PMID: 22280405
Targeting vascular changes in lesions in multiple sclerosis and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
What is the origin of the complex vascular changes that exist in the CNS lesions of Multiple Sclerosis (MS)? From the beginning of the study of the pathological changes in MS in the 19th century, lesions were seen to be associated with veins.
On a microscopic level, there have been numerous pathological changes to these vessels including altered structure and permeability, fibrinolysis, iron-related alterations and collagen deposition.
Vascular changes in inflammatory conditions outside the CNS are well documented and we hypothesize that angiogenesis (the generation of new blood vessels from existing) is an integral process of lesion development and spread in MS.
We demonstrated similar vascular abnormalities in MS and in the animal model, EAE.
We measured the increase in angiogenesis-related genes in EAE and review herein the effectiveness of chemical inhibitors of angiogenesis (SU5416, thalidomide and several derivatives).
We postulate that interference with angiogenesis provides a suitable non-immunological target for investigation in MS.
PMID: 23242012
[Pharmaceutical prescription for multiple sclerosis : evaluation of pharmaceutical consumption at private health insurance].
For persons covered by statutory health insurance (SHI) an increase in the number of defined daily doses (DDD) for pharmaceuticals to treat multiple sclerosis (MS) is known but so far there has been no comparable survey for private health insurance (PHI).
Moreover, there are gaps in knowledge of the reasons for the increase and concerning the number of the MS patients in Germany.
The study is based on pharmaceutical data of the PHI in Germany.
The projection takes into account the different prevalence and the different male/female relationship in SHI and PHI in an extrapolation to the total population.
From 2006 to 2010 the number of DDDs of MS pharmaceuticals increased by approximately 91.6 % (SHI 39.9 %) per insured person.
The increase in the PHI is mainly based for on an increase in the number of MS patients.
The total number of MS patients in Germany was estimated to be approximately 146,000 whereby some 12,700 MS patients (8.7 %) were insured in PHI.
There is a need for research into the reasons for the increase in MS patients.
The disproportional increase in the PHI compared to SHI could be a result of the increase of insured persons and an increased inclusion of persons with a higher risk of the disease.
PMID: 21052675
Serum levels of soluble CD21 in patients with systemic sclerosis.
Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a systemic disorder that typically results in fibrosis of the skin and multiple internal organ systems.
Although the precise mechanism is unknown, overproduction of extracellular matrix proteins, including collagens and fibronectins, and aberrant immune activation might be involved in the pathogenesis.
The soluble cluster of differentiation 21 (sCD21) represents the extracellular portion of the CD21 glycoprotein that is released by shedding from the cell surfaces into plasma.
sCD21 binds complement fragments and activates monocytes through binding to membrane CD23.
The present study was undertaken to investigate the serum levels of sCD21 in patients with SSc.
Serum sCD21 levels were reduced with age both in patients with SSc and normal controls.
Serum sCD21 levels in patients with SSc were significantly decreased compared to those in control subjects.
When we divided patients with SSc into limited cutaneous SSc (lcSSc) and diffuse cutaneous SSc (dcSSc), patients with lcSSc had lower levels of serum sCD21 than those with dcSSc.
Moreover, the prevalence of pulmonary fibrosis in the patients with dcSSc inversely correlated with serum sCD21 levels.
Our finding may support the notion that B-cell activation is involved in the mechanism for pulmonary fibrosis and skin sclerosis.
PMID: 22872097
Detection of microRNAs in microglia by real-time PCR in normal CNS and during neuroinflammation.
Microglia are cells of the myeloid lineage that reside in the central nervous system (CNS)(1).
These cells play an important role in pathologies of many diseases associated with neuroinflammation such as multiple sclerosis (MS)(2).
Microglia in a normal CNS express macrophage marker CD11b and exhibit a resting phenotype by expressing low levels of activation markers such as CD45.
During pathological events in the CNS, microglia become activated as determined by upregulation of CD45 and other markers(3).
The factors that affect microglia phenotype and functions in the CNS are not well studied.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a growing family of conserved molecules (~22 nucleotides long) that are involved in many normal physiological processes such as cell growth and differentiation(4) and pathologies such as inflammation(5).
MiRNAs downregulate the expression of certain target genes by binding complementary sequences of their mRNAs and play an important role in the activation of innate immune cells including macrophages(6) and microglia(7).
In order to investigate miRNA-mediated pathways that define the microglial phenotype, biological function, and to distinguish microglia from other types of macrophages, it is important to quantitatively assess the expression of particular microRNAs in distinct subsets of CNS-resident microglia.
Common methods for measuring the expression of miRNAs in the CNS include quantitative PCR from whole neuronal tissue and in situ hybridization.
However, quantitative PCR from whole tissue homogenate does not allow the assessment of the expression of miRNA in microglia, which represent only 5-15% of the cells of neuronal tissue.
Hybridization in situ allows the assessment of the expression of microRNA in specific cell types in the tissue sections, but this method is not entirely quantitative.
In this report we describe a quantitative and sensitive method for the detection of miRNA by real-time PCR in microglia isolated from normal CNS or during neuroinflammation using experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), a mouse model for MS.
The described method will be useful to measure the level of expression of microRNAs in microglia in normal CNS or during neuroinflammation associated with various pathologies including MS, stroke, traumatic injury, Alzheimer's disease and brain tumors.
PMID: 21958918
The PROMIS initiative: involvement of rehabilitation stakeholders in development and examples of applications in rehabilitation research.
To fully capture the impact of a disease or condition on the lives of individuals, patient-reported outcomes are considered a necessary component of health measurement in rehabilitation.
This article provides an overview of the involvement of rehabilitation stakeholders in the development of sound measurement tools for the Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS), a National Institutes of Health-funded initiative.
PROMIS is a multisite study that included many different populations.
We focus on the involvement of people with several chronic conditions, including multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury, and arthritis, in the development of PROMIS measures.
We describe both qualitative and quantitative methods used, including expert panels, focus groups, cognitive interviews, and item response theory modeling, which resulted in enhanced utility of PROMIS measures in rehabilitation.
Measures include a set of global health items and 12 item banks representing 6 domains.
Scores are reported in the T score metric (mean ± SD, 50 ± 10) and centered on mean values from the U.S. general population.
The PROMIS item banks measure quality of life and symptoms of people with chronic conditions and have the potential to enhance research and clinical practice by facilitating comparisons of scores across domains and populations.
Copyright © 2011 American Congress of Rehabilitation Medicine.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21953022
Longitudinal changes in social functioning in mildly disabled patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis receiving subcutaneous interferon β-1a: results from the COGIMUS (COGnitive Impairment in MUltiple Sclerosis) study (II).
To report longitudinal changes in and explore the influence of cognition on social functioning in mildly disabled patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS).
Italian patients (18-50 years) with RRMS and Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) score ≤4.0 were assigned to interferon β-1a, 44 or 22 μg subcutaneously three times weekly, and underwent annual assessments for social functioning (Environmental Status Scale [ESS]) over 3 years.
Baseline total ESS score did not differ between patients with and without cognitive impairment (P = 0.505).
Total ESS score remained low (&lt;2.0) and stable over 3 years in the whole study population, but worsened slightly when assessed by assigned treatment or treatment and baseline cognitive status (both P = 0.004), driven mostly by changes in the 'transportation' and 'financial/economic status' subscales.
The strongest independent predictor of worsening ESS score was baseline EDSS score.
Test-retest analyses confirmed that total ESS score and most subscales changed little over 3 years.
ESS scores remained low and changed minimally over 3 years, reflecting the mild physical disability and good cognitive performance in this patient population.
Determining the influence of cognitive function and treatment on longitudinal changes in social functioning requires further studies.
PMID: 23367356
Automatic brain MR images diagnosis based on edge fractal dimension and spectral energy signature.
A new automatic system to detect pathologies in human brain magnetic resonance (MR) images is presented.
The goal is to classify normal versus abnormal images affected by Alzheimer, Glioma, Herpes, Metastatic, and Multiple Sclerosis.
The extracted features are the fractal dimension of edges in the Hilbert domain, and the skewness and kurtosis of their spectral energy distribution.
The proposed system (FDSE) outperforms the popular discrete wavelet transform (DWT) and principal component analysis (PCA).
PMID: 23724568
Focused suggestion with somatic anchoring technique: rapid self-hypnosis for pain management.
This article details a self-hypnosis technique designed to teach patients how to manage acute or chronic pain through directed focus.
The focused suggestion with somatic anchoring technique has been used with various types of pain, including somatic pain (arthritis, post-injury pain from bone breaks, or muscle tears), visceral pain (related to irritable bowel disease), and neuropathic pain (related to multiple sclerosis).
This technique combines cognitive restructuring and mindfulness meditation with indirect and direct suggestions during hypnosis.
The case examples demonstrate how the focused suggestion with somatic anchoring technique is used with both acute and chronic pain conditions when use of long-term medication has been relatively ineffective.
PMID: 23134495
Inflammatory events at blood-brain barrier in neuroinflammatory and neurodegenerative disorders: implications for clinical disease.
Proper function of the neurovasculature is required for optimal brain function and preventing neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration.
Within this review, we discuss alterations of the function of the blood-brain barrier in neurologic disorders such as multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, and Alzheimer's disease and address potential underlying mechanisms.
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
© 2012 International League Against Epilepsy.
PMID: 22116823
IL-17 silencing does not protect nonobese diabetic mice from autoimmune diabetes.
The long-held view that many autoimmune disorders are primarily driven by a Th1 response has been challenged by the discovery of Th17 cells.
Since the identification of this distinct T cell subset, Th17 cells have been implicated in the pathogenesis of several autoimmune diseases, including multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis.
Type 1 diabetes has also long been considered a Th1-dependent disease.
In light of the emerging role for Th17 cells in autoimmunity, several recent studies investigated the potential of this subset to initiate autoimmune diabetes.
However, direct evidence supporting the involvement of Th17 cells in actual pathogenesis, particularly during spontaneous onset, is lacking.
In this study, we sought to directly address the role of IL-17, the cytokine by which Th17 cells are primarily characterized, in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diabetes.
We used lentiviral transgenesis to generate NOD mice in which IL-17 is silenced by RNA interference.
The loss of IL-17 had no effect on the frequency of spontaneous or cyclophosphamide-induced diabetes.
In contrast, IL-17 silencing in transgenic NOD mice was sufficient to reduce the severity of myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein-induced experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, consistent with reports that IL-17 deficiency is protective in this experimental model of multiple sclerosis.
We concluded that IL-17 is dispensable, at least in large part, in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diabetes.
PMID: 22334391
Inflammation during fetal and neonatal life: implications for neurologic and neuropsychiatric disease in children and adults.
Inflammation is increasingly recognized as being of both physiological and pathological importance in the immature brain.
The rationale of this review is to present an update on this topic with focus on long-term consequences of inflammation during childhood and in adults.
The immature brain can be exposed to inflammation in connection with viral or bacterial infection during pregnancy or as a result of sterile central nervous system (CNS) insults.
Through efficient anti-inflammatory and reparative processes, inflammation may resolve without any harmful effects on the brain.
Alternatively, inflammation contributes to injury or enhances CNS vulnerability.
Acute inflammation can also be shifted to a chronic inflammatory state and/or adversely affect brain development.
Hypothetically, microglia are the main immunocompetent cells in the immature CNS, and depending on the stimulus, molecular context, and timing, these cells will acquire various phenotypes, which will be critical regarding the CNS consequences of inflammation.
Inflammation has long-term consequences and could speculatively modify the risk of a variety of neurological disorders, including cerebral palsy, autism spectrum disorders, schizophrenia, multiple sclerosis, cognitive impairment, and Parkinson disease.
So far, the picture is incomplete, and data mostly experimental.
Further studies are required to strengthen the associations in humans and to determine whether novel therapeutic interventions during the perinatal period can influence the occurrence of neurological disease later in life.
Copyright © 2012 American Neurological Association.
PMID: 22038575
Electroretinogram findings in unilateral optic neuritis.
To report the electrophysiological findings in patients with unilateral optic neuritis (ON), with particular reference to the electroretinogram (ERG).
A retrospective analysis of full-field ERG, pattern ERG (PERG) and pattern visual evoked potential findings from 46 patients with clinical and electrophysiological findings in keeping with unilateral ON.
ISCEV standard ERGs did not significantly differ between the optic neuritis and fellow eyes, nor between patients with and without MS.
Differences were present in the N95 component of the PERG, which was significantly lower in the affected eye, and the pattern reversal visual evoked potential, which showed significantly longer peak time (latency) in the affected eye.
In addition, there was a significant difference between patients with and without multiple sclerosis (MS).
No significant inter-ocular asymmetry in ISCEV standard ERGs was present in these cases of unilateral optic neuritis, either as a clinically isolated syndrome or as part of multiple sclerosis.
All ERGs recorded were normal.
PMID: 21161391
Association between the IL7R T244I polymorphism and multiple sclerosis: a meta-analysis.
Previously published analyses of the association between the interleukin 7 receptor (IL7R) T244I polymorphism (rs6897932) and multiple sclerosis (MS) have yielded conflicting results.
We performed a meta-analysis to assess whether the combined data showed this association, and to investigate its effect size.
We analyzed 10 studies identified from PubMed (12,185 MS patients and 15,855 controls) and calculated the odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the C-allele, the C/C genotype (recessive effect) and the C/C + C/T (dominant effect) genotype.
Heterogeneity within and between studies was observed: allele C: Q = 30.86, P = 0.002; genotype C/C: Q = 30.28, P = 0.003.
Using a random-effects model, the C-allele and the C/C genotype were associated with MS (OR = 1.11, 95% CI = 1.04-1.19, P = 0.001 for the C-allele; OR = 1.15, 95% CI = 1.06-1.24, P = 0.0009 for the C/C genotype).
The C/C + C/T genotype was also associated with MS using a fixed-effects model (OR = 1.15, 95% CI = 1.05-1.26, P = 0.003).
There was no significant publication bias among the selected studies according to the funnel plot.
We also performed the analysis on a European subgroup.
This revealed an association between IL7R T244I and MS (P &lt; 0.00001 for the C-allele and the C/C genotype; P = 0.0004 for the C/C + C/T genotype), no heterogeneity was observed (allele C: P = 0.07; genotype C/C: P = 0.10).
In conclusion, the meta-analysis demonstrated that the IL7R T244I polymorphism was associated with susceptibility to MS.
PMID: 22006815
Shift work at young age is associated with increased risk for multiple sclerosis.
Environmental factors play a prominent role in multiple sclerosis (MS) etiology.
The aim of this study was to investigate the potential association between shift work and MS risk, which has previously never been investigated.
This report is based on 2 population-based, case-control studies, 1 with incident cases (1,343 cases, 2,900 controls) and 1 with prevalent cases (5,129 cases, 4,509 controls).
Using logistic regression, the occurrence of MS among subjects who have been exposed to shift work at various ages was compared with that of those who have never been exposed by calculating the odds ratio (OR) with a 95% confidence interval (CI).
In both studies, there was a significant association between working shift at a young age and occurrence of MS (OR, 1.6; 95% CI, 1.2-2.1 in the incidence study and OR, 1.3; 95% CI, 1.0-1.6 in the prevalence study).
In the incident study, the OR of developing MS was 2.0 (95% CI, 1.2-3.6) among those who had worked shifts for 3 years or longer before age 20 years, compared with those who had never worked shifts.
The OR for the corresponding comparison in the prevalent study was 2.1 (95% CI, 1.3-3.4).
The observed association between shift work at a young age and occurrence of MS in 2 independent studies strengthens the notion of a true relationship.
Consequences of shift work such as circadian disruption and sleep restriction are associated with disturbed melatonin secretion and enhanced proinflammatory responses and may thus be part of the mechanism behind the association.
Copyright © 2011 American Neurological Association.
PMID: 23740953
Amino acid copolymers that alleviate experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis in vivo interact with heparan sulfates and glycoprotein 96 in APCs.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease that affects the CNS.
One approved treatment for relapsing forms of MS is YEAK, a random copolymer of the amino acids tyrosine, glutamic acid, alanine, and lysine.
YFAK, a second-generation copolymer composed of tyrosine, phenylalanine, alanine, and lysine, is more successful in treating experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, a mouse model of MS.
Although originally designed and optimized based on the autoantigen myelin basic protein (MBP) and the MBP-derived peptide MBP85-99 presented to the MS-associated class II MHC molecule HLA-DR2, YEAK and YFAK also stimulate cytokine and chemokine production in APCs that lack class II MHC products.
How YEAK and YFAK copolymers interact with APCs remains enigmatic.
We used biotinylated YFAK to affinity-purify YFAK-interacting proteins from RAW264.7 cells and tested APCs from mice deficient in several of the newly identified interactors for their capacity to secrete CCL22 in response to YEAK and YFAK.
We propose that initial contact of YFAK with cells is mediated mainly by electrostatic interactions, and find that interaction of YFAK with host proteins is strongly dependent on ionic strength.
Cells deficient in enzymes involved in sulfation of proteins and proteoglycans showed strongly reduced binding of biotinylated YFAK.
Lastly, cells stimulated with YFAK in the presence of heparin, structurally similar to heparan sulfates, failed to produce CCL22.
We conclude that charge-dependent interactions of copolymers that alleviate MS/experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis are critical for their effects exerted on APCs and may well be the main initial mediators of these therapeutically active copolymers.
PMID: 23056052
Early bilateral cystoid macular oedema secondary to fingolimod in multiple sclerosis.
We report a case of fingolimod-associated bilateral cystoid macular oedema in a patient with multiple sclerosis (MS).
A 34-year-old female, diagnosed with MS at age of 30, developed bilateral blurred vision 5 days after initiation of fingolimod.
She was misdiagnosed as optic neuritis initially and fingolimod was only discontinued 3 weeks after onset of her visual symptoms when OCT showed prominent bilateral cystoid macular oedema and subretinal fluid.
Although her left corrected vision returned to 6/6, she had persistently decreased right visual acuity of 6/12 after 5 months.
This paper aims to raise awareness among ophthalmologists and neurologists of the importance of early recognition of macular oedema associated with fingolimod.
PMID: 22619225
We are about to cure multiple sclerosis in the next 10 years, even though we do not know its cause: yes.
Proposal             Never underestimate the pervasive, powerful influence of constructive chaos in medical progress.
PMID: 22396755
Genomic regions associated with multiple sclerosis are active in B cells.
More than 50 genomic regions have now been shown to influence the risk of multiple sclerosis (MS).
However, the mechanisms of action, and the cell types in which these associated variants act at the molecular level remain largely unknown.
This is especially true for associated regions containing no known genes.
Given the evidence for a role for B cells in MS, we hypothesized that MS associated genomic regions co-localized with regions which are functionally active in B cells.
We used publicly available data on 1) MS associated regions and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 2) chromatin profiling in B cells as well as three additional cell types thought to be unrelated to MS (hepatocytes, fibroblasts and keratinocytes).
Genomic intervals and SNPs were tested for overlap using the Genomic Hyperbrowser.
We found that MS associated regions are significantly enriched in strong enhancer, active promoter and strong transcribed regions (p = 0.00005) and that this overlap is significantly higher in B cells than control cells.
In addition, MS associated SNPs also land in active promoter (p = 0.00005) and enhancer regions more than expected by chance (strong enhancer p = 0.0006; weak enhancer p = 0.00005).
These results confirm the important role of the immune system and specifically B cells in MS and suggest that MS risk variants exert a gene regulatory role.
Previous studies assessing MS risk variants in T cells may be missing important effects in B cells.
Similar analyses in other immunological cell types relevant to MS and functional studies are necessary to fully elucidate how genes contribute to MS pathogenesis.
PMID: 22110978
Treatment of fatigue in multiple sclerosis patients: a neurocognitive approach.
The objective of the study was to treat fatigue in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) by a neurocognitive rehabilitation program aimed at improving motor planning by using motor imagery (MI).
Twenty patients with clinically definite MS complaining of fatigue were treated for five weeks with exercises of neurocognitive rehabilitation twice a week.
Patients were evaluated by Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS), Modified Fatigue Impact Scale (MFIS), MSQoL54, Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS), and MS Functional Composite (MSFC).
After treatment, a decrease in fatigue was detected with both FSS (P = 0.0001) and MFIS (P = 0.0001).
MSFC (P = 0.035) and MSQoL54 (P = 0.002) scores improved compared to baseline.
At six-month followup, the improvement was confirmed for fatigue (FSS, P = 0.0001; MFIS P = 0.01) and for the physical subscale of MSQoL54 (P = 0.049).
No differences in disability scales were found.
These results show that neurocognitive rehabilitation, based on MI, could be a strategy to treat fatigue in MS patients.
PMID: 22888218
Development of oral agent in the treatment of multiple sclerosis: how the first available oral therapy, fingolimod will change therapeutic paradigm approach.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the central nervous system, traditionally considered to be an autoimmune, demyelinating disease.
Based on this understanding, the initial therapeutic strategies were directed at immune modulation and inflammation control.
At present, there are five licensed first-line disease-modifying drugs and two second-line treatments in MS.
Currently available MS therapies have shown significant efficacy throughout many trials, but they produce different side-effect profiles in patients.
Since they are well known and safe, they require regular and frequent parenteral administration and are associated with limited long-term treatment adherence.
Thus, there is an important need for the development of new therapeutic strategies.
Several oral compounds are in late-stage development for treating MS.
Fingolimod (FTY720; Novartis, Basel, Switzerland) is an oral sphingosine-1-phosphase receptor modulator which has demonstrated superior efficacy compared with placebo and interferon β-1a in Phase III studies and has been approved in the treatment of MS.
We summarily review the oral compounds in study, focusing on the recent development, approval and the clinical experience with FTY720.
PMID: 22188035
Microarray analysis on archival multiple sclerosis tissue: pathogenic authenticity outweighs technical obstacles.
Probably all neuropathologists know this dilemma: on the one hand, they have extremely precious archival material in their possession, which has been collected over many years from many different laboratories.
Typically, this material is extremely well characterized, and often, it contains especially significant tissue specimens from unique cases.
On the other hand, they face severe scepticism when they plan to use this archival material for large-scale gene expression studies by microarray analysis, since previous handling in the absence of RNA protection, prolonged storage at room temperature, and fixation with formaldehyde may dramatically reduce the amount of retrievable RNA.
Fortunately, this dilemma can be solved.
We give here examples from our own, multiple sclerosis-centered laboratory and explain why archival tissue might be more authentic for the disease process and might yield more information about the molecular and cellular substrates driving CNS inflammation in MS patients than more recently acquired tissues.
© 2011 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.
PMID: 22888211
Hemianopia and visual loss due to progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in natalizumab-treated multiple sclerosis.
This case describes typical ophthalmic findings as a key feature for diagnosis of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) and its possible differential diagnosis.
A 58-year-old female patient with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis on immunotherapy with natalizumab developed visual disturbance, reading problems, and visual field defects due to PML.
PML is a reactivation of latent infection with the John Cunningham virus, which is a type of polyomavirus acquired in childhood or adolescence and is quite common in the general population.
PML so far has been mostly associated with other immunodeficiency disorders, such as acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, but is also gaining importance in association with the increasing use and duration of treatment with natalizumab in patients suffering from multiple sclerosis.
Natalizumab is a highly specific α4-integrin antagonist approved for treatment of patients with active relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 21918983
Immunogenicity of recombinant human interferon beta interacting with particles of glass, metal, and polystyrene.
Aggregates play a major role in the immunogenicity of recombinant human interferon beta (rhIFNβ), a protein used to treat multiple sclerosis.
A possible cause of aggregation is interaction between therapeutic protein and surfaces encountered during processing, storage, and administration.
Moreover, proteins may adsorb to particles shed from these surfaces.
In this work, we studied the immunogenicity of recombinant human interferon beta-1a (rhIFNβ-1a) interacting with glass microparticles, stainless steel microparticles, and polystyrene nanoparticles.
At physiological pH, rhIFNβ-1a readily adsorbed to the particles, while the degree of adsorption was influenced by the ionic strength of the phosphate buffer.
Front-face fluorescence showed that the tertiary structure of rhIFNβ-1a slightly changed upon adsorption to glass.
The interaction with stainless steel microparticles resulted in increased levels of aggregates in the free protein fraction.
Furthermore, protein adsorbed to stainless steel microparticles was more difficult to desorb than protein adsorbed to glass.
Incubation with stainless steel considerably enhanced the immunogenicity of rhIFNβ-1a in transgenic mice immune tolerant for human interferon beta.
The protein fraction adsorbed on stainless steel particles was responsible for this.
In conclusion, rhIFNβ-1a adsorbs to common hydrophilic surface materials, possibly increasing the immunogenicity of the protein.
Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
PMID: 22079561
tPA in the injured central nervous system: different scenarios starring the same actor?
When in 1947, Astrup and Permin reported that animal tissues contain fibrinokinase, a plasminogen activator, and when Pennica and colleagues (Pennica et al., 1983) cloned and expressed human tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) in Escherichia coli in 1983, they might did not realize how much their pioneer work would impact the life of millions of patients suffering from myocardial infarction or ischemic stroke.
Some years after, accumulating evidence shows that tPA is not just a plasminogen activator of endothelial origin.
Indeed, the main function of tPA released from the endothelium is to convert fibrin-bound plasminogen into active plasmin, thus dissolving the fibrin meshwork of blood clots.
But this serine protease is also expressed by several cell types, and its beneficial and deleterious actions stand beyond fibrinolysis or even proteolysis.
We will review here the reported effects and mechanisms of action of tPA in the course of three different pathologies of the central nervous system (CNS): spinal cord injury, ischemic stroke and multiple sclerosis.
While these three disorders have distinct aetiologies, they share some pathogenic mechanisms.
We will depict the main good and bad sides of tPA described to date during each of these pathological situations, as well as the proposed mechanisms explaining these effects.
We speculate that due to common pathogenic pathways, tPA's actions described in one particular disease could in fact occur in the others.
Finally, we will evaluate if tPA could be a therapeutic target for these pathologies.
This article is part of a Special Issue entitled 'Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder'.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21964471
Inhibitory role of diazepam on autoimmune inflammation in rats with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Glutamate and GABA are the main excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters in the CNS, and both may be involved in the neuronal dysfunction in neurodegenerative conditions.
We have recently found that glutamate release was decreased in isolated synaptosomes from the rat cerebral cortex during the development of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), the animal model of multiple sclerosis.
In contrast to control animals where GABA induced a decrease in the evoked glutamate release, which was abolished by picrotoxin (a GABA(A) antagonist), synaptosomes from EAE rats showed a loss in the inhibition of the glutamate release mediated by GABA with a concomitant diminution of the flunitrazepam-sensitive GABA(A) receptor density.
We have presently further evaluated the relevance of the GABAergic system in EAE by treating rats challenged for the disease with the GABA agonist diazepam.
Administration of diazepam during 6 days starting at day 6 or 11 after EAE active induction led to a marked decrease of the disease incidence and histological signs associated with the disease.
Cellular reactivity and antibody responses against the encephalitogenic myelin basic protein were also diminished.
Beyond the effects of diazepam on the autoimmune, inflammatory response, we report also a positive effect on neurotransmission.
Treatment with diazepam inhibited the previously described reduction in glutamate release in the frontal cortex synaptosomes from EAE animals.
These data suggest that an endogenous inhibitory GABAergic system within the immune system is involved in the diazepam effect on EAE and indicate that increasing GABAergic activity potently ameliorates EAE.
Copyright © 2011 IBRO.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22660635
The microRNA miR-23b suppresses IL-17-associated autoimmune inflammation by targeting TAB2, TAB3 and IKK-α.
Inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-17 (IL-17) promote inflammatory autoimmune diseases.
Although several microRNAs (miRNAs) have been shown to regulate autoimmune pathogenesis by affecting lymphocyte development and function, the role of miRNAs in resident cells present in inflammatory lesions remains unclear.
Here we show that miR-23b is downregulated in inflammatory lesions of humans with lupus or rheumatoid arthritis, as well as in the mouse models of lupus, rheumatoid arthritis or multiple sclerosis.
IL-17 downregulates miR-23b expression in human fibroblast-like synoviocytes, mouse primary kidney cells and astrocytes and is essential for the downregulation of miR-23b during autoimmune pathogenesis.
In turn, miR-23b suppresses IL-17-, tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α)- or IL-1β-induced NF-κB activation and inflammatory cytokine expression by targeting TGF-β-activated kinase 1/MAP3K7 binding protein 2 (TAB2), TAB3 and inhibitor of nuclear factor κ-B kinase subunit α (IKK-α) and, consequently, represses autoimmune inflammation.
Thus, IL-17 contributes to autoimmune pathogenesis by suppressing miR-23b expression in radio-resident cells and promoting proinflammatory cytokine expression.
PMID: 22160466
Decreased microglial activation in MS patients treated with glatiramer acetate.
Activated microglia are thought to be an important contributor to tissue damage in multiple sclerosis (MS).
The level of microglial activation can be measured non-invasively using [(11)C]-R-PK11195, a radiopharmaceutical for positron emission tomography (PET).
Prior studies have identified abnormalities in the level of [(11)C]-R-PK11195 uptake in patients with MS, but treatment effects have not been evaluated.
Nine previously untreated relapsing-remitting MS patients underwent PET and magnetic resonance imaging of the brain at baseline and after 1 year of treatment with glatiramer acetate.
Parametric maps of [(11)C]-R-PK11195 uptake were obtained for baseline and post-treatment PET scans, and the change in [(11)C]-R-PK11195 uptake pre- to post-treatment was evaluated across the whole brain.
Region-of-interest analysis was also applied to selected subregions.
Whole brain [(11)C]-R-PK11195 binding potential per unit volume decreased 3.17% (95% CI: -0.74, -5.53%) between baseline and 1 year (p = 0.018).
A significant decrease was noted in cortical gray matter and cerebral white matter, and a trend towards decreased uptake was seen in the putamen and thalamus.
The results are consistent with a reduction in inflammation due to treatment with glatiramer acetate, though a larger controlled study would be required to prove that association.
Future research will focus on whether the level of baseline microglial activation predicts future tissue damage in MS and whether [(11)C]-R-PK11195 uptake in cortical gray matter correlates with cortical lesion load.
PMID: 23255412
Clinical use of brain volumetry.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-based brain volumetry is increasingly being used in the clinical setting to assess brain volume changes from structural MR images in a range of neurologic conditions.
Measures of brain volumes have been shown to be valid biomarkers of the clinical state and progression by offering high reliability and robust inferences on the underlying disease-related mechanisms.
This review critically examines the different scenarios of the application of MRI-based brain volumetry in neurology: 1) supporting disease diagnosis, 2) understanding mechanisms and tracking clinical progression of disease, and 3) monitoring treatment effect.
These aspects will be discussed in a wide range of neurologic conditions, with particular emphasis on Alzheimer's disease and multiple sclerosis.
Copyright © 2012 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
PMID: 22572012
Multiple congenital ectatic and fusiform arterial aneurysms associated with lower limb hypoplasia.
Aneurysmal disease is uncommon in children, and its presence often leads to suspicion of genetic disorders (Loeys-Dietz syndrome, Marfan syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, tuberous sclerosis), trauma, and infection.
We describe the case of a newborn boy with generalized left lower limb hypoplasia associated with diffuse areas of arteriectasis combined with areas of stenosis and fusiform aneurysms of the iliac, femoral, and popliteal arteries.
No additional vascular territories were affected.
The patient was asymptomatic, and no therapeutic intervention has been considered.
Numerous complementary imaging and laboratory examinations failed to establish a definitive diagnosis.
This collection of findings has not been previously reported.
Copyright © 2012 Society for Vascular Surgery.
Published by Mosby, Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21862036
Activation patterns in multiple sclerosis on the Computerized Tests of Information Processing.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) patients exhibit cognitive deficits that negatively impact quality of life.
The Relative Consequence Model suggests that problems with information processing speed (IPS) may be the basis for many of these cognitive difficulties.
To investigate, with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), if an IPS task (the Computerized Test of Information Processing (CTIP)) would reveal neurophysiological differences between MS patients and matched controls.
Performance and neural activation were investigated in twelve cognitively impaired MS patients and 12 matched controls as each performed the CTIP.
The CTIP measures reaction time (RT) and errors on three tasks (simple RT, choice RT and semantic search RT) with increasing cognitive demands.
Participants demonstrated increased RT with increased task complexity.
Patients showed longer RTs for the choice RT condition than controls but the pattern of performance across tasks did not vary between groups.
Errors were not significantly different between groups.
Imaging results for both the choice and the semantic search conditions revealed significant differences between groups involving a compensatory increase in activation in MS participants compared to controls in prefrontal cortex and right temporal gyri.
However, there were also areas of decreased activity in MS participants when compared with controls in left temporal gyri.
Significantly different neural activation patterns between MS patients and controls were associated with IPS, as measured by the CTIP.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22330938
Peripheral oxidative stress in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
To evaluate levels of oxidative stress in blood samples in patients with relapsing-remitting MS (RR-MS).
Peripheral blood samples were collected from 24 RR-MS patients and 15 healthy controls.
Levels of the following were measured: carbonylated proteins, 8-hydroxy-2'deoxyguanosine (8OHdG), total glutathione, reduced glutathione (GSH), oxidized glutathione (GSSG), GSH/GSSG ratio, superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase (GPx), glutathione reductase (GRd), glutathione-S-transferase (GST), myeloperoxidase (MPO), antioxidant gap, total antioxidant capacity (PAO), global oxidative stress (GOS), serum vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (sVCAM-1) and serum inter-cellular adhesion molecule 1 (sICAM-1).
Values for carbonylated proteins, 8OHdG, total glutathione, GSH, GSH/GSSG ratio, SOD, GRd and GOS were significantly higher in RR-MS patients than in healthy controls.
By contrast, PAO, GSSG, GPx and GST were lower in RR-MS patients.
Oxidative stress plays a major role in MS, and is observed prior to relapse.
Copyright © 2012 The Canadian Society of Clinical Chemists.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22747904
Applying the theory of planned behaviour to multiple sclerosis patients' decisions on disease modifying therapy--questionnaire concept and validation.
Patients making important medical decisions need to evaluate complex information in the light of their own beliefs, attitudes and priorities.
The process can be considered in terms of the theory of planned behaviour.
Decision support technologies aim at helping patients making informed treatment choices.
Instruments assessing informed choices need to include risk knowledge, attitude (towards therapy) and actual uptake.
However, mechanisms by which decision support achieves its goals are poorly understood.Our aim was therefore to develop and validate an instrument modeling the process of multiple sclerosis (MS) patients' decision making about whether to undergo disease modifying (immuno-)therapies (DMT).
We constructed a 30-item patient administered questionnaire to access the elaboration of decisions about DMT in MS according to the theory of planned behaviour.
MS-patients' belief composites regarding immunotherapy were classified according to the domains attitude, subjective social norm and control beliefs and within each domain to either expectations or values yielding 6 sub-domains.
A randomized controlled trial (n = 192) evaluating an evidence based educational intervention tested the instrument's predictive power regarding intention to use immunotherapy and its sensitivity to the intervention.
The psychometric properties of the questionnaire were satisfactory (mean item difficulty 62, mean SD 0.9, range 0-3).
Responses explain up to 68% of the variability in the intention to use DMT was explained by up to 68% in the total sample.
Four weeks after an educational intervention, predictive power was higher in the intervention (IG) compared to the control group (CG) (intention estimate: CG 56% / IG 69%, p = .179; three domains CG 56% / IG 74%, p = .047; six sub-domains CG 64% / IG 78%, p = .073).
The IG held more critical beliefs towards immunotherapy (p = .002) and were less willing to comply with social norm (p = .012).
The questionnaire seems to provide a valid way of explaining patients' inherent decision processes and to be sensitive towards varying levels of elaboration.
Similar tools based on the theory of planned behaviour could be applied to other decision making scenarios.
PMID: 21649611
Frequency and severity of headache is worsened by Interferon-β therapy in patients with multiple sclerosis.
The relationship between multiple sclerosis (MS) and headache (HA) is not well known.
It was reported that interferon-beta (IFNβ) could induce or worsen HA.
To evaluate the impact of IFNβ treatment on HA and the relationship between HA and the various commercial preparations of IFNβ in mildly disabled patients with MS.
A specific questionnaire was administered to 357 relapsing-remitting MS patients.
Characteristics of HAs were considered, including the temporal relationships with IFNβ administration.
One hundred and seventeen patients were treated with weekly intramuscular injections of interferon IFNβ-1a (Avonex(®)), 84 with subcutaneous injections of IFNβ-1b (Betaferon(®)) every other day, 48 and 108 with three times weekly subcutaneous injections of IFNβ-1a (Rebif(®)) 22 mcg or IFNβ-1a (Rebif(®)) 44 mcg, respectively.
Three hundred and fourteen patients were affected by HA, and among them, 219 patients suffered of pre-existing HA.
In this latter group, 121 subjects (55%) noted a worsening of their HA after starting IFNβ therapy; this was more frequently reported by patients treated with Avonex(®) and Rebif(®) 44.
Ninety-five patients experienced new HA.
IFNβ treatment could worsen HA in patients with pre-existing HA or cause the appearance of new HA.
Among different IFNβ preparations, Rebif(®) 44 and Avonex(®) seemed to be more cephalalgic than the other drugs.
© 2011 John Wiley &amp; Sons A/S.
PMID: 23700821
[Current state of research on multiple sclerosis].
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic disease of the central nervous system (CNS) autoimmune.
It belongs to a group of demyelinating disease, which is an irreversible consequence of disability.
Epidemiological data indicate that occurs in nearly 2.5 million people around the world.
Despite much research is still little known about the disease pathomechanism.
Do not we also have so far fully effective the treatment.
Available immunomodulatory drugs offer new opportunities defer progression for years.
Both fingolimod and natalizumab are more effective in the treatment of MS than the widely used IFN-beta and glatiramer acetate (GA).
However, new drugs pose a greater risk of side effects than first-generation drugs.
The rapid development of research offers the prospect of a better understanding of the pathogenesis of the disease and to develop more effective treatments.
PMID: 21757039
Lipidomic investigations for the characterization of circulating serum lipids in multiple sclerosis.
Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a neurodegenerative autoimmune demyelinating disease affecting young adults.
The aetiology still remains a mystery and diagnosis is impaired by the lack of defined molecular markers.
Autoimmune response remains the main topic under investigation and recent studies suggest additional non-proteic mediators of brain inflammation such as lipids.
We carried out an LC-MS based lipidomics approach to highlight serum lipids profiling in MS.
Method was optimised and applied in a preliminary clinical cross-sectional investigation of MS patients vs Healthy Controls (HC) and patients with Other Neurological Diseases (OND).
Ten significant metabolites were highlighted and tentatively identified by accurate mass and MS/MS experiments.
Our most relevant data show altered level of lyso-glycerophosphatidylcholine (lysoPC) and glycerophosphatidylcholine (PC) species.
Total lysoPC/PC ratio showed significant decrease in pathological groups (MS, OND) and, in addition, MS subjects had a relevant decrease of this ratio also in respect to OND.
These findings suggest that there may be an altered phospholipid metabolism in MS that can be evaluated in serum.
Some of these features are distinctive and may be considered specific for MS.
Our lipidomics data show, for the first time, evidence in serum of a relationship between LysoPC/PC ratio and MS.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22497990
Behçet's disease.
DEFINITION OF THE DISEASE: Behçet disease (BD) is a chronic, relapsing, multisystemic disorder characterized by mucocutaneous, ocular, vascular and central nervous system manifestations.
BD seems to cluster along the ancient Silk Road, which extends from eastern Asia to the Mediterranean basin.
European cases are often described, not exclusively in the migrant population.
The clinical spectrum includes oral and genital ulcerations, uveitis, vascular, neurological, articular, renal and gastrointestinal manifestations.
The etiopathogenesis of the disease remains unknown, although genetic predisposition, environmental factors and immunological abnormalities have been implicated.
Diagnosis is only based on clinical criteria.
DIFFERRENTIAL DIAGNOSIS: It depends on the clinical presentation of BD, but sarcoidosis, multiple sclerosis, Crohn's disease, Takayasu's arteritis, polychondritis or antiphospholipid syndrome need to be considered.
Treatment is symptomatic using steroids and immunomodulatory therapy.
It is efficient depending on the rapidity of initiation, the compliance, and the duration of therapy.
The prognosis is severe due to the ocular, neurological and arterial involvement.
PMID: 22497991
Dopaminergic D2-like agonists produce yawning in the myelin mutant taiep and Sprague-Dawley rats.
Systemic administration of D2-like dopaminergic-receptor agonists increases yawning behavior.
However, only a few studies have been done in animals with pathological conditions.
The taiep rat is a myelin mutant with an initial hypomyelination followed by progressive demyelination, being the brainstem one of the most affected areas.
In our experiments, we analyzed the effects of systemic administration of the D2-family agonists and antagonists on yawning behavior, and correlated them with the lipid myelin content in the brainstem and other areas in the central nervous system (CNS) in 8 month old male taiep and Sprague-Dawley rats.
Subjects were maintained under standard conditions in Plexiglas cages with a 12:12 light-dark cycle, lights on at 0700 and free access to rodent pellets and tap water.
Drugs were freshly prepared injected ip at 0800 and subjects were observed for 60 min.
When antagonists were used it was administered 15 min before the agonist.
Sprague-Dawley and taiep rats significantly increased their yawning frequency after systemic injection of (-)-quinpirole hydrochloride, R(+)-7-Hydroxy-2-(dipropylamino)tetralin hydrobromide (7-OH-DPAT) or trans-(±)-3,4,4a,10b-tetrahydro-4-propyl-2H,5H-[1]benzopyrano [4,3-b]-1,4-oxazin-9-ol hydrochloride ((±)-PD 128,907).
Among D2-like agonists used higher effects are obtained with (-)-quinpirole.
The effects caused by (-)-quinpirole can be reduced by (-)-sulpiride; and yawning caused by 7-OH-DPAT was decreased by tiapride only in taiep rats.
In Sprague-Dawley only (-)-sulpiride is able to decrease (-)-quinpirole-caused yawning.
In conclusion, dopaminergic D2-like agonists are still able to cause yawning despite the severe myelin loss in taiep rats.
Similarly, patients with various CNS illnesses that affect myelin, such as stroke or multiple sclerosis, are able to yawn suggesting that trigger neurons are still able to command this innate behavior.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22001684
Circulating CD8+CD56-perforin+ T cells are increased in multiple sclerosis patients.
Relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS), secondary progressive (SP)MS and primary progressive (PP)MS patients showed higher percentages of circulating CD8+CD56-perforin+ T cells than controls whereas only relapsing RRMS and PPMS patients showed higher perforin expression in CD8+CD56- T cells than controls.
MS patients with EDSS ≥3 showed higher percentage of CD8+CD56-perforin+ T cells than patients with EDSS &lt;3 and controls whereas patients with EDSS &lt;3 showed higher percentage of this T cell subpopulation than controls.
Our data show that MS is characterized by a dysregulation of CD8+CD56-perforin+ T cells that may play a role in the development of disability.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22640902
A brief review of Susac syndrome.
Susac syndrome was named after J.O.
Susac who first described the syndrome in 1979.
It is characterized by the clinical triad of encephalopathy, branch retinal artery occlusion, and sensorineural hearing loss.
It mainly occurs in young women.
This underdiagnosed disease needs to be considered in the differential diagnosis of a broad variety of disorders.
In Susac syndrome, autoimmune processes leading to damage and inflammation-related occlusion of the microvessels in brain, retina, and inner ear are thought to play a causal role.
The diagnosis is based primarily on the clinical presentation, the documentation of branch retinal artery occlusion by fluorescence angiography, and characteristic findings on cerebral MRI, that help in distinguishing Susac syndrome from other inflammatory entities, like multiple sclerosis.
Antiendothelial cell antibodies could be detected in some patients.
Patients are successfully treated with immunosuppression, however, the best regimen still needs to be defined.
As a result of the rarity of the disease, controlled therapeutic trials are missing so far.
In this review, we want to demonstrate the clinical features, natural history, treatment, and clinical course of Susac syndrome, illustrated by a typical case history.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23888609
Glutathione in multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disease of the central nervous system, characterised mainly as an autoimmune neurodegenerative disorder.
Its cause is unknown but multifactorial; however, some studies suggest that oxidative stress may be one of the sources, or a consequence of the disease, from loss of oxidant/antioxidant balance.
This review studies glutathione, one of the most important agents of the endogenous antioxidant defence system, protecting cells from damage caused by oxidative stress.
It evaluates glutathione and the enzymes glutathione peroxidase and glutathione reductase in various forms and stages of the disease.
Analysis of a literature search suggests that the scientific community is not unanimous in its views, so more studies are required of patients with different forms of the disease and its manifestations, taking into account that the body functions as a whole and reacts in a compensatory manner.
It would seem imperative to achieve a consensus on the pathogenesis responsible for severe disability, and explore sensitive biomarkers of its progression and indicators of oxidative stress.
It is also important to promote the development of new therapies, with more studies on other substances such as acrolein, lipoic acid and dimethyl fumarate.
Clarification of the mechanisms involved in oxidative stress, in different forms of multiple sclerosis, could result in improvements in the monitoring and prognosis of the disease, with subsequent increases in a patient's quality of life.
PMID: 22240715
Verbal episodic memory in 426 multiple sclerosis patients: impairment in encoding, retrieval or both?
Episodic memory is frequently impaired in multiple sclerosis (MS) patients but the exact nature of the disorder is controversial.
It was initially thought to be due to a retrieval deficit but some studies have demonstrated an encoding deficit, which could be linked to a slowing of information processing speed or to a deficit in elaboration of strategies.
The main objective of this study is to assess the prevalence and the nature of verbal episodic memory (VEM) impairment in MS patients.
We retrieved memory performances of 426 patients [314 F-112 M; mean age: 46.1 years; median Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) score: 3.1] from a neuropsychological data base.
VEM was assessed using the 16 words RL-RI 16 test.
66% MS patients present at least one recall impaired in VEM (37.2% from 2 to 5 recall).
14.2% MS patients present an impairment in encoding phase.
We observed that 5% of patients presented recognition difficulties.
Correlations were observed between VEM performances and EDSS, and disease duration but no group effect (ANOVA) is observed between form of MS and VEM performances.
These results confirm the high prevalence of VEM impairment in MS patients.
Deficits affect mainly information retrieval in early stage MS patients and are then linked to encoding as disability increases.
Storage disorders are infrequent, so cognitive rehabilitation with mental imaging could be effective in MS patients.
PMID: 22925418
Spectrum disorder of neuromyelitis optica in a patient presenting with intractable vomiting and hiccups, transverse myelitis and acute encephalopathy.
Optic neuropathy and transverse myelitis (TM) are common symptoms of multiple sclerosis (MS) but may also be seen in association with the antibody-mediated autoimmune disorder, neuromyelitis optica (NMO).
We report a female patient presenting with intractable vomiting and hiccups and TM shortly followed by an acute encephalopathy, most likely due to NMO spectrum disorder.
Serum and cerebrospinal fluid NMO antibodies were negative.
Serial MRI abnormalities included longitudinally extensive TM of the cervical cord, focal T2-weighted hyperintensity of the area postrema and lesions in both thalami and the hypothalamus.
Clinical and MRI involvement of these brain regions, which have high aquaporin expression, in conjunction with a spinal lesion extending over three vertebral segments strongly favoured a diagnosis of NMO.
She required several courses of intravenous methylprednisolone and plasmapheresis before receiving intravenous rituximab therapy.
NMO spectrum disorder should be considered in the differential diagnosis of atypical central nervous system presentations such as intractable vomiting and hiccups and acute encephalopathy.
Recognition of this syndrome has significant implications as its treatment and prognosis differs from MS.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21699540
The cyclooxygenase-2 pathway via the PGE₂ EP2 receptor contributes to oligodendrocytes apoptosis in cuprizone-induced demyelination.
Cyclooxygenases (COX)-1 and -2 are key enzymes required for the conversion of arachidonic acid to eicosanoids, potent mediators of inflammation.
In patients with multiple sclerosis, COX-2 derived prostaglandins (PGs) are elevated in the CSF and COX-2 is up-regulated in demyelinating plaques.
However, it is not known whether COX-2 activity contributes to oligodendrocyte death.
In cuprizone-induced demyelination, oligodendrocyte apoptosis and a concomitant increase in the gene expression of COX-2 and PGE₂-EP2 receptor precede histological demyelination.
COX-2 and EP2 receptor were expressed by oligodendrocytes, suggesting a causative role for the COX-2/EP2 pathway in the initiation of oligodendrocyte death and demyelination.
COX-2 gene deletion, chronic treatment with the COX-2 selective inhibitor celecoxib, or with the EP2 receptor antagonist AH6809 reduced cuprizone-induced oligodendrocyte apoptosis, the degree of demyelination and motor dysfunction.
These data indicate that the PGE₂ EP2 receptor contributes to oligodendrocyte apoptosis and open possible new therapeutic approaches for multiple sclerosis.
Published 2011.
This article is a US Government work and is in the public domain in the USA.
Journal of Neurochemistry © 2011 International Society for Neurochemistry.
PMID: 23422639
Vulvar ulcer causing osteomyelitis of the pubic bone.
Osteomyelitis of the pubic bone is a rare entity.
Risk factors for infection of the symphysis pubis and osteomyelitis of the pubic bone include direct trauma, previous urogynecologic procedures, extreme physical exercise, and immunocompromised state.
The treatment modalities range from conservative antibiotic treatment to extensive surgery.
A 49-year-old woman with multiple sclerosis and borderline diabetes mellitus presented with bloody vulvovaginal discharge.
The source was found out to be an ulcer located above the urethra with exposure of the underlying symphysis pubis.
Intraoperative debridement of the ulcer followed by bone biopsies demonstrated osteomyelitis of the pubic bone.
Prolonged intravenous antibiotics and 4 operative debridements were needed before the osteomyelitis was adequately addressed and the defect could be closed with a bulbocavernosus flap.
This is the first report of a severe case of osteomyelitis of the pubic bone arising from a vulvar ulcer.
PMID: 22119175
Assessment of a portable device for the quantitative measurement of ankle joint stiffness in spastic individuals.
Spasticity is a common complication with neurological diseases and CNS lesions.
Instrumented systems to evaluate spasticity often cannot provide an immediate result, thus limiting their clinical usefulness.
In this study we investigated the accuracy and reliability of the portable Neurokinetics RA1 Ridgidity Analyzer to measure stiffness of the ankle joint in 46 controls, 14 spinal cord injured (SCI) and 23 multiple sclerosis (MS) participants.
Ankle stiffness measures were made twice by two raters, at speeds above and below the expected stretch reflex threshold.
Ankle torque was measured with the portable device and a stationary torque motor.
Inter- and intra-rater reliability was assessed with the intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC).
Stiffness measures with the portable and stationary devices were significantly correlated for controls and MS participants (p &lt; 0.01).
Intra-rater reliability for the portable device ranged from 0.60-0.89 (SCI) and 0.63-0.67 (control) and inter-rater reliability ranged from 0.70-0.73 (SCI) and 0.61-0.77 (control).
Ankle stiffness measures in SCI and MS participants were significantly larger than in controls for both slow (p &lt; 0.05) and fast movements (p &lt; 0.01), with stiffness being larger for fast compared to slow movements in SCI and MS participants (p &lt; 0.05), but not in controls (p = 0.5).
The portable device correlated well with measures obtained by a torque motor in both controls and MS participants, showed high intra- and inter-rater reliability for the SCI participants, and could easily distinguish between stiff and control ankle joints.
However, the device, in its current form, may be less accurate during rapid movements when inertia contributes to stiffness and the shape of the air-filled pads did not provide a good interface with the foot.
This study demonstrates that a portable device can potentially be a useful diagnostic tool to obtain reliable information of stiffness for the ankle joint.
Copyright © 2011 International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology.
Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21543525
Unmet needs of severely affected multiple sclerosis patients: the health professionals' view.
Research has only started recently to specifically concentrate on the group of patients severely affected by multiple sclerosis (MS).
The aim of this study was to assess the perception on patients' unmet needs by healthcare professionals.
Focus groups and expert interviews were recorded, transcribed verbatim and analysed by qualitative content analysis.
Unmet needs were identified in four main categories ('support from family/friends'; 'healthcare services'; 'managing everyday life'; 'maintaining biographical continuity').
Whereas physicians assessed most unmet needs in the category 'healthcare services', nurses and social workers focussed on unmet needs in the categories 'support from family/friends' and 'maintaining biographical continuity'.
Although the study focused on unmet needs of patients, professionals also voiced their unmet needs when caring for these patients.
The group of professionals identified more subcategories than patients and included unmet needs of relatives.
Adding professionals' perspective to that of patients is essential to gain a holistic view on patients' unmet needs and to further optimize their care.
The perspective of palliative care might contribute to meet unmet needs of severely affected MS patients.
PMID: 22231830
Interleukin-2 and the septohippocampal system: intrinsic actions and autoimmune processes relevant to neuropsychiatric disorders.
The effects of IL-2 on brain development, function, and disease are the result of IL-2's actions in the peripheral immune system and its intrinsic actions in the central nervous system (CNS).
Determining whether, and under what circumstances (e.g., development, acute injury), these different actions of IL-2 are operative in the brain is essential to make significant advances in understanding the multifaceted affects of IL-2 on CNS function and disease, including psychiatric disorders.
For several decades, there has been a great deal of speculation about the role of autoimmunity in brain disease.
More recently, we have learned a great deal about the role of cytokines on neurobiological processes, and there have been many studies that have found peripheral immune alterations in patients with neurological and neuropsychiatric diseases.
Despite a plethora of published literature, almost all of this data in humans is correlative and much of the basic research has understandably relied on simpler models (e.g., in vitro models).
Good animal models such as our IL-2 knockout mouse model could provide valuable new insight into understanding how the complex biology of a cytokine such as IL-2 can have simultaneous, dynamic effects on multiple systems (e.g., regulating homeostasis in the brain and immune system, autoimmunity that can affect both systems).
Animal models can also provide much needed new data elucidating neuroimmunological and autoimmune processes involved in brain development and disease.
Such information may ultimately provide critical new insight into the role of brain cytokines and autoimmunity in prominent neurological and neuropsychiatric diseases (e.g., Alzheimer's disease, autism, multiple sclerosis, schizophrenia).
PMID: 22234717
Increasing physical activity in multiple sclerosis: replicating Internet intervention effects using objective and self-report outcomes.
Our previous research indicated that an Internet intervention was effective in increasing self-reported physical activity in persons with multiple sclerosis (MS).
The present study examined the efficacy of the same Internet intervention in persons with MS by using both objective and self-report measures of physical activity.
Participants (N = 21) wore an accelerometer around the waist for 7 days and then completed the International Physical Activity Questionnaire (IPAQ) and Godin Leisure-Time Exercise Questionnaire (GLTEQ) before and after receiving the 12-week Internet intervention.
The Internet intervention resulted in moderate increases in accelerometer activity counts (d = 0.68) and steps counts (d = 0.60), and this was paralleled by small increases in IPAQ (d = 0.43) and GLTEQ (d = 0.34) scores.
The number of weeks that persons logged on was correlated with change in accelerometer activity counts (r = 0.42) and step counts (r = 0.37) but not change in IPAQ (r = 0.10) or GLTEQ (r = 0.08) scores.
The novel contribution of this study was the observation that an Internet intervention was efficacious for increasing physical activity in persons with MS by using both objective and self-report measures.
PMID: 22234713
Self-management in neurological disorders: systematic review of the literature and potential interventions in multiple sclerosis care.
Our objective was to review the current body of evidence supporting the efficacy of self-management programs in individuals with multiple sclerosis (MS) and other chronic neurological conditions.
We reviewed published literature using standardized search terms; examined self-management interventions in a variety of chronic neurological disorders, including MS; and classified studies using the evidence classification established by the American Academy of Neurology.
We reviewed 527 abstracts, of which 39 met our inclusion criteria for evaluation.
Of the 39 studies, 3 provided class I evidence assessing the efficacy of self-management interventions: a randomized controlled trial of a telephone counseling program for health promotion in MS, a home-based exercise program for reducing falls in people with Parkinson disease, and the comparison of a fitness center program versus a home-based exercise program for people with traumatic brain injury.
The remaining studies provided additional support for self-management interventions with a lesser degree of methodologic rigor (class II, class III, or class IV evidence).
We concluded that self-management strategies are applicable to chronic neurological diseases, but a need exists for more rigorous studies in this area.
We provide recommendations for future intervention study methodologies with a specific emphasis on MS care.
PMID: 22903399
Mycoplasma corogypsi-associated polyarthritis and tenosynovitis in black vultures (Coragyps atratus).
Three wild American black vultures (Coragyps atratus) were presented to rehabilitation centers with swelling of multiple joints, including elbows, stifles, hocks, and carpal joints, and of the gastrocnemius tendons.
Cytological examination of the joint fluid exudate indicated heterophilic arthritis.
Radiographic examination in 2 vultures demonstrated periarticular soft tissue swelling in both birds and irregular articular surfaces with subchondral bone erosion in both elbows in 1 bird.
Prolonged antibiotic therapy administered in 2 birds did not improve the clinical signs.
Necropsy and histological examination demonstrated a chronic lymphoplasmacytic arthritis involving multiple joints and gastrocnemius tenosynovitis.
Articular lesions varied in severity and ranged from moderate synovitis and cartilage erosion and fibrillation to severe synovitis, diffuse cartilage ulceration, subchondral bone loss and/or sclerosis, pannus, synovial cysts, and epiphyseal osteomyelitis.
No walled bacteria were observed or isolated from the joints.
However, mycoplasmas polymerase chain reactions were positive in at least 1 affected joint from each bird.
Mycoplasmas were isolated from joints of 1 vulture that did not receive antibiotic therapy.
Sequencing of 16S rRNA gene amplicons from joint samples and the mycoplasma isolate identified Mycoplasma corogypsi in 2 vultures and was suggestive in the third vulture.
Mycoplasma corogypsi identification was confirmed by sequencing the 16S-23S intergenic spacer region of mycoplasma isolates.
This report provides further evidence that M. corogypsi is a likely cause of arthritis and tenosynovitis in American black vultures.
Cases of arthritis and tenosynovitis in New World vultures should be investigated for presence of Mycoplasma spp, especially M. corogypsi.
PMID: 22933081
Pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis: what can we learn from the cuprizone model.
Multiple sclerosis is an inflammatory demyelinating and neurodegenerative disorder of the central nervous system (CNS).
The primary cause of the disease remains unknown, but an altered immune regulation with features of autoimmunity has generally been considered to play a critical role in the pathogenesis.
Historically, lesion development has been attributed to activation of CD4 and CD8 T lymphocytes, B lymphocytes, and monocytes in the peripheral circulation and the migration of these cells through the blood-brain barrier to exert direct or indirect cytotoxic effects on myelin, oligodendrocytes and neuronal processes in the CNS.
This broadly accepted concept was significantly influenced by the experimental autoimmune encephalitis (EAE) model, in which either immunization with myelin antigens or injection of a myelin antigen-specific T cell line into a recipient results in inflammatory demyelination in the CNS.
More recent studies reveal that the loss of oligodendrocytes and neurons begins in the earliest stages of the disease and may not always be associated with blood-derived inflammatory cells.
The pathology affects both the white and the gray matters and the clinical disability best correlates with the overall neurodegenerative process.
These newer observations prompted several revisions of the classical concept of MS and facilitated a shift from using EAE to using other model systems.
This chapter summarizes the classical and more contemporary concepts of MS, and provides methodologies for employing the cuprizone model for further explorations of the pathogenesis and treatment of the disease.
PMID: 22933080
Mouse models of multiple sclerosis: experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis and Theiler's virus-induced demyelinating disease.
Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) and Theiler's Murine Encephalitis Virus-Induced Demyelinating Disease (TMEV-IDD) are two clinically relevant murine models of multiple sclerosis (MS).
Like MS, both are characterized by mononuclear cell infiltration into the CNS and demyelination.
EAE is induced by either the administration of myelin protein or peptide in adjuvant or by the adoptive transfer of encephalitogenic T cell blasts into naïve recipients.
The relative merits of each of these protocols are compared.
Depending on the type of question being asked, different mouse strains and peptides are used.
Different disease courses are observed with different strains and different peptides in active EAE.
These variations are also addressed.
Additionally, issues relevant to clinical grading of EAE in mice are discussed.
In addition to EAE induction, useful references for other disease indicators such as DTH, in vitro proliferation, and immunohistochemistry are provided.
TMEV-IDD is a useful model for understanding the possible viral etiology of MS.
This section provides detailed information on the preparation of viral stocks and subsequent intracerebral infection of mice.
Additionally, virus plaque assay and clinical disease assessment are discussed.
Recently, recombinant TMEV strains have been created for the study of molecular mimicry which incorporate various 30 amino acid myelin epitopes within the leader region of TMEV.
PMID: 22815277
Network meta-analysis models to account for variability in treatment definitions: application to dose effects.
For a network meta-analysis, an interlinked network of nodes representing competing treatments is needed.
It is often challenging to define the nodes as these typically refer to similar but rarely identical interventions.
The objectives of this paper are as follows: (i) to present a series of network meta-analysis models that account for variation in the definition of the nodes and (ii) to exemplify the models where variation in the treatment definitions relates to the dose.
Starting from the model that assumes each node has a 'fixed' definition, we gradually introduce terms to explain variability by assuming that each node has several subnodes that relate to different doses.
The effects of subnodes are considered monotonic, linked with a 'random walk', random but exchangeable, or have a linear pattern around the treatment mean effect.
Each model can be combined with different assumptions for the consistency of effects and might impact on the ranking of the treatments.
Goodness of fit, heterogeneity and inconsistency were assessed.
The models are illustrated in a star network for the effectiveness of fluoride toothpaste and in a full network comparing agents for multiple sclerosis.
The fit and parsimony measures indicate that in the fluoride network the impact of the dose subnodes is important whereas in the multiple sclerosis network the model without subnodes is the most appropriate.
The proposed approach can be a useful exploratory tool to explain sources of heterogeneity and inconsistency when there is doubt whether similar interventions should be grouped under the same node.
Copyright © 2012 John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd.
PMID: 22269426
CXCL1 can be regulated by IL-6 and promotes granulocyte adhesion to brain capillaries during bacterial toxin exposure and encephalomyelitis.
Granulocytes generally exert protective roles in the central nervous system (CNS), but recent studies suggest that they can be detrimental in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), the most common model of multiple sclerosis.
While the cytokines and adhesion molecules involved in granulocyte adhesion to the brain vasculature have started to be elucidated, the required chemokines remain undetermined.
CXCR2 ligand expression was examined in the CNS of mice suffering from EAE or exposed to bacterial toxins by quantitative RT-PCR and in situ hybridization.
CXCL1 expression was analyzed in IL-6-treated endothelial cell cultures by quantitative RT-PCR and ELISA.
Granulocytes were counted in the brain vasculature after treatment with a neutralizing anti-CXCL1 antibody using stereological techniques.
CXCL1 was the most highly expressed ligand of the granulocyte receptor CXCR2 in the CNS of mice subjected to EAE or infused with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or pertussis toxin (PTX), the latter being commonly used to induce EAE.
IL-6 upregulated CXCL1 expression in brain endothelial cells by acting transcriptionally and mediated the stimulatory effect of PTX on CXCL1 expression.
The anti-CXCL1 antibody reduced granulocyte adhesion to brain capillaries in the three conditions under study.
Importantly, it attenuated EAE severity when given daily for a week during the effector phase of the disease.
This study identifies CXCL1 not only as a key regulator of granulocyte recruitment into the CNS, but also as a new potential target for the treatment of neuroinflammatory diseases such as multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 23132327
Neuroinflammatory imaging biomarkers: relevance to multiple sclerosis and its therapy.
Magnetic resonance imaging is an established tool in the management of multiple sclerosis (MS).
Loss of blood brain barrier integrity assessed by gadolinium (Gd) enhancement is the current standard marker of MS activity.
To explore the complex cascade of the inflammatory events, other magnetic resonance imaging, but also positron emission tomographic markers reviewed in this article are being developed to address active neuroinflammation with increased sensitivity and specificity.
Alternative magnetic resonance contrast agents, positron emission tomographic tracers and imaging techniques could be more sensitive than Gd to early blood brain barrier alteration, and they could assess the inflammatory cell recruitment and/or the associated edema accumulation.
These markers of active neuroinflammation, although some of them are limited to experimental studies, could find great relevance to complete Gd information and thereby increase our understanding of acute lesion pathophysiology and its noninvasive follow-up, especially to monitor treatment efficacy.
Furthermore, such accurate markers of inflammation combined with those of neurodegeneration hold promise to provide a more complete picture of MS, which will be of great benefit for future therapeutic strategies.
PMID: 22987758
Practical medical applications of quantitative MR relaxometry.
Conventional MR images are qualitative, and their signal intensity is dependent on several complementary contrast mechanisms that are manipulated by the MR hardware and software.
In the absence of a quantitative metric for absolute interpretation of pixel signal intensities, one that is independent of scanner hardware and sequences, it is difficult to perform comparisons of MR images across subjects or longitudinally in the same subject.
Quantitative relaxometry isolates the contributions of individual MR contrast mechanisms (T1, T2, T2) and provides maps, which are independent of the MR protocol and have a physical interpretation often expressed in absolute units.
In addition to providing an unbiased metric for comparing MR scans, quantitative relaxometry uses the relationship between MR maps and physiology to provide a noninvasive surrogate for biopsy and histology.
This study provides an overview of some promising clinical applications of quantitative relaxometry, followed by a description of the methods and challenges of acquiring accurate and precise quantitative MR maps.
It concludes with three case studies of quantitative relaxometry applied to studying multiple sclerosis, liver iron, and acute myocardial infarction.
Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 23355896
Impact of mobility impairment on indirect costs and health-related quality of life in multiple sclerosis.
This study was conducted to estimate the indirect costs and health-related quality of life (HRQoL) (utilities) of multiple sclerosis (MS) patients in the United States (US), and to determine the impact of worsening mobility on these parameters.
In collaboration with the North American Research Committee on Multiple Sclerosis (NARCOMS) registry we conducted a cross-sectional study of participants who completed the biannual update and supplemental spring 2010 survey.
Demographic, employment status, income, mobility impairment, and health utility data were collected from a sample of registry participants who met the study criteria and agreed to participate in the supplemental Mobility Study.
Mean annual indirect costs per participant in 2011US$ and mean utilities for the population and for cohorts reporting different levels of mobility impairment were estimated.
Analyses included 3,484 to 3,611 participants, based on survey completeness.
Thirty-seven percent of registrants were not working or attending school and 46.7% of these reported retiring early.
Indirect costs per participant per year, not including informal caregiver cost, were estimated at $30,601±31,184.
The largest relative increase in indirect costs occurred at earlier mobility impairment stages, regardless of the measure used.
Participants' mean utility score (0.73±0.18) was lower than that of a similarly aged sample from the general US population (0.87).
As with indirect costs, larger decrements in utility were seen at earlier mobility impairment stages.
These results suggest that mobility impairment may contribute to increases in indirect costs and declines in HRQoL in MS patients.
PMID: 23890777
Apotransferrin inhibits interleukin-2 expression and protects mice from experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Transferrin (Tf) has a major role in T cell activation and proliferation.
Here, we investigated whether Tf exerts immunomodulatory effects on T cells and in development of T-cell driven experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE).
While treatment of concanavalin A-stimulated splenocytes with apotransferrin (ApoTf) did not affect release of IL-1β, TNF, IFN-γ, IL-17, IL-4, and IL-10, it markedly and dose-dependently down-regulated synthesis of IL-2 in these cells.
ApoTf also inhibited IL-2 generation in purified CD3+ T cells and the effect was accompanied with down-regulation of MAPK p44/42 and NFκB signaling.
Despite impeded IL-2 release, proliferation of splenocytes was not inhibited by ApoTf.
Importantly, ApoTf ameliorated EAE in mice and significantly reduced ex vivo IL-2 production in proteolipid protein-specific lymphocytes.
Thus ApoTf may be a promising beneficial agent for multiple sclerosis.
© 2013.
PMID: 22742888
Efficacy of vision restoration therapy after optic neuritis (VISION study): study protocol for a randomized controlled trial.
Optic neuritis is a frequent manifestation of multiple sclerosis.
Visual deficits range from a minor impairment of visual functions through to complete loss of vision.
Although many patients recover almost completely, roughly 35% of patients remain visually impaired for years, and therapeutic options for those patients hardly exist.
Vision restoration therapy is a software-based visual training program that has been shown to improve visual deficits after pre- and postchiasmatic injury.
The aim of this pilot study is to evaluate whether residual visual deficits after past or recent optic neuritis can be reduced by means of vision restoration therapy.
A randomized, controlled, patient- and observer-blinded clinical pilot study (VISION study) was designed to evaluate the efficacy of vision restoration therapy in optic neuritis patients.
Eighty patients with a residual visual deficit after optic neuritis (visual acuity ≤0.7 and/or scotoma) will be stratified according to the time of optic neuritis onset (manifestation more than 12 months ago (40 patients, fixed deficit) versus manifestation 2 to 6 months ago (40 patients, recent optic neuritis)), and randomized into vision restoration therapy arm or saccadic training arm (control intervention).
Patients will be instructed to complete a computer-based visual training for approximately 30 minutes each day for a period of 6 months.
Patients and evaluators remain blinded to the treatment allocation throughout the study.
All endpoints will be analyzed and P-values &lt; 0.05 will be considered statistically significant.
The primary outcome parameter will be the expansion of the visual field after 3 and 6 months of treatment as determined by static visual field perimetry and high resolution perimetry.
Secondary outcome variables will include visual acuity at both low and high contrast, glare contrast sensitivity, visually evoked potentials, optical coherence tomography and other functional tests of the visual system, alertness, health-related quality of life, fatigue, and depression.
If vision restoration therapy is shown to improve visual function after optic neuritis, this method might be a first therapeutic option for patients with incomplete recovery from optic neuritis. NCT01274702.
PMID: 23304562
A common anesthesiology procedure for a patient with an uncommon combination of diseases: a case report.
Administering neuraxial anesthesia to a patient with an underlying neurological disease and a combination of four other pathological disorders can be challenging.
We report in this paper the case of a 45-year-old woman with neurological deficit due to ischemic brain infarct, multiple sclerosis, antiphospholipid syndrome, and β-heterozygous thalassemia that was subjected to abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingoophorectomy under epidural anesthesia for ovarian cancer.
PMID: 23260322
Adenosine A1 receptor agonist, N6-cyclohexyladenosine, protects myelin and induces remyelination in an experimental model of rat optic chiasm demyelination; electrophysiological and histopathological studies.
Chronic demyelinated lesions and subsequent functional impairment are resulted from eventual failure of remyelination process as seen in multiple sclerosis.
Activation of adenosine A1 receptor is reported to be effective on neural stem cells (NSCs) proliferation and oligodendrocytes differentiation.
Therefore, this study attempted to investigate the effect of A1 receptor agonist N6-cyclohexyladenosine (CHA), on lysolecithin (LPC) induced demyelination and remyelination in rat optic chiasm.
The experiments were carried out on male Wistar rats using visual evoked potential recording, myelin staining by Luxol fast blue and histological evaluation of demyelinated and remyelinated axons within the area of lesion.
CHA was administrated i.c.v.
during demyelination or remyelination phases.
As revealed by myelin staining, the most extent of demyelination occurred at 7th day post-lesion (dpl 7), but gradually myelination was restored toward control during days 14-28.
VEP P1-latency and P1-N1 amplitude showed widespread demyelination on dpl 7 and 14 which consequently was reversed during days 14-28 post lesion.
I.c.v. treatment of animals with CHA during demyelination phase (days 0-13) reduced the extent of demyelination.
During remyelination phase (days 14-28), CHA was able to increase remyelination in both electrophysiological and histopathological studies.
The effects of CHA seem to be due to its protective effect on myelinating cells and its regenerative effect through potentiating endogenous neural progenitors.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23160197
B cell exchange across the blood-brain barrier in multiple sclerosis.
In multiple sclerosis (MS) pathogenic B cells likely act on both sides of the blood-brain barrier (BBB).
However, it is unclear whether antigen-experienced B cells are shared between the CNS and the peripheral blood (PB) compartments.
We applied deep repertoire sequencing of IgG heavy chain variable region genes (IgG-VH) in paired cerebrospinal fluid and PB samples from patients with MS and other neurological diseases to identify related B cells that are common to both compartments.
For the first time to our knowledge, we found that a restricted pool of clonally related B cells participated in robust bidirectional exchange across the BBB.
Some clusters of related IgG-VH appeared to have undergone active diversification primarily in the CNS, while others have undergone active diversification in the periphery or in both compartments in parallel.
B cells are strong candidates for autoimmune effector cells in MS, and these findings suggest that CNS-directed autoimmunity may be triggered and supported on both sides of the BBB.
These data also provide a powerful approach to identify and monitor B cells in the PB that correspond to clonally amplified populations in the CNS in MS and other inflammatory states.
PMID: 23300649
Passive experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis in C57BL/6 with MOG: evidence of involvement of B cells.
Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) is the most relevant animal model to study demyelinating diseases such as multiple sclerosis.
EAE can be induced by active (active EAE) or passive (at-EAE) transfer of activated T cells in several species and strains of rodents.
However, histological features of at-EAE model in C57BL/6 are poorly described.
The aim of this study was to characterize the neuroinflammatory and neurodegenerative responses of at-EAE in C57BL/6 mice by histological techniques and compare them with that observed in the active EAE model.
To develop the at-EAE, splenocytes from active EAE female mice were harvested and cultured in presence of MOG(35-55) and IL-12, and then injected intraperitoneally in recipient female C57BL6/J mice.
In both models, the development of EAE was similar except for starting before the onset of symptoms and presenting a higher EAE cumulative score in the at-EAE model.
Spinal cord histological examination revealed an increased glial activation as well as more extensive demyelinating areas in the at-EAE than in the active EAE model.
Although inflammatory infiltrates composed by macrophages and T lymphocytes were found in the spinal cord and brain of both models, B lymphocytes were significantly increased in the at-EAE model.
The co-localization of these B cells with IgG and their predominant distribution in areas of demyelination would suggest that IgG-secreting B cells are involved in the neurodegenerative processes associated with at-EAE.
PMID: 23402677
Early treatment with high-dose interferon beta-1a reverses cognitive and cortical plasticity deﬁcits in multiple sclerosis.
Acute inﬂammation is associated with cognitive deﬁcits and alterations of cortical plasticity in multiple sclerosis (MS).
We tested whether early treatment with high-dose interferon (IFN) beta-1a, known to reduce inﬂammatory activity, improves cortical function and cognitive deﬁcits in MS.
Eighty treatment-naïve relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS)patients received IFN beta-1a (44 mcg) subcutaneously three times per week.
Cognitive performance and cortical plasticity were measured through the paced auditory serial addition test (PASAT) and intermittent theta burst stimulation (iTBS) before and up to two years af-ter IFN beta-1a initiation.
Before treatment, patients with gadolinium-enhancing lesions (Gd+) on MRI performed worse on the PASAT,and showed lower iTBS-induced plasticity, compared with Gd- patients.
Six months after treatment initiation both PASAT and iTBS-induced plasticity improved in Gd+ and remained stable in Gd- patients.
These results suggest that cognitive and synaptic plasticity deﬁcits may be rescued during high-doseIFN beta-1a treatment in newly-diagnosed RRMS patients with Gd+ lesions.
PMID: 24028994
Errata Corrige: The Neuroradiology Journal 25: 17-21, 2012. Multiple Sclerosis Lesions in the Brain: Computer-Assisted Assessment of Lesion Load Dynamics on 3D FLAIR MR Images.
The detection and monitoring of brain lesions caused by multiple sclerosis is commonly performed with the use of magnetic resonance imaging.
Analysis of a large number of images is a time-consuming challenge to the neuroradiologist, that can be accelerated with the assistance of computer-detection software.
In 98 baseline and follow-up brain magnetic resonance studies from 88 patients with a diagnosis of multiple sclerosis, we employed locally developed lesion-detection software to assess temporal change in the load of brain lesions and compared its results to routine clinical reports.
Analyzing the differences between the follow-up study and the baseline study, the software displays the results in the form of a scrollable axial volume, with the changed lesions highlighted in different colors and superimposed on the baseline reference scan.
Although disagreements between the software and the clinical readers in the detection of changed lesions were observed only in 12 (12.2%) cases, the difference reached statistical significance (p=0.04).
The mean interpretation time with assistance of the software was 2.7±2.2 minutes.
We conclude that the performance of the software-assisted interpretation in the analysis of change over time in multiple sclerosis brain lesions is different from the performance of clinical readers, with a possibly shorter assessment time.
The software detected more changes from baseline than clinical readers, suggesting a higher sensitivity, which will have to be confirmed on further analysis.
PMID: 22649194
Cutting edge: TNF receptor-associated factor 4 restricts IL-17-mediated pathology and signaling processes.
The effector T cell subset, Th17, plays a significant role in the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis and of other autoimmune diseases.
The signature cytokine, IL-17, engages the IL-17R and recruits the E3-ligase NF-κB activator 1 (Act1) upon stimulation.
In this study, we examined the role of TNFR-associated factor (TRAF)4 in IL-17 signaling and Th17-mediated autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Primary cells from TRAF4-deficient mice displayed markedly enhanced IL-17-activated signaling pathways and induction of chemokine mRNA.
Adoptive transfer of MOG35-55 specific wild-type Th17 cells into TRAF4-deficient recipient mice induced an earlier onset of disease.
Mechanistically, we found that TRAF4 and TRAF6 used the same TRAF binding sites on Act1, allowing the competition of TRAF4 with TRAF6 for the interaction with Act1.
Taken together, the results of this study reveal the necessity of a unique role of TRAF4 in restricting the effects of IL-17 signaling and Th17-mediated disease.
PMID: 21972082
Liver X receptors regulate cholesterol homeostasis in oligodendrocytes.
Cholesterol synthesis and transport in oligodendrocytes are essential for optimal myelination and remyelination in pathological conditions such as multiple sclerosis.
However, little is known about cholesterol homeostasis in the myelin-forming oligodendrocytes.
Liver X receptors (LXRs) are nuclear oxysterol receptors that regulate genes involved in cholesterol homeostasis and may therefore play an important role in de- and remyelination.
We investigated whether LXRs regulate cholesterol homeostasis in oligodendrocytes.
mRNA expression of genes encoding LXR-α and LXR-β and their target genes (ABCA1, ABCG1, ABCG4, apoE, and LDLR) was detected in oligodendrocytes derived from both neonatal and adult rats using quantitative real-time PCR.
The expression of LXR-β and several target genes was increased during oligodendrocyte differentiation.
We further demonstrated that treatment of primary neonatal rat oligodendrocytes with the synthetic LXR agonist T0901317 induced the expression of several established LXR target genes, including ABCA1, ABCG1, apoE, and LDLR.
Treatment of oligodendrocytes with T0901317 resulted in an enhanced cholesterol efflux in the presence of apolipoprotein A-I or high-density lipoprotein particles.
These data show that LXRs are involved in regulating cholesterol homeostasis in oligodendrocytes.
Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 23758972
Incidence of multiple sclerosis among European Economic Area populations, 1985-2009: the framework for monitoring.
A debate surrounding multiple sclerosis epidemiology has centred on time-related incidence increases and the need of monitoring.
The purpose of this study is to reassess multiple sclerosis incidence in the European Economic Area.
We conducted a systematic review of literature from 1965 onwards and integrated elements of original research, including requested or completed data by surveys authors and specific analyses.
The review of 5323 documents yielded ten studies for age- and sex-specific analyses, and 21 studies for time-trend analysis of single data sets.
After 1985, the incidence of multiple sclerosis ranged from 1.12 to 6.96 per 100,000 population, was higher in females, tripled with latitude, and doubled with study midpoint year.
The north registered increasing trends from the 1960s and 1970s, with a historic drop in the Faroe Islands, and fairly stable data in the period 1980-2000; incidence rose in Italian and French populations in the period 1970-2000, in Evros (Greece) in the 1980s, and in the French West Indies in around 2000.
We conclude that the increase in multiple sclerosis incidence is only apparent, and that it is not specific to women.
Monitoring of multiple sclerosis incidence might be appropriate for the European Economic Area.
PMID: 21892620
The multiple faces of valosin-containing protein-associated diseases: inclusion body myopathy with Paget's disease of bone, frontotemporal dementia, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Inclusion body myopathy associated with Paget's disease of bone and frontotemporal dementia (IBMPFD) is a progressive, fatal genetic disorder with variable penetrance, predominantly affecting three main tissue types: muscle (IBM), bone (PDB), and brain (FTD).
IBMPFD is caused by mutations in the ubiquitously expressed valosin-containing protein (VCP) gene, a member of the AAA-ATPase superfamily.
The majority of individuals who develop IBM have progressive proximal muscle weakness.
Muscle biopsies reveal rimmed vacuoles and inclusions that are ubiquitin- and TAR DNA binding protein-43 (TDP-43)-positive using immunohistochemistry.
PDB, seen in half the individuals, is caused by overactive osteoclasts and is associated clinically with pain, elevated serum alkaline phosphatase, and X-ray findings of coarse trabeculation and sclerotic lesions.
FTD diagnosed at a mean age of 55 years in a third of individuals is characterized clinically by comprehension deficits, dysnomia, dyscalculia, and social unawareness.
Ubiquitin- and TDP-43-positive neuronal inclusions are also found in the brain.
Genotype-phenotype correlations are difficult with marked intra-familial and inter-familial variations being seen.
Varied phenotypes within families include frontotemporal dementia, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinsonism, myotonia, cataracts, and anal incompetence, among others.
Cellular and animal models indicate pathogenetic disturbances in IBMPFD tissues including altered protein degradation, autophagy pathway alterations, apoptosis, and mitochondrial dysfunction.
Currently, mouse and drosophila models carrying VCP mutations provide insights into the human IBMPFD pathology and are useful as tools for preclinical studies and testing of therapeutic strategies.
In this review, we will explore the pathogenesis and clinical phenotype of IBMPFD caused by VCP mutations.
PMID: 22796988
Quantitative proton density mapping: correcting the receiver sensitivity bias via pseudo proton densities.
Most methods for mapping proton densities (PD) in brain tissue are based on measuring all parameters influencing the signal intensity with subsequent elimination of any weighting not related to PD.
This requires knowledge of the receiver coil sensitivity profile (RP), the measurement of which can be problematic.
Recently, a method for compensating the influence of RP non-uniformities on PD data at a field strength of 3T was proposed, based on bias field correction of spoiled gradient echo image data to remove the low spatial frequency bias imposed by RP variations from uncorrected PD maps.
The purpose of the current study was to present and test an independent method, based on the well-known linear relationship between the longitudinal relaxation rate R1 and 1/PD in brain tissue.
For healthy subjects, RP maps obtained with this method and the resulting PD maps are very similar to maps based on bias field correction, and quantitative PD values acquired with the new independent method are in very good agreement with literature values.
Furthermore, both methods for PD mapping are compared in the presence of several pathologies (multiple sclerosis, stroke, meningioma, recurrent glioblastoma).
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21949917
Tumefactive multiple sclerosis in a young patient with hemiplegia and seizures associated with radiological appearance mimicking cerebral tumour.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most common inflammatory demyelinating disease, affecting approximately one million adults worldwide.
This paper describes a young female patient who presented to the acute medical team with generalised tonic-clonic seizures and right hemiplegia on a background of MS.
Radiological imaging revealed a large ring enhancing lesion exerting mass effect.
We describe an unusual form of MS and discuss diagnostic pitfalls of tumefactive demyelinating lesions which can be mistaken for brain tumours and abscesses.
PMID: 22637476
Mechanism for p38α-mediated experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
One of the mitogen-activated protein kinases, p38, has been found to play a crucial role in various inflammatory responses.
In this study, we analyzed the roles of p38α in multiple sclerosis, using an animal model, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). p38α(+/-) mice (p38α(-/-) showed embryonic lethality) showed less severe neurological signs than WT mice.
Adoptive transfer of lymph node cells (LNC) from sensitized WT mice with MOG(35-55) to naive WT-induced EAE was much more severe compared with the case using LNC from sensitized p38α(+/-) mice.
Comprehensive analysis of cytokines from MOG(35-55)-challenged LNC by Western blot array revealed that production of IL-17 was significantly reduced by a single copy disruption of the p38α gene or a p38 inhibitor.
Likewise, by a luciferase reporter assay, an electrophoresis mobility shift assay, and characterization of the relationship between p38 activity and IL-17 mRNA expression, we confirmed that p38 positively regulates transcription of the Il17 gene.
Furthermore, oral administration of a highly specific p38α inhibitor (UR-5269) to WT mice at the onset of EAE markedly suppressed the progression of EAE compared with a vehicle group.
These results suggest that p38α participates in the pathogenesis of EAE through IL-17 induction.
PMID: 23793699
Mapping the 12-item multiple sclerosis walking scale to the EuroQol 5-dimension index measure in North American multiple sclerosis patients.
To map the 12-item Multiple Sclerosis Walking Scale (MSWS-12) onto the EuroQol 5-dimension (EQ-5D) health-utility index in multiple sclerosis (MS) patients participating in the North American Research Committee on Multiple Sclerosis (NARCOMS) registry.
Cross-sectional MSWS-12 to EQ-5D cross-walking analysis.
NARCOMS registry spring 2010 biannual update and supplemental survey.
North American patients completing both the MSWS-12 and the EQ-5D randomly split into derivation and validation cohorts.
Ordinary least squares regression was performed within the derivation cohort, with participants' EQ-5D as the dependent variable.
Results of the MSWS-12 were input as independent variable(s) into six regression models.
Model goodness-of-fit was subsequently assessed in the validation cohort using the mean absolute error (MAE), root mean square error (RMSE) and the adjusted R(2).
The best performing model was refined in the entire cohort and utilised for additional analyses.
A total of 3505 NARCOMS participants were included.
Their mean±SD EQ-5D and MSWS-12 scores were 0.74±0.18 and 50.8±33.5, respectively, and these assessments were found to be moderately correlated (r=-0.553, p&lt;0.001).
The model using all individual MSWS-12 item scores as independent variables was found to have the best fit (MAE=0.109±0.096, RMSE=0.145, adjusted R(2)=0.329).
The percentage of EQ-5D estimates within 0.05 and 0.10 of the actual value were 30% and 61%, respectively.
This mapping equation was more precise in patients with moderate mobility impairment (MAE=0.087±0.061 at patient-determined disease step (PDDS) of 3-6) and less precise in patients with no (MAE=0.141±0.128 at PDDS of 0-2) or severe mobility impairment (MAE=0.121±0.049 at PDDS ≥7).
The EQ-5D scores can be predicted using the MSWS-12 item scores with reasonable precision in North American patients with MS.
Prediction estimates were more precise in patients with moderate mobility impairment.
PMID: 22381245
From bench to MS bedside: challenges translating biomarker discovery to clinical practice.
A substantial need exists for developing and validating a range of biomarkers that would address a number of important unmet clinical needs in the MS field.
In spite of considerable efforts over last years, very few putative biomarkers have been fully validated or successfully integrated into routine clinical practice.
Here, we consider some of the main challenges that have limited such effective translation from biomarker discovery to the bedside in the context of MS, the prototypic chronic human CNS inflammatory illness.
We will define the types of biomarkers that would be relevant for MS, identify their ideal attributes, and then discuss individual challenges and strategies to overcome them.
Crown Copyright © 2012.
Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22487571
Identifying autoantigens in demyelinating diseases:  valuable clues to diagnosis and treatment?
Identification of autoantigens in demyelinating diseases is essential for the understanding of the pathogenesis.
Immune responses against these antigens could be used as biomarkers for diagnosis, prognosis and treatment responses.
Knowledge of antigen-specific immune responses in individual patients is also a prerequisite for antigen-based therapies.
A proportion of patients with demyelinating disease have antibodies to aquaporin 4 (AQP4) or myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG).
Patients with anti-AQP4 have the distinct clinical presentation of neuromyelitis optica (NMO), and these patients often also harbour other autoimmune responses.
In contrast, anti-MOG is seen in patients with different disease entities such as childhood multiple sclerosis (MS), acute demyelinating encephalomyelitis (ADEM), anti-AQP4 negative NMO, and optic neuritis, but hardly in adult MS.
A number of new candidate autoantigens have been identified and await validation.
Antigen-based therapies are mainly aimed at tolerizing T-cell responses against myelin basic protein (MBP) and have shown only modest or no clinical benefit so far.
Currently, only few patients with demyelinating diseases can be characterized based on their autoantibody profile.
The most prominent antigens in this respect are MOG and AQP4.
Further research has to focus on the validation of newly discovered antigens as biomarkers.
PMID: 21911588
IL2RA gene polymorphism rs2104286 A&gt;G seen in multiple sclerosis is associated with intermediate uveitis: possible parallel pathways?
Uveitis is a major cause for visual impairment.
Inflammation-related gene polymorphisms have previously been shown to confer susceptibility to different types of uveitis.
Recently, IL-2 receptor alpha (IL2RA, also called CD25) and IL-7 receptor alpha (IL7RA) gene variants (rs2104286, rs12722489, and rs6897932) have been identified to play an essential role in the pathogenesis of immune-mediated diseases.
Their role in uveitis, however, has not yet been studied.
The present study was set to investigate a hypothesized association of these gene polymorphisms and the presence of either intermediate or HLA-B27-associated acute anterior uveitis.
One hundred forty-five patients with HLA-B27-associated acute anterior uveitis (AAU), 84 patients with intermediate uveitis, 132 HLA-B27-negative controls, and 61 HLA-B27-positive controls were enrolled.
Determination of genotypes was done by polymerase chain reaction.
The frequency of carriers of the minor allele for rs2104286 was significantly lower in patients with intermediate uveitis compared with HLA-B27 positive and negative controls combined (P = 0.006).
Frequencies of the minor allele for rs2104286 did not differ significantly in patients with HLA-B27-associated uveitis (28.3%) when compared with HLA-B27-negative controls (24.2%; P = 0.29) and HLA-B27-positive controls (30.3%; P = 0.72).
The rs12722489 and rs6897932 polymorphisms were not significantly associated with either investigated uveitis entity (P &gt; 0.005).
These findings suggest an association of the rs2104286 polymorphism with intermediate uveitis, but not with HLA-B27-associated acute anterior uveitis.
Because this polymorphism was associated with multiple sclerosis in previous studies, the authors suggest possible parallel pathways between multiple sclerosis and intermediate uveitis but not HLA-B27-associated uveitis.
PMID: 22484845
Immunomodulators for multiple sclerosis may ameliorate spinal bone loss.
The effect of immunomodulator therapy (IMT) for multiple sclerosis (MS) on bone turnover is unknown.
The aim of this study was to assess bone turnover in MS patients on IMT.
MS patients (n = 29) on maintenance IMT had repeat measurement of bone mineral density (BMD) after a 4.0 ± 0.4 years; bone turnover markers (BTM) were measured at the time of repeat BMD.
BMD was unchanged at the spine but declined at the hip.
BTMs, both resorption and formation, were reduced compared to normative range that may indicate an anti-resorptive action of IMT.
Significant negative correlations were noted between BTMs and changes in BMD at spine but not hip.
These observations suggest that IMT may have a beneficial effect on spinal bone by an antiresorptive action.
A prospective study of the effect of IMT on BMD and bone turnover is warranted.
PMID: 22106296
The role of cell type-specific responses in IFN-β therapy of multiple sclerosis.
The mechanism of IFN-β therapy in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) is not well understood, but induction of apoptosis in specific leukocyte subsets is likely to be important.
Enhanced expression of TNFSF10 or TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) mRNA in unseparated leukocytes has been put forward as a therapeutic response marker, but it is unclear which leukocyte subsets express TRAIL.
We investigated the basis of TRAIL expression in response to IFN-β by studying activation of STATs 1, 3, and 5, p38 MAPK, and NF-κB in different leukocyte subsets of patients with RRMS.
Monocytes, B cells, and T cells showed substantial differences in the activation of p38 and the STATs in response to i.m.
injection of IFN-β1a or stimulation in vitro.
Induction of cell-surface TRAIL, analyzed in nine leukocyte subsets, was observed only on monocytes and granulocytes and correlated with the activation of p38 and/or NF-κB in these subsets only, in agreement with previous work in fibroblasts showing that the induction of TRAIL in response to IFN-β depends on the activation of p38 and NF-κB as well as STATs 1 and 2.
We propose that, in myeloid cells, the differential activation of p38 and NF-κB and induction of TRAIL, which sensitizes cells to apoptosis, can help to explain differences in responsiveness to IFN-β therapy among patients with RRMS and, furthermore, that such differential patterns of activation and expression may also be important in understanding the therapeutic responses to IFN-α/β in hepatitis and cancer.
PMID: 23733958
Peripheral elevation of TNF-α leads to early synaptic abnormalities in the mouse somatosensory cortex in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Sensory abnormalities such as numbness and paresthesias are often the earliest symptoms in neuroinflammatory diseases including multiple sclerosis.
The increased production of various cytokines occurs in the early stages of neuroinflammation and could have detrimental effects on the central nervous system, thereby contributing to sensory and cognitive deficits.
However, it remains unknown whether and when elevation of cytokines causes changes in brain structure and function under inflammatory conditions.
To address this question, we used a mouse model for experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) to examine the effect of inflammation and cytokine elevation on synaptic connections in the primary somatosensory cortex.
Using in vivo two-photon microscopy, we found that the elimination and formation rates of dendritic spines and axonal boutons increased within 7 d of EAE induction--several days before the onset of paralysis--and continued to rise during the course of the disease.
This synaptic instability occurred before T-cell infiltration and microglial activation in the central nervous system and was in conjunction with peripheral, but not central, production of TNF-α.
Peripheral administration of a soluble TNF inhibitor prevented abnormal turnover of dendritic spines and axonal boutons in presymptomatic EAE mice.
These findings indicate that peripheral production of TNF-α is a key mediator of synaptic instability in the primary somatosensory cortex and may contribute to sensory and cognitive deficits seen in autoimmune diseases.
PMID: 23624600
A combination of fluorescent NFAT and H2B sensors uncovers dynamics of T cell activation in real time during CNS autoimmunity.
Multiple sclerosis is an autoimmune disease of the central nervous system (CNS) that is initiated when self-reactive T cells enter the brain and become locally activated after encountering their specific nervous antigens.
When and where the disease-relevant antigen encounters occur is unclear.
Here we combined fluorescently labeled nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) with histone protein H2B to create a broadly applicable molecular sensor for intravital imaging of T cell activation.
In experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, an animal model for multiple sclerosis, we report that effector T cells entering the CNS become activated after short contacts with leptomeningeal phagocytes.
During established disease, the activation process is extended to the depth of the CNS parenchyma, where the cells form contacts with microglia and recruited phagocytes.
We show that it is the activation processes during the preclinical phase rather than during established disease that are essential for the intensity and duration of the disease bout.
PMID: 22581754
Subject movement during multislice interleaved MR acquisitions: prevalence and potential effect on MRI-derived brain pathology measurements and multicenter clinical trials of therapeutics for multiple sclerosis.
To show the prevalence of inter-packet motion in clinical trial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data and the effect of inter-packet motion on MRI-derived brain pathology measurements.
We present a method to detect and quantify inter-packet motion, apply it to 2384 MRIs to determine the prevalence of inter-packet motion in clinical trial data, and show the effect of inter-packet motion on measuring multiple sclerosis (MS) lesion volumes.
Experiments with simulated data showed that the detection procedure was accurate at measuring the amount of movement between packets and quantifying the amount of missing data.
Application to clinical trial data demonstrated that a large number of MRIs had missing data due to inter-packet motion; 20% of the images had greater than 10% of the data missing and 10% of the images had greater than 15% of the data missing.
These levels corresponded to thresholds where lesions were difficult to visually identify or disappeared completely.
Lesion volume measurement errors ranged from 1.3 ± 0.5% to 9.9 ± 6.3%.
Inter-packet motion can introduce substantial errors to MRI-derived brain pathology measurements.
The prevalence of inter-packet motion is substantial in MS clinical trial data.
Automated detection procedures should be implemented to increase the fidelity of MRI-derived measurements.
Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22486999
Effects of non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs on D-serine-induced oxidative stress in vitro.
Inflammation is deleterious for organs with reduced capacity of regeneration, such as the brain.
Recently, studies have focused on investigating the therapeutic effects of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, and multiple sclerosis.
Excitotoxicity is the pathological process when receptors for the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate, such as the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA), receptors are overactivated.
This process may be involved in neurodegenerative diseases.
D-serine is one of the coagonist of NMDA receptors, and increased levels of D-serine are associated with excitotoxicity.
In our study, the potential neuroprotective effects of mefenamic acid, acetaminophen, and naproxen sodium were investigated against D-serine-induced oxidative stress in the rat brain in vitro.
To show their potential neuroprotective properties, NSAIDs were incubated with D-serine and reactive oxygen species (ROS), malondialdehyde, and protein carbonyl content of the brain after different treatments were measured.
Our results demostrate that NSAIDs used in the present study significantly reduced ROS production, lipid peroxidation, and protein oxidation against D-serine treatment.
PMID: 22421587
Rituximab and multiple sclerosis.
B lymphocytes seem to have a fundamental role in multiple sclerosis, acting as sensors, coordinators, and regulators of the immune response.
Furthermore, they are important in activating T cells and they can mediate tissue injury through diverse mechanisms.
Such findings have important therapeutic implications in autoimmune central nervous system diseases in a fashion similar to other autoimmune processes.
The best known monoclonal antibody targeting B cells that has been used as a novel therapy for various autoimmune conditions, as well as multiple sclerosis, is rituximab.
This review summarizes the available data on the role of B cell in multiple sclerosis and further reports on current knowledge on the B-cell-depleting monoclonal antibody rituximab, its mechanism of action, and its efficacy on multiple sclerosis.
Data presented were categorized in 3 groups based on the nature of data presented (radiological, clinical, and immunological data).
Both case-control studies and case reports were included, while table classification was in chronological order.
PMID: 23431447
Ultrahigh-Field MR (7 T) Imaging of Brain Lesions in Neuromyelitis Optica.
Background.
Brain lesions are common in neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOsd) and may resemble lesions of multiple sclerosis (MS).
Objectives.
To describe the imaging characteristics of supratentorial lesions in NMOsd on ultrahigh-field (7 T) MRI with special attention to vessel-lesion relationship.
Methods.
Ten NMOsd patients, all women and all seropositive for NMO IgG, with mean age of 51.3 ± 15.4 years and disease duration of 9.2 ± 6.4 years, were scanned at a 7 T whole-body human MR system with high-resolution 2D gradient echo sequence optimized to best visualize lesions and venous structures, T2- and T1-weighted imaging.
Results.
In 10 patients with NMOsd, a total of 92 lesions were observed (mean: 9.2 ± 8.8; range: 2-30), but only 8 lesions (9%) were traversed by a central venule.
All lesions were &lt;5 mm in diameter, and 83% were located in subcortical white matter.
There were no lesions in the cortex or basal ganglia.
Two patients exhibited diffuse periependymal abnormalities on FLAIR.
Conclusions.
Small, subcortical lesions without a central venule are the most consistent finding of NMOsd on 7 T MRI of the brain.
Ultrahigh-field imaging may be useful for differentiating between NMOsd and MS.
PMID: 22816507
Testing for urinary tract colonization before high-dose corticosteroid treatment in acute multiple sclerosis relapses: prospective algorithm validation.
To evaluate a dipstick algorithm for urinary tract colonization, prior to high-dose corticosteroid treatment in acute relapses of multiple sclerosis (MS).
Prospective cohort study of 267 consecutive patients with MS relapses requiring corticosteroid treatment in a hospital-based, ambulatory, acute MS relapse clinic.
A total of 18 participants met the exclusion criteria, leaving 249 for analysis.
Main outcome measures were urinary dipstick sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value and safety of antibiotic co-treatment with high-dose corticosteroids.
Significant bacteriuria (≥10(5)  colonies ml) rate in this population was 11% (95% CI, 7.1-14.9).
Specificity and sensitivity of positive leucocyte esterase or nitrite were 78% and 65%.
Negative predictive value of urine dipstick was 96%.
No clinical adverse events occurred in the 3% (95% CI, 0.9-5.1) of patients with a false-negative dipstick.
Eighteen per cent of patients were unnecessarily treated with antibiotics for 48 h.
Urinary dipstick testing allows for rapid and safe management of patients suffering from an acute MS relapse.
The algorithm is conservative, and future work is needed to reduce the false-positive rate.
© 2012 The Author(s) European Journal of Neurology © 2012 EFNS.
PMID: 22271152
Matrix metalloproteinase-12 deficiency ameliorates the clinical course and demyelination in Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis.
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of extracellular proteases involved in the pathogenesis of demyelinating diseases like multiple sclerosis (MS).
The aim of the present study was to investigate whether MMPs induce direct myelin degradation, leukocyte infiltration, disruption of the blood-brain barrier (BBB), and/or extracellular matrix remodeling in the pathogenesis of Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis (TME), a virus-induced model of MS.
During the demyelinating phase of TME, the highest transcriptional upregulation was detected for Mmp12, followed by Mmp3.
Mmp12                         (-/-) mice showed reduced demyelination, macrophage infiltration, and motor deficits compared with wild-type- and Mmp3 knock-out mice.
However, BBB remained unaltered, and the amount of extracellular matrix deposition was similar in knock-out mice and wild-type mice.
Furthermore, stereotaxic injection of activated MMP-3, -9, and -12 into the caudal cerebellar peduncle of adult mice induced a focally extensive primary demyelination prior to infiltration of inflammatory cells, as well as a reduction in the number of oligodendrocytes and a leakage of BBB.
All these results demonstrate that MMP-12 plays an essential role in the pathogenesis of TME, most likely due to its primary myelin- or oligodendrocyte-toxic potential and its role in macrophage extravasation, whereas there was no sign of BBB damage or alterations to extracellular matrix remodeling/deposition.
Thus, interrupting the MMP-12 cascade may be a relevant therapeutic approach for preventing chronic progressive demyelination.
PMID: 22289117
Sunlight is associated with decreased multiple sclerosis risk: no interaction with human leukocyte antigen-DRB1*15.
  Both insufficient exposure to sunlight and vitamin D deficiency have been associated with an increased risk for multiple sclerosis (MS).
An interaction between human leukocyte antigen HLA-DRB1*15 and vitamin D in MS was recently proposed.
We investigated the association between previous exposure to ultraviolet radiation (UVR), vitamin D status at inclusion in the study, and MS risk including the interaction of these factors with HLA-DRB1*15.
  A population-based case-control study involving 1013 incident cases of MS and 1194 controls was performed in Sweden during 2005-2010.
Subjects were classified according to their UVR exposure habits, vitamin D status, and HLA genotypes.
The associations between different sun exposure habits/vitamin D levels and MS were calculated as odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI) using logistic regression.
Potential interaction was evaluated by calculating the attributable proportion due to interaction.
  Subjects with low UVR exposure had a significantly increased risk of MS compared with those who reported the highest exposure (OR 2.2, 95% CI 1.5-3.3).
Similarly, subjects who had 25-hydroxy-vitamin D levels less than 50 nM/l had an increased risk for MS (OR 1.4, 95% CI 1.2-1.7).
The association between UVR exposure and MS risk persisted after adjustment for vitamin D status.
There was no interaction with HLA-DRB1*15 carriage.
  UVR and vitamin D seem to affect MS risk in adults independently of HLA-DRB1*15 status.
UVR exposure may also exert a protective effect against developing MS via other pathways than those involving vitamin D.
© 2012 The Author(s) European Journal of Neurology © 2012 EFNS.
PMID: 22486199
The impact of interferon beta and natalizumab on comorbid migraine in multiple sclerosis.
Some multiple sclerosis (MS)-specific therapies may exacerbate a comorbid migraine.
Whereas data regarding the impact of interferon beta (IFNB) on this comorbidity have been reported, studies on the role of natalizumab (NTZ) are still lacking.
Our aim was to compare the impact of IFNB and NTZ on the frequency and disability of comorbid migraine in MS patients.
performed a longitudinal evaluation on MS patients with comorbid migraine previously assessed at our center and retested for the present study, by comparing data from 33 patients originally treated with IFNB and thereafter switched to NTZ vs 30 patients continued currently to receive IFNB.
Longitudinal analysis showed a significant reduction of migraine frequency (from a mean value of 8.4 to 5.1 days per month; P = .034) and Migraine Disability Assessment Scale (MIDAS) score (from a mean value of 14.2 to 10.5; P = .045) in the subgroup patients switched from IFNB to NTZ but not in those remaining in the IFNB recipient, irrespective of level of fatigue, trait anxiety, depression, alexithymia, or other clinical variables.
Our findings suggest that NTZ did not exacerbate comorbid migraine in MS patients and support the hypothesis that IFNB might represent an important trigger for migraine worsening.
© 2012 American Headache Society.
PMID: 22615252
The sphingosine-1-phosphate analogue FTY720 impairs mucosal immunity and clearance of the enteric pathogen Citrobacter rodentium.
The sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) analogue FTY720 is therapeutically efficacious in multiple sclerosis and in the prevention of transplant rejection.
It prevents the migration of lymphocytes to sites of pathology by trapping them within the peripheral lymph nodes, mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs), and Peyer's patches.
However, evidence suggests that its clinical use may increase the risk of mucosal infections.
We investigated the impact of FTY720 treatment on susceptibility to gastrointestinal infection with the mouse enteric pathogen Citrobacter rodentium.
This attaching and effacing bacterium induces a transient bacterial colitis in immunocompetent mice that resembles human infection with pathogenic Escherichia coli.
FTY720 treatment induced peripheral blood lymphopenia, trapped lymphocytes in the MLNs, and prevented the clearance of bacteria when mice were infected with luciferase-tagged C. rodentium.
FTY720-treated C. rodentium-infected mice had enhanced colonic inflammation, with significantly higher colon mass, colon histopathology, and neutrophil infiltration than vehicle-infected animals.
In addition, FTY720-treated infected mice had significantly lower numbers of colonic dendritic cells, macrophages, and T cells.
Gene expression analysis demonstrated that FTY720-treated infected mice had an impaired innate immune response and a blunted mucosal adaptive immune response, including Th1 cytokines.
The data demonstrate that the S1P analogue FTY720 adversely affects the immune response to and clearance of C. rodentium.
PMID: 22426759
Evaluation of the relationship between leptin, resistin, adiponectin and natural regulatory T cells in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
Data suggest that adipocytokines and natural regulatory T (nTreg) cells play a pivotal role in the immunopathogenesis of multiple sclerosis and the associated inflammation.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate selected adipocytokines and nTreg cells and to assess their relationship with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS).
The study was conducted among 25 patients with RRMS and 25 healthy individuals.
Blood samples were collected within two weeks after the beginning of acute relapse of RRMS.
The body mass index (BMI) of each patient was calculated.
Serum adipocytokine concentrations were determined by ELISA and nTreg cells were evaluated using multicolour flow cytometry.
Patients and controls had similar BMI, regardless of gender.
Significantly higher leptin and resistin levels and significantly lower adiponectin levels were found in patients with RRMS in comparison to the control group (p &lt; 0.0001).
The percentage of nTreg cells (p &lt; 0.01) and the mean fluorescence channel (MFC) of FoxP3 were significantly reduced in patients with RRMS (p &lt; 0.001).
There was an inverse correlation be-tween leptin concentration and MFC of the transcription factor Foxp3 nTreg in patients with RRMS (r = -0.7, p &lt; 0.05).
Conclusions: Proinflammatory adipocytokine profile and decreased percentage of nTreg cells suggest their implication in the inflammatory response in RRMS regardless of corticosteroid therapy.
The correlation between leptin and the MFC of the transcription factor Foxp3 in nTreg cells in patients with RRMS suggests its inhibitory effect on FoxP3 expression.
PMID: 22290118
Absence of evidence for bornavirus infection in schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and major depressive disorder.
In 1983, reports of antibodies in subjects with major depressive disorder (MDD) to an as-yet uncharacterized infectious agent associated with meningoencephalitis in horses and sheep led to molecular cloning of the genome of a novel, negative-stranded neurotropic virus, Borna disease virus (BDV).
This advance has enabled the development of new diagnostic assays, including in situ hybridization, PCR and serology based on recombinant proteins.
Since these assays were first implemented in 1990, more than 80 studies have reported an association between BDV and a wide range of human illnesses that include MDD, bipolar disorder (BD), schizophrenia (SZ), anxiety disorder, chronic fatigue syndrome, multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, dementia and glioblastoma multiforme.
However, to date there has been no blinded case-control study of the epidemiology of BDV infection.
Here, in a United States-based, multi-center, yoked case-control study with standardized methods for clinical assessment and blinded serological and molecular analysis, we report the absence of association of psychiatric illness with antibodies to BDV or with BDV nucleic acids in serially collected serum and white blood cell samples from 396 subjects, a study population comprised of 198 matched pairs of patients and healthy controls (52 SZ/control pairs, 66 BD/control pairs and 80 MDD/control pairs).
Our results argue strongly against a role for BDV in the pathogenesis of these psychiatric disorders.
PMID: 21723939
The MAO inhibitor phenelzine improves functional outcomes in mice with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE).
Multiple sclerosis (MS) and the animal model, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), are both accompanied by motor and non-motor symptoms.
Pathological changes in the activities of key neurotransmitters likely underlie many of these symptoms.
We have previously described disturbances in the levels of 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT/serotonin), noradrenaline (NE) and γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) in a mouse model of EAE.
The potential therapeutic effect of a drug that targets these three neurotransmitters, the antidepressant and anti-panic drug phenelzine (PLZ), was assessed in mice with MOG(35-55) induced EAE.
The neurotransmitter content of EAE and control tissue after PLZ administration was first evaluated by HPLC.
The ability of PLZ treatment to modulate EAE disease course and clinical signs was then assessed.
Daily PLZ treatment, starting seven days after disease induction, delayed EAE onset, reduced disease severity in the chronic phase and was associated with substantial improvements in exploratory behavior and a novel measure of sickness and/or depression.
Upon completion of the experiment, PLZ's effects on histopathological markers of the disease were examined.
No differences were observed in T cell infiltration, microglia/macrophage reactivity, demyelination or axonal injury in PLZ-treated spinal cords.
However, EAE mice treated with PLZ showed a normalization of 5-HT levels in the ventral horn of the spinal cord that might account for the improvements in behavioral outcomes.
These results demonstrate the therapeutic potential of MAO inhibitors such as PLZ in MS.
Additionally, the behavioral changes observed in EAE mice indicate that alterations in non-motor or 'affective' measures may be valuable to consider in addition to traditional measures of gross locomotor function.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23766909
Assessing relapse in multiple sclerosis questionnaire: results of a pilot study.
There is need for a brief but comprehensive objective assessment tool to help clinicians evaluate relapse symptoms in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) and their impact on daily functioning, as well as response to treatment.
The 2-part Assessing Relapse in Multiple Sclerosis (ARMS) questionnaire was developed to achieve these aims.
Part 1 consists of 7 questions that evaluate relapse symptoms, impact on activities of daily living (ADL), overall functioning, and response to treatment for previous relapses.
Part 2 consists of 7 questions that evaluate treatment response in terms of symptom relief, functioning, and tolerability.
The ARMS questionnaire has been evaluated in 103 patients with MS.
The most commonly reported relapse symptoms were numbness/tingling (67%), fatigue (58%), and leg/foot weakness (55%).
Over half of patients reported that ADL or overall functioning were affected very much (47%) or severely (11%) by relapses.
Prescribed treatments for relapses included intravenous and/or oral corticosteroids (87%) and adrenocorticotropic hormone (13%).
Nearly half of patients reported that their symptoms were very much (33%) or completely resolved (16%) following treatment.
The most commonly reported adverse events were sleep disturbance (45%), mood changes (33%), weight gain (29%), and increased appetite (26%).
Systematic assessment of relapses and response to relapse treatment may help clinicians to optimize outcomes for MS patients.
PMID: 23766908
Hospitalization rates and discharge status in multiple sclerosis.
Management of multiple sclerosis (MS) has shifted from supportive to disease modifying therapy.
Considering the increasingly widespread adoption of this approach in managing MS patients, we hypothesized that hospitalizations and surrogates of disease-related complications should have declined during the last decade.
Methods.
Using the Nationwide Inpatient Sample, hospitalizations for MS and associated secondary diagnoses and procedures as well as discharge status were examined.
Time trends were examined for different age cohorts focusing on the period from 2001 to 2010.
Results.
During the preceding decade, annual hospitalizations for MS increased by 40%, with stable rates in all age groups except geriatric patients, who accounted for a significantly higher fraction of admissions.
Nursing home transfers as a surrogate marker of disability remained unchanged for all age groups.
Similarly, urinary tract infections, the need for skin debridement, or gastrostomy tube placement did not vary during the decade.
Conclusion.
During a time of increased adoption of disease modifying therapy, MS-related hospitalizations continued to increase and surrogate measures of disability in admitted patients remained stable, demonstrating the still significant impact of the disease on affected individuals.
PMID: 23766907
The role of clinical and instrumented outcome measures in balance control of individuals with multiple sclerosis.
Purpose.
The aim of the study was to investigate differences in balance control between individuals with multiple sclerosis (MS) and healthy control subjects using clinical scales and instrumented measures of balance and determine relationships between balance measures, fatigue, and disability levels in individuals with MS with and without a history of falls.
Method.
Twelve individuals with MS and twelve healthy controls were evaluated using the Berg Balance and Activities-specific Balance Confidence Scales, Modified Clinical Test of Sensory Interaction on Balance, and Limits of Stability Tests as well as Fatigue Severity Scale and Barthel Index.
Results.
Mildly affected individuals with MS had significant balance performance deficits and poor balance confidence levels (P &lt; 0.05).
MS group had higher sway velocities and diminished stability limits (P &lt; 0.05), significant sensory impairments, high fatigue and disability levels (P &lt; 0.05).
Sway velocity was a significant predictor of balance performance and the ability to move towards stability limits for the MS group.
For the MS-fallers group, those with lower disability levels had faster movement velocities and better balance performance.
Conclusion.
Implementation of both clinical and instrumented tests of balance is important for the planning and evaluation of treatment outcomes in balance rehabilitation of people with MS.
PMID: 22022398
Neuroprotective effect of combination therapy of glatiramer acetate and epigallocatechin-3-gallate in neuroinflammation.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory autoimmune disease of the central nervous system.
However, studies of MS and the animal model, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), indicate that neuronal pathology is the principle cause of clinical disability.
Thus, there is need to develop new therapeutic strategies that not only address immunomodulation but also neuroprotection.
Here we show that the combination therapy of Glatiramer acetate (GA), an immunomodulatory MS therapeutic, and the neuroprotectant epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), the main phenol in green tea, have synergistic protective effects in vitro and in the EAE model.
EGCG and GA together led to increased protection from glutamate- and TRAIL-induced neuronal cell death in vitro.
EGCG combined with GA induced regeneration of hippocampal axons in an outgrowth assay.
The combined application of EGCG and GA did not result in unexpected adverse events in vivo.
Neuroprotective and neuroregenerative effects could be translated in the in vivo model, where combination treatment with EGCG and GA significantly delayed disease onset, strongly reduced clinical severity, even after onset of symptoms and reduced inflammatory infiltrates.
These results illustrate the promise of combining neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory treatments and strengthen the prospects of EGCG as an adjunct therapy for neuroinflammatory and neurodegenerative diseases.
PMID: 22209319
[Vitamin D and autoimmunity. Second part: Clinical aspects].
Vitamin D is often confined to its role in calcium homeostasis and bone metabolism.
An exponential literature discusses its non-skeletal effects, especially its central role in the physiology of the immune system, where it acts at several levels to maintain self-tolerance.
Here, the authors review the experimental, epidemiological and clinical studies, illustrating the potential role of vitamin D in the development and perpetuation of autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus, type 1 diabetes mellitus, multiple sclerosis, inflammatory bowel diseases or rheumatoid arthritis.
Copyright © 2011 Société nationale française de médecine interne (SNFMI).
Published by Elsevier SAS.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23062430
NMR and pattern recognition methods in metabolomics: from data acquisition to biomarker discovery: a review.
Metabolomics is the discipline where endogenous and exogenous metabolites are assessed, identified and quantified in different biological samples.
Metabolites are crucial components of biological system and highly informative about its functional state, due to their closeness to functional endpoints and to the organism's phenotypes.
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, next to Mass Spectrometry (MS), is one of the main metabolomics analytical platforms.
The technological developments in the field of NMR spectroscopy have enabled the identification and quantitative measurement of the many metabolites in a single sample of biofluids in a non-targeted and non-destructive manner.
Combination of NMR spectra of biofluids and pattern recognition methods has driven forward the application of metabolomics in the field of biomarker discovery.
The importance of metabolomics in diagnostics, e.g.
in identifying biomarkers or defining pathological status, has been growing exponentially as evidenced by the number of published papers.
In this review, we describe the developments in data acquisition and multivariate analysis of NMR-based metabolomics data, with particular emphasis on the metabolomics of Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) and biomarker discovery in Multiple Sclerosis (MScl).
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 24032283
A novel mutation of laminin β-2 gene in Pierson syndrome manifested with nephrotic syndrome in the early neonatal period.
Pierson syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder which is mainly characterized by congenital nephrotic syndrome (CNS), diffuse mesangial sclerosis (DMS) and distinct ocular abnormalities, including microcoria.
Most affected children exhibit early onset of chronic renal failure, neurodevelopmental deficits, and blindness.
It is caused by a homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding laminin beta2 (LAMB2) on chromosome 3p21.
In this article, we report on a patient with CNS, bilateral megalocornea and microcoria.
The patient had developed renal failure at very early postnatal period and died of septic shock.
A novel homozygous donor splice mutation (IVS4 + 2T &gt; C) in LAMB2 gene was identified in the patient.
PMID: 22615327
Gait variability measures reveal differences between multiple sclerosis patients and healthy controls.
The purpose of this study was to determine the differences in gait variability between patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) and healthy controls during walking at a self-selected pace.
Kinematics were collected during three minutes of treadmill walking for 10 patients with MS and 10 healthy controls.
The Coefficient of Variation (CoV), the Approximate Entropy (ApEn) and the Detrended Fluctuation Analysis (DFA) were used to investigate the fluctuations present in stride length and step width from continuous strides.
ApEn revealed that patients with MS had significantly lower values than healthy controls for stride length (p &lt; .001) and step width (p &lt; .001).
ApEn results revealed that the natural fluctuations present during gait in the stride length and step width time series are more regular and repeatable in patients with MS.
These changes implied that patients with MS may exhibit reduced capacity to adapt and respond to perturbations during gait.
PMID: 22834825
Molecular targets of FTY720 (fingolimod).
FTY720 is a recently approved first line therapy for relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis.
In this context, FTY720 is a pro-drug, with its anti-multiple sclerosis, immunosuppressive effects largely elicited following its phosphorylation by sphingosine kinase 2 and subsequent modulation of G protein-coupled sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) receptor 1 that induces lymphopenia by altering lymphocyte trafficking.
A number of other biological effects of FTY720 have, however, been described, including considerable evidence that this drug also has anti-cancer properties.
These other effects of FTY720 are independent of S1P receptors, and appear facilitated by modulation of a range of other recently described protein targets by nonphosphorylated FTY720.
Here, we review the direct targets of FTY720 that contribute to its anti-cancer properties.
We also discuss other recently described protein effectors that, in combination with S1P receptors, appear to contribute to its immunosuppressive effects.
PMID: 24179780
DTI detects water diffusion abnormalities in the thalamus that correlate with an extremity pain episode in a patient with multiple sclerosis.
Various types of multiple sclerosis (MS) related pain have been discussed.
One concept is that deafferentation secondary to lesions in the spino-thalamo-cortical network can cause central pain.
However, this hypothesis is somehow limited by a lack of a robust association between pain episodes and sites of lesion location.
We tested the hypothesis that temporary tissue alterations in the thalamus that are not detectable by conventional magnetic resonance imaging (T1w, FLAIR) can potentially explain a focal, paroxysmal central pain episode of a patient with MS.
For microstructural tissue assessment we employed ten longitudinal diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) examinations.
We could demonstrate an abnormal, unilateral temporary increase of the fractional anisotropy (FA) in the thalamus contralateral to the affected body side.
Before the pain episode and after pain relief the FA reached completely normal values as seen in identically investigated age and gender matched 100 healthy control subjects.
THESE FINDINGS SUGGEST THAT: i.) frequently applied and quantitatively evaluated DTI could be used as a sensitive imaging technique for detection of pathological processes associated with MS not detectable with conventional imaging strategies, ii.) temporary pathological processes in the normal-appearing thalamus may explain waxing and waning symptoms like episodes of central pain, and iii.) cross-sectional case examinations on (MS) patients with central pain should be performed to investigate how often thalamic alterations occur together with central pain.
PMID: 23277008
Gray matter SWI-filtered phase and atrophy are linked to disability in MS.
The association between clinical outcomes and abnormal susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI)-filtered phase, indicative of increased iron content, as well as atrophy, was investigated in the subcortical deep-gray matter (SDGM) of multiple sclerosis (MS) patients.
149 relapsing-remitting (RR) and 61 secondary-progressive (SP) MS patients underwent SWI on a 3T scanner.
Mean phase of the abnormal phase tissue (MP-APT) and normalized volumes were determined for the total and region-specific SDGM structures.
In an age- and gender-adjusted regression model, total SDGM volume was the strongest predictor of Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) (beta = -.224, p&lt;.001), followed by total SDGM MP-APT (beta = -.168, p &lt;.019).
This model accounted for 30.4% of the variance in EDSS.
Only SDGM MP-APT added additional variance in predicting EDSS, compared to conventional MRI metrics.
Caudate and red nucleus MP-APT and amygdala volume were associated with EDSS.
Our findings suggest that disability in MS patients is associated better with SDGM pathology, as indicated by increased iron content and atrophy, than with lesion burden or white matter and cortical volumes.
PMID: 21163551
Gray matter atrophy rate as a marker of disease progression in AD.
Global gray matter (GM) atrophy rates were quantified from magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) over 6- and 12-month intervals in 37 patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 19 controls using: (1) nonlinear registration and integration of Jacobian values, and (2) segmentation and subtraction of serial GM volumes.
Sample sizes required to power treatment trials using global GM atrophy rate as an outcome measure were estimated and compared between the 2 techniques, and to global brain atrophy measures quantified using the boundary shift integral (brain boundary shift integral; BBSI) and structural image evaluation, using normalization, of atrophy (SIENA).
Increased GM atrophy rates (approximately 2% per year) were observed in patients compared with controls.
Although mean atrophy rates provided by Jacobian integration were smaller than those from segmentation and subtraction of GM volumes, measurement variance was reduced.
The number of patients required per treatment arm to detect a 20% reduction in GM atrophy rate over a 12-month follow-up (90% power) was 202 (95% confidence interval [CI], 118-423) using Jacobian integration and 2047 (95% CI 271 to &gt; 10,000) using segmentation and subtraction.
Comparable sample sizes for whole brain atrophy were 240 (95% CI, 142-469) using the BBSI and 196 (95% CI, 110-425) using SIENA.
Jacobian integration could be useful for measuring GM atrophy rate in Alzheimer's disease as a marker of disease progression and treatment efficacy.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22456565
Hard lessons from a long hospital stay.
This narrative is related in the alternating voices of the two authors.
One author, a 55-year-old man, quadriplegic from primary progressive multiple sclerosis, describes the 10 weeks he spent in four facilities for treatment of a stage IV ischial pressure ulcer.
The other author, his friend and health care proxy, describes the advocacy and personal assistance she gave him in the face of often inadequate care that at times threatened his safety, comfort, and emotional well-being.
The authors describe their differing perspectives on this care, which involved a transfer onto his open wound, frequently missed meals, and poor bowel management and personal hygiene.
They believe that inadequate staffing and insufficient training and supervision of nursing assistants, among other factors, underlay these problems.
PMID: 22677679
[Damage of macular ganglion cell complex and peripapillary retinal nerve fiber layer in multiple sclerosis].
The aim of this study was to evaluate macular ganglion cell complex (GCC) characteristics and peripapillary retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) thickness in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) and to investigate the associations between these parameters and clinical characteristics of patients for evaluation perspectives of using this method for monitoring of disability and neurodegenerative processes.
We examined a total of 113 participants (analysis of 211 eyes), divided into three groups: 1.
48 MS patients (66 eyes) with a history of optic neuritis (ON); 2.
35 MS patients (70 eyes) without a history of ON; 3.
30 disease-free control subjects (45 eyes).
The estudy included anamnesis collection, neurological examination with assessment of EDSS scores.
Refracted visual acuity prior to optical coherence tomography (OCT) was tested.
RTVue-100 ОСТ system was used to assess peripapillary RNFL thickness and macular inner parameter (protocol GCC).
The strongly correlated decline of the most RNFL and GCC indices was characteristic of all groups of MS patients with and without ON compared to controls.
The damage of GCC was greater in patients with ON.
The inverse correlation was found between the indices studied and the level of patient's disability.
The study of GCC and RNFL thickness can be used to describe and characterize the level of axonal damage in MS and for objectification of neurodegenerative process in studies on neuroprotection and neuroreparation.
PMID: 22677678
[The role of brain glucose metabolism in the development of cognitive dysfunctions in patients with remitting and secondary-progressive multiple sclerosis].
To study mechanisms of development of cognitive dysfunctions in multiple sclerosis (MS), brain glucose metabolism has been investigated using PET method.
We have studied 61 patients with different types of MS course.
Correlations between cognitive dysfunctions and regional glucose metabolic rate were revealed.
The authors suggest that metabolic dysfunctions of the grey matter play the important role in the pathogenesis of cognitive disturbances in MS.
PMID: 22677673
[Association between polymorphisms of cytokine genes and the rate of multiple sclerosis progression].
A genetic predisposition due to the polygenic system responsible for the formation of immune response plays a key role in the development of multiple sclerosis.
We genotyped the following polymorphisms: TNFα (rs1800629), TNFRSF1A (rs4149584), CD40 (rs6074022 and rs11086998) using TaqMan technology.
The significant genotype effect on the disability index on EDSS and rate of MS progression was found.
The association between GA and AA TNFα genotypes and higher average annual frequency of exacerbations was revealed.
Genotypes CC (rs6074022) and GG (rs11086998) were associated with the higher disability level.
Genotype CC (rs11086998) was associated with the higher rate of MS progression.
The results may be used as potential predictors of high rate of MS progression and allow to tailor treatment on early stages of the disease.
PMID: 22677672
[Epidemiology of multiple sclerosis in the Primosky Krai and Far East regions].
The first results of a clinical and epidemiological survey on prevalence, incidence, clinical characteristics, diagnosis of multiple sclerosis (MS) and medical assistance to patients in Primosky Krai, Vladivostok and the Far East regions (Sakhalin, Magadan oblasts and Kamchatka Krai) during 2005-2010 are presented.
The prevalence of MS was 1.12 cases per 100000 population in the Primosky Krai in whole and from 1.61 cases in 2005 in Vladivostok to 11.45 and 16.2 cases in Primosky Krai and Vladivostok in 2010, respectively.
The incidence of MS was maximal in the Primosky Krai (2.61 cases per 100 000 population in 2007 and 3.95 cases in 2008).
The increase in the prevalence may be explained by the improvement of MS diagnosis, introduction of neuroimaging methods for brain structure visualization (MRI etc) and the organization of a regional MS center.
The relative decrease in the MS incidence to 2.49 cases per 100 000 in 2010 was noted.
Epidemiological characteristics of MS in separate oblasts of the Far East are presented.
In whole, all indices indicate the moderate risk for MS in the region studied.
PMID: 22276094
Measles IgG antibody index correlates with T2 lesion load on MRI in patients with early multiple sclerosis.
B cells and humoral immune responses play an important role in the pathogenesis and diagnosis of multiple sclerosis (MS).
A characteristic finding in patients with MS is a polyspecific intrathecal B cell response against neurotropic viruses, specifically against measles virus, rubella virus, and varicella zoster virus, also known as an MRZ reaction (MRZR).
Here, we correlated from the routine clinical diagnostics individual IgG antibody indices (AIs) of MRZR with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings in patients with first MS diagnosis.
MRZR was determined in 68 patients with a clinically isolated syndrome (CIS) or early relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS).
Absolute AI values for measles virus, rubella virus, and varicella zoster virus were correlated with T2 lesion load and gadolinium enhancing lesions on cerebral MRI (cMRI) and cMRI combined with spinal MRI (sMRI).
Measles virus AI correlated significantly with T2 lesion load on cMRI (p = 0.0312, Mann-Whitney U test) and the sum of lesions on cMRI and sMRI (p = 0.0413).
Varicella zoster virus AI also showed a correlation with T2 lesion load on cMRI but did not reach statistical significance (p = 0.2893).
The results confirm MRZR as part of the polyspecific immune reaction in MS with possible prognostic impact on MRI and clinical parameters.
Furthermore, the data indicate that intrathecal measles virus IgG production correlates with disease activity on cMRI and sMRI in patients with early MS.
PMID: 22677676
[Clinical significance of T-regulatory cells in multiple sclerosis].
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory demyelinating disease of the central nervous system that develops due to the activation of selfreactive T-cells specific for myelin components.
Regulatory T-cells CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ (T-reg) play an important role in the autoimmunity control and inhibition of T-cells-mediated myelin destruction.
The aim of the study was to determine a number of T-reg in the blood of patients in different stages of disease, to evaluate their functional activity and to obtain T-reg induced ex vivo.
The phenotypic analysis revealed the 2-3 fold reduction of T-reg in the exacerbation phase of MS and the increase of their content in the remission while the level of T-reg in the donor's blood remained significantly higher.
The inverse correlation between the degree of severity and duration of MS and the number of T-reg was found.
The suppression function of T-reg of MS patients was substantially decreased in the exacerbation and remission stages.
The induction of ex vivo T-reg allows to increase the number of these cells by 30-90 times during 6-8 days.
The induced T-reg have phenotypic and functional characteristics of native T-reg.
The adaptive cell treatment using induced T-reg may become an instrument for correction of immune dysfunction in MS.
PMID: 22677674
[A retrospective study of patients with early onset of multiple sclerosis in Omskaya Oblast].
To study the features of multiple sclerosis (MS) with child age-at-onset, we examined 254 patients with confirmed diagnosis of MS.
The disease developed at the age younger than 16 years in 27 patients.
A control group included 303 healthy volunteers.
Correlations between the rate of disease progression and the age-at-onset were found.
The more benign course of MS was noted in patients with earlier disease onset.
There were more women and the disease frequently manifested with retrobulbar nephritis in the group with early onset.
The results indicated that a G allele of -308G/A polymorphism of the TNF-α gene might be a risk factor for MS.
The A allele may play a protective function.
No association between -137G/C IL-18 polymorphism and MS was found.
These polymorphisms did not contribute to the predisposition to early onset of MS.
PMID: 22538555
Significance of Virchow-Robin spaces in patients newly diagnosed with multiple sclerosis: a case-control study in an Arab population.
To assess the frequency and extent of dilatation of Virchow-Robin (VR) spaces at three levels of the brain in patients of Arab ethnicity in Kuwait recently diagnosed with multiple sclerosis (MS) and compare the results with age- and gender-matched controls.
The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans performed within 3 months of the clinical diagnosis of 80 patients recently diagnosed with active MS were compared to those of 80 age- and gender-matched controls with headache but without any neurological deficits for the frequency and size of VR spaces.
MRI was done with noncontrast axial and coronal T(1)W FSE, axial T(2)W FSE, axial T(2)W FLAIR and sagittal FLAIR sequences followed by postcontrast axial and coronal T(1)W sequences.
The frequency of VR spaces in MS patients and controls at midbrain, lenticulostriate vessels and supraventricular levels was analyzed using a two-tailed McNemar test.
There was no difference in the frequency of VR spaces at the levels of the midbrain, lenticulostriate vessels and supraventricular white matter between MS patients and controls.
In the supraventricular region, however, there were 91 dilated VR spaces in 26 (32%) of the MS patients while in the control group, there were 8 dilated VR spaces in 6 (7.5%) patients and the difference was statistically significant (p &lt; 0.0001).
The data showed that dilated VR spaces in the supraventricular region could potentially be used as a marker for MS and as a prognostic tool.
However, further studies with a larger population are needed to further evaluate and confirm this observation.
Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.
PMID: 22119415
Gender-based blood transcriptomes and interactomes in multiple sclerosis: involvement of SP1 dependent gene transcription.
In this study we investigated the contribution of gender to global gene expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from multiple sclerosis (MS) patients and healthy controls.
We observed that, in contrast to the conventional approach, gender-based case-control comparisons resulted in genelists with significantly reduced heterogeneity in human populations.
In addition, MS was characterized by significant changes both in the quantity and in the quality of the sex-specific genes.
Application of stringent statistics defined gender-based signatures which classified a second independent MS population with high precision.
The global unsupervised cluster analyses for 60 subjects showed that 29/31 female and 27/29 male samples were properly identified.
Notably, MS was associated in women and in men with distinct gene signatures which however shared several molecular functions, biological processes and interactors.
Issues regarding epigenetic control of gene expression appeared as the main common theme for disease, with a central role for the functional modules related to histone deacetylase, NF-kappaB and androgen receptor signaling.
Moreover, in silico analyses predicted that the differential expression in MS women and men were depending on the transcription factor SP1.
Specific targeting of this pathway by the bis-anthracycline WP631 impaired T cell responses in vitro and in vivo, and reduced the incidence and the severity of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, indicating that SP1 dependent gene transcription sustains neuroinflammation.
Thus, the gender-based approach with its reduced heterogeneity and the systems biology tools with the identification of the molecular and functional networks successfully uncovered the differences but also the commonalities associated to multiple sclerosis in women and men.
In conclusion, we propose gender-based systems biology as a novel tool to gain fundamental information on disease-associated functional processes.
Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22831917
Regional differences in human ependymal and subventricular zone cytoarchitecture are unchanged in neuropsychiatric disease.
Much work has focused on the possible contribution of adult hippocampal neurogenesis to neuropsychiatric diseases.
The hippocampal subgranular zone and the other stem cell-containing neurogenic niche, the subventricular zone (SVZ), share several cytological features and are regulated by some of the same molecular mechanisms.
However, very little is known about the SVZ in neuropsychiatric disorders.
This is important since it surrounds the lateral ventricles and in schizophrenia ventricular enlargement frequently follows forebrain nuclei shrinkage.
Also, adult neurogenesis has been implicated in pharmacotherapy for affective disorders and many of the molecules associated with neuropsychiatric disorders affect SVZ biology.
To assess the neurogenic niche, we examined material from 60 humans (Stanley Collection) and characterized the cytoarchitecture of the SVZ and ependymal layer in age-, sex- and post mortem interval-matched controls, and patients diagnosed with schizophrenia, bipolar illness, and depression (n = 15 each).
There is a paucity of post mortem brains available for study in these diseases, so to maximize the number of possible parameters examined here, we quantified individual sections rather than a large series.
Previous work showed that multiple sclerosis is associated with increased width of the hypocellular gap, a cell-sparse region that typifies the human SVZ.
Statistically there were no differences between disease groups and controls in the width of the hypocellular gap or in the density of cells in the hypocellular gap.
Because ventricular enlargement in schizophrenia may disrupt ependymal cells, we quantified them, but observed no difference between diagnostic groups and controls.
There are significant differences in the prevalence of neuropsychiatric illness between the sexes.
Therefore, we looked for male versus female differences, but did not observe any in the parameters quantified.
We next turned to a finer spatial resolution and asked if there were differences amongst the disease groups in dorsal ventral subdivisions of the SVZ.
Similar to when we treated the SVZ as a whole, we did not find such differences.
However, compared to the dorsal SVZ, the ventral SVZ had a wider hypocellular gap and more ependymal cells in all four groups.
In contrast, cell density was similar in dorsal ventral subregions of the SVZ hypocellular gap.
These results show that though there are regional differences in the SVZ in humans, neuropsychiatric disorders do not seem to alter several fundamental histological features of this adult neurogenic zone.
Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.
PMID: 22312112
Self-reactive human CD4 T cell clones form unusual immunological synapses.
Recognition of self-peptide-MHC (pMHC) complexes by CD4 T cells plays an important role in the pathogenesis of many autoimmune diseases.
We analyzed formation of immunological synapses (IS) in self-reactive T cell clones from patients with multiple sclerosis and type 1 diabetes.
All self-reactive T cells contained a large number of phosphorylated T cell receptor (TCR) microclusters, indicative of active TCR signaling.
However, they showed little or no visible pMHC accumulation or transport of TCR-pMHC complexes into a central supramolecular activation cluster (cSMAC).
In contrast, influenza-specific T cells accumulated large quantities of pMHC complexes in microclusters and a cSMAC, even when presented with 100-fold lower pMHC densities.
The self-reactive T cells also maintained a high degree of motility, again in sharp contrast to virus-specific T cells.
2D affinity measurements of three of these self-reactive T cell clones demonstrated a normal off-rate but a slow on-rate of TCR binding to pMHC.
These unusual IS features may facilitate escape from negative selection by self-reactive T cells encountering very small amounts of self-antigen in the thymus.
However, these same features may enable acquisition of effector functions by self-reactive T cells encountering large amounts of self-antigen in the target organ of the autoimmune disease.
PMID: 23269030
[A case of neuromyelitis optica associated with anti-aquaporin 4 antibody and other autoantibodies].
We report a patient with optic neuropathy and longitudinally extensive myelitis associated with anti-aquaporin 4 (AQP4) antibody and other autoantibodies.
An 89-year-old woman presented with progressive numbness and weakness of the extremities which had acutely developed.
She also complained of neck pain and gait disturbance.
The results of a general physical examination were unremarkable.
Neurologic examination disclosed right optic atrophy, an absence of touch sensation, pain, and muscular weakness in all her extremities.
Her deep tendon reflexes were decreased, and the Babinski sign was bilaterally positive.
Immunoserologic study yielded positive titers for anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), anti-double-stranded DNA, anti-Sjögren syndrome (SS)-A, anti-SS-B, and anti-ribonucleoprotein (RNP) antibodies.
A lumbar cerebrospinal fluid examination showed a protein concentration of 54 mg/dL, a glucose concentration of 50 mg/dL (simultaneous blood concentration, 140 mg/dL), and a cell count of 2/mm(3).
Chest radiography revealed interstitial pneumonia.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical spine showed spondylotic cervical canal stenosis with cord impingement.
T2-weighted MR images demonstrated increased signal intensity extending from C2 to C6, while contrast enhancement was noted in T1-weighted MR images upon gadolinium-DTPA administration.
We suspected longitudinally extensive myelitis associated with the autoimmune disorders systemic lupus erythematosus and Sjögren syndrome.
After intravenous methylprednisolone administration, her neurologic abnormalities gradually decreased, while MRI no longer showed increased signal or contrast enhancement.
Anti-AQP4 antibody titers were positive.
We consider that this patient had a neuromyelitis optica (NMO) spectrum disorder which was associated with systemic autoimmune disease.
The possibility of NMO should be considered in similar patients with autoimmune disease, and anti-AQP4 antibody should be assessed.
PMID: 22039549
Identification of human NK17/NK1 cells.
Natural killer (NK) cells have both cytolytic and immunoregulatory functions.
We recently described that these cells release the inflammatory cytokines IL-17 and IFN-γ.
However, the precise identity of the NK cell subset(s) that secrete these cytokines is not known.
To isolate the cells secreting IL-17 and IFN-γ, we took advantage of the findings that Th17/Th1 cells express chemokine receptors.
Therefore, CD56(+)NK cells were stained with antibodies against various chemokine receptors and intracellularly with antibodies toward IL-17 and IFN-γ.
Consequently, we identified previously unrecognized subset of NK cells generated from normal human peripheral blood after activation with IL-2 but not PMA plus ionomycin.
The cells are characterized by the expression of CD56(+) and CCR4(+), produce IL-17 and IFN-γ and are consequently named NK17/NK1 cells.
They also express CD161, NKp30, NKp44, NKp46, NKG2D, CD158, CCL22, IL-2Rβ and the common γ chain but not CD127 or IL-23R.
Further, they possess T-bet and RORγt transcription factors.
Antibodies to IL-1β, IL-6, IL-21, or TGF-β1 do not inhibit IL-2-induced generation of NK17/NK1 cells, suggesting that IL-2 has the capacity to polarize these cells.
Notably, NK17/NK1 cells are abundant in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) without activation, and are generated from the peripheral blood of these patients after activation with IL-2.
NK17/NK1 cells identified here have not been previously described in healthy or MS patients.
PMID: 22875099
Circadian rhythmicity of inflammatory serum parameters: a neglected issue in the search of biomarkers in multiple sclerosis.
Inflammatory serum parameters are intensely investigated in the search of biomarkers for disease activity and treatment response in multiple sclerosis (MS).
A reason for contradictory results might be the timing of blood collection for analyzing serum concentrations of inflammatory parameters which are subject to diurnal changes.
We included 34 untreated patients with relapsing-remitting MS and 34 age- and sex-matched healthy controls.
12 MS patients showed acute disease activity in corresponding MRI scans.
Blood samples were obtained at 7.00, 11.00 am, 2.30, 6.00 and 9.30 pm within 1 day.
We determined serum levels of cortisol and inflammatory markers including soluble tumor necrosis factor-beta (sTNF-β), soluble TNF-Receptor-1 (sTNF-R1) and -2 (sTNF-2), soluble vascular adhesion molecule-1 (sVCAM-1) and soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1) by ELISA.
We observed significantly higher serum levels of sTNF-R1 (p &lt; 0.001) and sTNF-R2 (p &lt; 0.001) in the morning and a significant decline of sICAM-1 (p &lt; 0.005) and sVCAM-1 (p &lt; 0.001) in the afternoon in both, MS patients and healthy controls.
Comparison of diurnal serum levels between MS patients with active versus with non-active disease revealed significantly higher serum levels of sVCAM-1 (p &lt; 0.05) around noon and in the early afternoon in MS patients with active disease.
A significant decline of sICAM-1 (p &lt; 0.05) in the afternoon was seen in MS patients with active and non-active disease.
Our data indicate that increased awareness of potential diurnal serum concentration changes of biomarkers can eliminate one major cause of biased data as they occur in most of the investigated immunological parameters.
PMID: 22761835
Remyelination induced by a DNA aptamer in a mouse model of multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a debilitating inflammatory disease of the central nervous system (CNS) characterized by local destruction of the insulating myelin surrounding neuronal axons.
With more than 200 million MS patients worldwide, the absence of treatments that prevent progression or induce repair poses a major challenge.
Anti-inflammatory therapies have met with limited success only in preventing relapses.
Previous screening of human serum samples revealed natural IgM antibodies that bind oligodendrocytes and promote both cell signaling and remyelination of CNS lesions in an MS model involving chronic infection of susceptible mice by Theiler's encephalomyelitis virus and in the lysolecithin model of focal demyelination.
This intriguing result raises the possibility that molecules with binding specificity for oligodendrocytes or myelin components may promote therapeutic remyelination in MS.
Because of the size and complexity of IgM antibodies, it is of interest to identify smaller myelin-specific molecules with the ability to promote remyelination in vivo.
Here we show that a 40-nucleotide single-stranded DNA aptamer selected for affinity to murine myelin shows this property.
This aptamer binds multiple myelin components in vitro.
Peritoneal injection of this aptamer results in distribution to CNS tissues and promotes remyelination of CNS lesions in mice infected by Theiler's virus.
Interestingly, the selected DNA aptamer contains guanosine-rich sequences predicted to induce folding involving guanosine quartet structures.
Relative to monoclonal antibodies, DNA aptamers are small, stable, and non-immunogenic, suggesting new possibilities for MS treatment.
PMID: 23522111
Validation of the analytical procedure for the determination of the neurotoxin β-N-methylamino-L-alanine in complex environmental samples.
The neurotoxic l-2-amino-3-methylaminopropionic acid (BMAA) was hypothesized to be involved in sporadic cases of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Studies highlighting a possible implication of environmental factors in the incidence of sporadic ALS have become more numerous over recent years.
Over the past years, the most widely used method for quantifying BMAA was based on the derivatization of this polar and basic molecule with a fluorescent compound (6-aminoquinolonyl-N-hydroxysuccinimidyl, 6-AQC).
This derivatization allows the retention of the conjugate by reversed-phase liquid chromatography and its detection by fluorescence.
Nevertheless, recent findings have shown that this method applied to complex samples may cause false positive responses.
We therefore developed an analytical procedure for the determination of underivatized BMAA at trace level in complex environmental matrices (river water, cyanobacteria and biofilm) using solid-phase extraction (SPE) based on mixed mode sorbent to concentrate and clean up real samples.
Analyzes were performed by hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) coupled to electrospray ionization and tandem mass spectrometry used in multiple reaction monitoring scan mode.
Analytical procedures were validated for the different natural samples using the total error approach.
BMAA can be quantified by these reliable and highly selective analytical methods in a range of only a few ng mL(-1) in river water and a few ng mg(-1) dry weight in cyanobacteria and biofilm matrices.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23345328
Activated invariant NKT cells control central nervous system autoimmunity in a mechanism that involves myeloid-derived suppressor cells.
Invariant NKT (iNKT) cells are a subset of T lymphocytes that recognize glycolipid Ags presented by the MHC class I-related protein CD1d.
Activation of iNKT cells with glycolipid Ags, such as the marine sponge-derived reagent α-galactosylceramide (α-GalCer), results in the rapid production of a variety of cytokines and activation of many other immune cell types.
These immunomodulatory properties of iNKT cells have been exploited for the development of immunotherapies against a variety of autoimmune and inflammatory diseases, but mechanisms by which activated iNKT cells confer disease protection have remained incompletely understood.
In this study, we demonstrate that glycolipid-activated iNKT cells cooperate with myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) in protecting mice against the development of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) in mice, an animal model for multiple sclerosis.
We show that α-GalCer induced the expansion and immunosuppressive activities of MDSCs in the spleen of mice induced for development of EAE.
Disease protection in these animals also correlated with recruitment of MDSCs to the CNS.
Depletion of MDSCs abrogated the protective effects of α-GalCer against EAE and, conversely, adoptive transfer of MDSCs from α-GalCer-treated mice ameliorated passive EAE induced in recipient animals.
The cytokines GM-CSF, IL-4, and IFN-γ, produced by activated iNKT cells, and inducible NO synthase, arginase-1, and IL-10 produced by MDSCs, contributed to these effects.
Our findings have revealed cooperative immunosuppressive interactions between iNKT cells and MDSCs that might be exploited for the development of improved immunotherapies for multiple sclerosis and other autoimmune and inflammatory diseases.
PMID: 22237991
The impact of a recent relapse on patient-reported outcomes in subjects with multiple sclerosis.
In this study, we estimate the impact of a recent relapse on physical and mental health in subjects with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) using validated patient-reported outcome (PRO) measures.
Subjects enrolled in the Comprehensive Longitudinal Investigation of MS at the Brigham and Women's Hospital with RRMS were eligible for enrollment.
Subjects with a clinical visit within 45 days of a relapse were identified and divided into groups based on whether the relapse occurred before (recent relapse) (n = 59) or after the visit (pre-relapse) (n = 31).
A group of subjects with no relapses was also identified (remission) (n = 336).
PRO measures in these three groups were compared.
All outcomes were compared using a t test and linear regression controlling for age, disease duration, sex, and EDSS.
Subjects with a recent relapse had significantly worse functioning on several physical and mental health scales compared to subjects in remission even after adjusting for potential confounders.
Subjects with a recent relapse also showed significant deterioration on PRO measures over 1 year compared to subjects in remission (P &lt; 0.05 for each comparison).
Subjects in the pre-relapse group were not significantly different than subjects in remission.
Clinical relapses have a measurable effect on PRO in subjects with RRMS.
PMID: 22019868
[Rapid improvement by rituximab treatment in a case of demyelinating polyneuropathy with anti-myelin-associated glycoprotein antibody].
Polyneuropathy associated with antibodies directed against myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG) is a chronic symmetric sensorimotor demyelinating neuropathy caused by monoclonal IgM against MAG (anti-MAG neuropathy).
Intravenous immunoglobulin therapy (IVIg) has been partially successful in patients with anti-MAG neuropathy.
A placebo-controlled trial of rituximab in patients with anti-MAG neuropathy has been reported.
We report rapid improvement in a patient with anti-MAG neuropathy using rituximab.
A 58-year-old man presented with abnormal sensation, weakness of the limbs, and unsteadiness.
He was previously diagnosed with chronic inflammatory demyelinating neuropathy and was treated with steroid pulse therapy and IVIg.
However, these treatments were not effective.
On examination at our hospital, he showed areflexia in all limbs, mild weakness in distal portions of upper and lower extremities, sensory ataxia, and hypesthesia/hypalgesia except for his face.
He showed high serum IgM levels (323mg/dl).
He did not show M protein on immunoelectrophoresis; however, anti-MAG and anti-sulfoglucuronyl paragloboside (SGPG) antibodies were detected by immunoblot and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, respectively.
He was diagnosed with anti MAG neuropathy and was administered four cycles of intravenous rituximab at a dose of 375mg/m(2)/week.
After the first cycle of rituximab administration, he showed improvement in two-point discrimination of middle fingers (10/13 before therapy to 7/7mm after administration).
Two-point discrimination and vibration markedly improved after four cycles of rituximab administration.
Romberg sign became negative after 7 months.
Anti-SGPG antibody titers reduced from 0.554 before rituximab administration to 0.307 (OD) at 1,600 dilution, 4 months after administration.
We concluded that rituximab was effective for the treatment of anti-MAG neuropathy.
We suggested that rapid and long-term improvement in our patient might be caused not only by preventing the formation of new antibody-secreting cells and antibody-titer reduction but also affecting the balance of proinflammatory cytokines and regulatory cytokines production.
PMID: 23358715
Repeated treatment with high dose cyclophosphamide for severe autoimmune diseases.
High dose cyclophosphamide (HiCY) without stem cell rescue has been shown to induce remissions in patients with severe autoimmune disorders (SADS).
However, up to 80% of these patients ultimately relapse.
Here we review the outcomes of seven patients treated with two cycles and one patient treated with three cycles of HiCY.
The diseases re-treated were scleroderma, multiple sclerosis, three patients with severe aplastic anemia (SAA), and three patients with myasthenia gravis (MG).
All but two patients with SAA had received standard immunomodulatory therapy for their disease up front and had been refractory.
All patients had complete hematologic recovery.
Overall survival in this cohort was 100%.
All patients relapsed after the initial cycle but event free survival thereafter was 93.3%.
All are still in remission except two MG patients, one of whom relapsed after a severe GI infection requiring hospitalization, and the other relapsed 3 years after the second treatment and she did not respond to the third treatment.
This shows that HiCY can be safely re-administered in patients with SAA and refractory SADS.
The quality and duration of second remissions appears to be equal or superior to the first remission.
PMID: 21668415
Comparison of carbamazepine rash in multiple sclerosis and epilepsy.
Studies on the comorbidity of multiple sclerosis (MS) and allergic disorders have shown conflicting results.
Carbamazepine (CBZ) is widely used in MS to control pain.
We have compared the incidence of rash from CBZ use in MS and epilepsy.
Consecutive adult patients with MS and epilepsy were studied retrospectively.
A detailed survey of medical records concerning CBZ treatment was performed.
A total of 495 patients with epilepsy and 442 patients with MS were included.
Sixty-five per cent of patients with epilepsy and 20% of patients with MS had used CBZ.
In CBZ-exposed patients, rash occurred in 15/89 (17%) in MS and in 43/323 (13%) in epilepsy, a difference which was not significant.
Women below 50 years experienced more skin reactions than older women and men.
The unadjusted odds ratio (OR) for rash in the MS vs epilepsy group was 1.32 (CI 0.70-2.51, P = 0.40).
Adjusting groups for gender and age reduced the OR to 1.11 (CI 0.56-2.19, P = 0.76).
Compared with epilepsy, which is only rarely caused by immunological mechanisms, the autoimmune disorder MS was not associated with a different occurrence of CBZ skin reactions.
The trend towards an increased occurrence of rashes in MS can partly be explained by a higher predisposition to CBZ rash in women of fertile age.
© 2011 John Wiley &amp; Sons A/S.
PMID: 22960185
The TASK1 channel inhibitor A293 shows efficacy in a mouse model of multiple sclerosis.
The two-pore domain potassium channel TASK1 (KCNK3) has recently emerged as an important modulator in autoimmune CNS inflammation.
Previously, it was shown that T lymphocytes obtained from TASK1(-/-) mice display impaired T cell effector functions and that TASK1(-/-) mice show a significantly reduced disease severity in myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG(35-55)) peptide induced experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model of multiple sclerosis.
We here evaluate a potent and specific TASK1 channel inhibitor, A293, which caused a dose-dependent reduction of T cell effector functions (cytokine production and proliferation).
This effect was abolished in CD4(+) T cells from TASK1(-/-) mice but not in cells from TASK3(-/-) mice.
In electrophysiological measurements, A293 application induced a significant reduction of the outward current of wildtype T lymphocytes, while there was no effect in TASK1(-/-) cells.
Preventive and therapeutic application of A293 significantly ameliorated the EAE disease course in wildtype mice while it had no significant effect in TASK1(-/-) mice and was still partly effective in TASK3(-/-) mice.
In summary, our findings support the concept of TASK1 as an attractive drug target for autoimmune disorders.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21517718
Mitoxantrone exerts both cytotoxic and immunoregulatory effects on activated microglial cells.
Mitoxantrone (MX) is the most common immunosuppressive drug used in patients with rapidly worsening multiple sclerosis (MS), whose disease is not controlled by β-interferon or glatiramer acetate.
Although MX suppresses antigen-presenting cell (APC) and T-cell function in the periphery, its mechanism of action in the central nervous system (CNS) is not known.
Given that MX can cross the disrupted blood-brain barrier, such as in MS patients, we in the present study have tested our hypothesis that MX in the CNS exerts cytotoxic and immunomodulatory effects on microglia, the major CNS-resident APCs that play a crucial role in MS pathogenesis.
The cytotoxic effect of MX on microglial cells was determined by MTT and flow cytometry test, whereas the regulatory function was tested with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) method.
Indeed, we have found that MX induced microglial cell death in a dose-dependent manner, and the cell death was mainly from late apoptosis and necrosis.
Further, MX induced significantly increased levels of interleukin (IL)-10 production of microglia, whereas IL-23p19 production/expression was significantly suppressed.
Thus, our study for the first time demonstrates the immunosuppressive/regulatory effect of MX on microglia, which represents an important mechanism underlying the therapeutic effect of this drug on MS patients.
PMID: 22209286
Diurnal rhythms are altered in a mouse model of multiple sclerosis.
Our earlier studies described a disruption of heart rate and blood pressure diurnal rhythms in mice with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE).
The present study investigates whether these observations could be extended to additional clock-regulated rhythms in mice with EAE.
Analysis of clock gene expression in the liver of EAE mice demonstrated significant variability associated with Per2 rhythmic expression.
Corticosterone and leptin hormone rhythms were also altered in EAE mice.
The results presented here indicate that disturbances in clock-regulated rhythms are associated with EAE and present a suitable model for investigating the relationship between circadian disruption and autoimmune inflammatory disease.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23727938
Modulation by melatonin of the pathogenesis of inflammatory autoimmune diseases.
Melatonin is the major secretory product of the pineal gland during the night and has multiple activities including the regulation of circadian and seasonal rhythms, and antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects.
It also possesses the ability to modulate immune responses by regulation of the T helper 1/2 balance and cytokine production.
Autoimmune diseases, which result from the activation of immune cells by autoantigens released from normal tissues, affect around 5% of the population.
Activation of autoantigen-specific immune cells leads to subsequent damage of target tissues by these activated cells.
Melatonin therapy has been investigated in several animal models of autoimmune disease, where it has a beneficial effect in a number of models excepting rheumatoid arthritis, and has been evaluated in clinical autoimmune diseases including rheumatoid arthritis and ulcerative colitis.
This review summarizes and highlights the role and the modulatory effects of melatonin in several inflammatory autoimmune diseases including multiple sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, type 1 diabetes mellitus, and inflammatory bowel disease.
PMID: 21304449
Effect of a cognitive task on postural control in patients with a clinically isolated syndrome suggestive of multiple sclerosis.
Patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) frequently experience poor postural control affecting mobility and/or cognitive impairment, even in the early stages of the disease.
As postural control consumes attentional resources, it is essential to test stability during a cognitive task.
To assess postural control and determine the effect of a cognitive task on balance in patients with a clinically isolated syndrome (CIS) suggestive of MS, within 3 months from onset.
Observational case control study Multiple Sclerosis Center and Institute of Motor Functions, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel Fifty-two CIS patients, aged 35.2±1.3 years, disease duration of 54±6.2 days and Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) of 1.7±0.2, participated in the study.
The control group consisted of 28 age and gender matched healthy subjects.
Stability was evaluated by the quantifying movement of the center of pressure (CoP) during standing under three conditions: eyes open, eyes closed, and while performing the modified Stroop test.
Sway rate and CoP data was collected by a computerized force platform device.
After combining major postural control parameters, only 50% of the patients performed normally.
Differences in postural variables were found between patients and healthy subjects (P&lt;0.01).
Both sway rate and standard deviation of the CoP in all test conditions were significantly higher in patients compared to controls.
The cognitive task resulted in an elevated sway rate both in CIS patients and the control group when compared with the eyes open task.
Within 3 months of the onset of neurological symptomatology, postural instability was detected in 50% of CIS patients using a dedicated balance measurement device.
As these findings are associated with the very early phase of MS, it appears that the ongoing pathological disease process is already taking place with regard to the balance control system.
Identification of postural abnormalities in the early stages is important in order to establish proper intervention programs.
PMID: 23351586
A novel mutation in the ABCA1 gene causing an atypical phenotype of Tangier disease.
Tangier disease is a rare autosomal-recessive disorder caused by mutation in the ATP binding cassette transporter 1 (ABCA1) gene.
Typically, Tangier disease manifests with symptoms and signs resulting from the deposition of cholesteryl esters in nonadipose tissues; chiefly, in peripheral nerves leading to neuropathy and in reticulo-endothelial organs, such as liver, spleen, lymph nodes, and tonsils, causing their enlargement and discoloration.
An association with early cardiovascular disease can be variable.
We describe a patient with a unique phenotype of Tangier disease from a novel splice site mutation in the ABCA1 gene that is associated with a central nervous system presentation resembling multiple sclerosis, and the presence of premature atherosclerosis.
Copyright © 2013 National Lipid Association.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22411609
Estrogen treatment prevents gray matter atrophy in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Gray matter atrophy is an important correlate to clinical disability in multiple sclerosis (MS), and many treatment trials include atrophy as an outcome measure.
Atrophy has been shown to occur in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), the most commonly used animal model of MS.
The clinical severity of EAE is reduced in estrogen-reated mice, but it remains unknown whether estrogen treatment can reduce gray matter atrophy in EAE.
In this study, mice with EAE were treated with either estrogen receptor (ER)-α ligand or ER-β ligand, and diffusion tensor images (DTI) were collected and neuropathology was performed.
DTI showed atrophy in the cerebellar gray matter of vehicle-treated EAE mice compared with healthy controls but not in ER-α or ER-β ligand-treated EAE mice.
Neuropathology demonstrated that Purkinje cell numbers were decreased in vehicle-treated EAE mice, whereas neither ER ligand-treated EAE groups showed a decrease.
This is the first report of a neuroprotective therapy in EAE that unambiguously prevents gray matter atrophy while sparing a major neuronal cell type.
Fractional anisotropy (FA) in the cerebellar white matter was decreased in vehicle- and ER-β ligand-treated but not in ER-α ligand-treated EAE mice.
Inflammatory cell infiltration was increased in vehicle- and ER-β ligand-treated but not in ER-α ligand-treated EAE mice.
Myelin staining was decreased in vehicle-treated EAE mice and was spared in both ER ligand-treated groups.
This is consistent with decreased FA as a potential biomarker for inflammation rather than myelination or axonal damage in the cerebellum in EAE.
Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 23555050
Amino Acid derivatives as new zinc binding groups for the design of selective matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors.
A number of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are important medicinal targets for conditions ranging from rheumatoid arthritis to cardiomyopathy, periodontal disease, liver cirrhosis, multiple sclerosis, and cancer invasion and metastasis, where they showed to have a dual role, inhibiting or promoting important processes involved in the pathology.
MMPs contain a zinc (II) ion in the protein active site.
Small-molecule inhibitors of these metalloproteins are designed to bind directly to the active site metal ions.
In an effort to devise new approaches to selective inhibitors, in this paper, we describe the synthesis and preliminary biological evaluation of amino acid derivatives as new zinc binding groups (ZBGs).
The incorporation of selected metal-binding functions in more complex biphenyl sulfonamide moieties allowed the identification of one compound able to interact selectively with different MMP enzymatic isoforms.
PMID: 21880375
Low and dysregulated production of follistatin in immune cells of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis patients.
One of the mechanisms known to play a key role in neuronal and oligodendroglial fate specification of neural stem cells (NSCs) is restriction of bone morphogenic proteins (BMP) signaling by BMP antagonists.
Here, we demonstrate that follistatin mRNA and protein secreted levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RR-MS) patients are significantly reduced compared to healthy controls (HC).
We also observed a different profile of regulation mechanisms.
Follistatin was similarly expressed and secreted by T lymphocytes and monocytes among the PBMCs of HC, and follistatin upregulation of HC was subjected to stimulation with both LPS and TNF-α.
Among PBMCs of RR-MS patients, however, follistatin was found to be downregulated in their monocytes and unresponsive to stimulation with either LPS or TNF-α.
Our results may shed some light on the mechanisms involved in remyelination failure in MS, which may be related to the inability of RR-MS patients' immune cells to provide a sufficient pro-neurogenic and oligodendrogenic niche, by expressing and secreting follistatin, in addition to the previously described noggin reduced expression.
Our results indicate that the low expression of follistatin in immune cells of patients with RR-MS is a result of the altered immunoregulation of monocytes in these patients.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22813067
Identification of nephropathy candidate genes by comparing sclerosis-prone and sclerosis-resistant mouse strain kidney transcriptomes.
The genetic architecture responsible for chronic kidney disease (CKD) remains incompletely described.
The Oligosyndactyly (Os) mouse models focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), which is associated with reduced nephron number caused by the Os mutation.
The Os mutation leads to FSGS in multiple strains including the ROP-Os/+.
However, on the C57Bl/6J background the mutation does not cause FSGS, although nephron number in these mice are equivalent to those in ROP-Os/+ mice.
We exploited this phenotypic variation to identify genes that potentially contribute to glomerulosclerosis.
To identify such novel genes, which regulate susceptibility or resistance to renal disease progression, we generated and compared the renal transcriptomes using serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE) from the sclerosis-prone ROP-Os/+ and sclerosis resistant C57-Os/+ mouse kidneys.
We confirmed the validity of the differential gene expression using multiple approaches.
We also used an Ingenuity Pathway Analysis engine to assemble differentially regulated molecular networks.
Cell culture techniques were employed to confirm functional relevance of selected genes.
A comparative analysis of the kidney transcriptomes revealed multiple genes, with expression levels that were statistically different.
These novel, candidate, renal disease susceptibility/resistance genes included neuropilin2 (Nrp2), glutathione-S-transferase theta (Gstt1) and itchy (Itch).
Of 34 genes with the most robust statistical difference in expression levels between ROP-Os/+ and C57-Os/+ mice, 13 and 3 transcripts localized to glomerular and tubulointerstitial compartments, respectively, from micro-dissected human FSGS biopsies.
Network analysis of all significantly differentially expressed genes identified 13 connectivity networks.
The most highly scored network highlighted the roles for oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction pathways.
Functional analyses of these networks provided evidence for activation of transforming growth factor beta (TGFβ) signaling in ROP-Os/+ kidneys despite similar expression of the TGFβ ligand between the tested strains.
These data demonstrate the complex dysregulation of normal cellular functions in this animal model of FSGS and suggest that therapies directed at multiple levels will be needed to effectively treat human kidney diseases.
PMID: 22575526
Minocycline up-regulates the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor and nerve growth factor in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Previous evidence demonstrated that minocycline could ameliorate clinical severity of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis and exhibit several anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective activities.
However, few studies have been carried out to assess its effects on the expression of neurotrophins in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis or multiple sclerosis.
Here we investigated the alteration of brain-derived neurotrophic factor and nerve growth factor in the sera, cerebral cortex, and lumbar spinal cord of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis C57 BL/6 mice in vivo as well as the splenocytes culture supernatants in vitro after minocycline administration.
Our results demonstrated that minocycline could up-regulate the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor and nerve growth factor both in peripheral (sera and splenocytes culture supernatants) and target organs (cerebral cortex and lumber spinal cord) of mice with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
These data suggest that up-regulation of neurotrophins in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis may be a novel neuroprotective mechanism of minocycline.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22825702
The benefits of exercise training in multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an immune-mediated disease characterized by inflammatory demyelination and neurodegeneration within the CNS.
This damage of CNS structures leads to deficits of body functions, which, in turn, affect patient activities, such as walking, and participation.
The pathogenesis and resulting consequences of MS have been described as concepts within the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) model--an international standard to describe and measure health and disability.
Evidence suggests that exercise training in people with MS has the potential to target and improve many of the components outlined in the ICF model.
Although the body of research examining the effects of exercise training on depression, cognition and participatory outcomes is not sufficiently developed, some preliminary evidence is promising.
Exercise training is proposed to affect inflammation, neurodegeneration, and CNS structures, but current evidence is limited.
In this Review, we discuss evidence from clinical trials that suggests beneficial effects of exercise training on muscle strength, aerobic capacity and walking performance, and on fatigue, gait, balance and quality of life.
Issues with current studies and areas of future research are highlighted.
PMID: 22366799
NADPH oxidase expression in active multiple sclerosis lesions in relation to oxidative tissue damage and mitochondrial injury.
Multiple sclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disease of the central nervous system, associated with demyelination and neurodegeneration.
The mechanisms of tissue injury are poorly understood, but recent data suggest that mitochondrial injury may play an important role in this process.
Mitochondrial injury can be triggered by reactive oxygen and nitric oxide species, and we recently provided evidence for oxidative damage of oligodendrocytes and dystrophic axons in early stages of active multiple sclerosis lesions.
In this study, we identified potential sources of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species through gene expression in carefully staged and dissected lesion areas and by immunohistochemical analysis of protein expression.
Genome-wide microarrays confirmed mitochondrial injury in active multiple sclerosis lesions, which may serve as an important source of reactive oxygen species.
In addition, we found differences in the gene expression levels of various nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase subunits between initial multiple sclerosis lesions and control white matter.
These results were confirmed at the protein level by means of immunohistochemistry, showing upregulation of the subunits gp91phox, p22phox, p47phox, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase 1 and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase organizer 1 in activated microglia in classical active as well as slowly expanding lesions.
The subunits gp91phox and p22phox were constitutively expressed in microglia and were upregulated in the initial lesion.
In contrast, p47phox, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase 1 and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase organizer 1 expression were more restricted to the zone of initial damage or to lesions from patients with acute or early relapsing/remitting multiple sclerosis.
Double labelling showed co-expression of the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase subunits in activated microglia and infiltrated macrophages, suggesting the assembly of functional complexes.
Our data suggest that the inflammation-associated oxidative burst in activated microglia and macrophages plays an important role in demyelination and free radical-mediated tissue injury in the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 23518706
Identification of endothelin 2 as an inflammatory factor that promotes central nervous system remyelination.
The development of new regenerative therapies for multiple sclerosis is hindered by the lack of potential targets for enhancing remyelination.
The study of naturally regenerative processes such as the innate immune response represents a powerful approach for target discovery to solve this problem.
By 'mining' these processes using transcriptional profiling we can identify candidate factors that can then be tested individually in clinically-relevant models of demyelination and remyelination.
Here, therefore, we have examined a previously described in vivo model of the innate immune response in which zymosan-induced macrophage activation in the retina promotes myelin sheath formation by oligodendrocytes generated from transplanted precursor cells.
While this model is not itself clinically relevant, it does provide a logical starting point for this study as factors that promote myelination must be present.
Microarray analysis of zymosan-treated retinae identified several cytokines (CXCL13, endothelin 2, CCL20 and CXCL2) to be significantly upregulated.
When tested in a cerebellar slice culture model, CXCL13 and endothelin 2 promoted myelination and endothelin 2 also promoted remyelination.
In studies to identify the receptor responsible for this regenerative effect of endothelin 2, analysis of both remyelination following experimental demyelination and of different stages of multiple sclerosis lesions in human post-mortem tissue revealed high levels of endothelin receptor type B in oligodendrocyte lineage cells.
Confirming a role for this receptor in remyelination, small molecule agonists and antagonists of endothelin receptor type B administered in slice cultures promoted and inhibited remyelination, respectively.
Antagonists of endothelin receptor type B also inhibited remyelination of experimentally-generated demyelination in vivo.
Our work therefore identifies endothelin 2 and the endothelin receptor type B as a regenerative pathway and suggests that endothelin receptor type B agonists represent a promising therapeutic approach to promote myelin regeneration.
PMID: 23570561
Synthesis and biological evaluation of urea derivatives as highly potent and selective rho kinase inhibitors.
RhoA and its downstream effector ROCK mediate stress fiber formation and cell contraction through their effects on the phosphorylation of myosin light chain (MLC).
Inhibition of the RhoA/ROCK pathway has proven to be a promising strategy for several indications such as cardiovascular disease, glaucoma, and inflammatory disease.
In 2010, our group reported urea-based ROCK inhibitors as potential antiglaucoma agents.
These compounds showed potent IC50 values in enzymatic and cell-based assays and significant intraocular pressure (IOP)-lowering effects in rats (∼7 mmHg).
(22) To develop more advanced ROCK inhibitors targeting various potential applications (such as myocardial infarction, erectile dysfunction, multiple sclerosis, etc.) in addition to glaucoma, a thorough SAR for this urea-based scaffold was studied.
The detailed optimization process, counter-screening, and in vitro and in vivo DMPK studies are discussed.
Potent and selective ROCK inhibitors with various in vivo pharmacokinetic properties were discovered.
PMID: 23518709
Safinamide and flecainide protect axons and reduce microglial activation in models of multiple sclerosis.
Axonal degeneration is a major cause of permanent disability in the inflammatory demyelinating disease multiple sclerosis, but no therapies are known to be effective in axonal protection.
Sodium channel blocking agents can provide effective protection of axons in the white matter in experimental models of multiple sclerosis, but the mechanism of action (directly on axons or indirectly via immune modulation) remains uncertain.
Here we have examined the efficacy of two sodium channel blocking agents to protect white matter axons in two forms of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, a common model of multiple sclerosis.
Safinamide is currently in phase III development for use in Parkinson's disease based on its inhibition of monoamine oxidase B, but the drug is also a potent state-dependent inhibitor of sodium channels.
Safinamide provided significant protection against neurological deficit and axonal degeneration in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, even when administration was delayed until after the onset of neurological deficit.
Protection of axons was associated with a significant reduction in the activation of microglia/macrophages within the central nervous system.
To clarify which property of safinamide was likely to be involved in the suppression of the innate immune cells, the action of safinamide on microglia/macrophages was compared with that of the classical sodium channel blocking agent, flecainide, which has no recognized monoamine oxidase B activity, and which has previously been shown to protect the white matter in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Flecainide was also potent in suppressing microglial activation in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
To distinguish whether the suppression of microglia was an indirect consequence of the reduction in axonal damage, or possibly instrumental in the axonal protection, the action of safinamide was examined in separate experiments in vitro.
In cultured primary rat microglial cells activated by lipopolysaccharide, safinamide potently suppressed microglial superoxide production and enhanced the production of the anti-oxidant glutathione.
The findings show that safinamide is effective in protecting axons from degeneration in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, and that this effect is likely to involve a direct effect on microglia that can result in a less activated phenotype.
Together, this work highlights the potential of safinamide as an effective neuroprotective agent in multiple sclerosis, and implicates microglia in the protective mechanism.
PMID: 22056978
MicroRNAs in peritoneal dialysis effluent are promising biomarkers for peritoneal fibrosis in peritoneal dialysis patients.
Peritoneal fibrosis is a common complication of long-term peritoneal dialysis, and contributes to encapsulating peritoneal sclerosis and eventually peritoneal ultrafiltration failure, which restricts the wide application of peritoneal dialysis.
Therefore, the prevention and treatment of peritoneal fibrosis is important to maintain peritoneal membrane integrity and prolong peritoneal dialysis treatment.
Unfortunately, neither specific biomarkers nor effective therapies are available for peritoneal fibrosis in the clinic up to now.
Emerging evidence suggests that extracellular microRNAs in body fluids are promising biomarkers for the diagnosis of diseases.
microRNAs were reported to be involved in multiple fibrotic diseases and the serum levels of specific microRNAs were correlated with the degree of fibrosis.
Moreover, extracellular microRNAs were found in peritoneal fluids and ascites.
Based on these findings, here we present our hypothesis that extracellular microRNAs associated with peritoneal epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and fibrosis could potentially be detected in peritoneal dialysis effluent, and serve as novel biomarkers for early assessment and diagnosis of peritoneal fibrosis.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22698518
Melatonin pathway genes are associated with progressive subtypes and disability status in multiple sclerosis among Finnish patients.
In this study we investigated the relationship between melatonin pathway and multiple sclerosis (MS) in a high-risk Finnish population by studying the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the genes coding for critical enzymes and receptors involved in the melatonin pathway.
A total of 590 subjects (193 MS patients and 397 healthy controls) were genotyped for seven SNPs in four genes including tryptophan hydroxylases (TPH)1 and 2, arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (AANAT) and melatonin receptor 1B (MTNR1B).
An overrepresentation of T allele carriers of a functional polymorphism (G-703T, rs4570625) in the promoter region of TPH2 gene was observed in the progressive MS subtypes.
The haplotype rs4570625-rs10506645TT of TPH2 gene was associated with the risk of severe disability in primary progressive MS (PPMS), while haplotype rs4570625-rs10506645TC appeared to be protective against disability in secondary progressive MS (SPMS).
In the MTNR1B gene, the haplotype rs10830963-rs4753426GC was associated with the risk of SPMS, whereas another haplotype rs10830963-rs4753426GT showed an association with the risk of PPMS.
These data showing the association of polymorphisms in the TPH2 and MTNR1B genes with the progressive subtypes of MS and disability suggest dysregulation in melatonin pathway.
Melatonin pathway seems to be involved in disease progression, and therefore its potential effects in overcoming MS-related neurodegeneration may be worth evaluating in future clinical trials.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23365440
Modeling the acute and chronic phases of Theiler murine encephalomyelitis virus infection.
Theiler murine encephalomyelitis virus (TMEV) infection of a mouse's central nervous system is biphasic: first the virus infects motor neurons (acute phase), and this is followed by a chronic phase in which the virus infects glial cells (primarily microglia and macrophages [M]) of the spinal cord white matter, leading to inflammation and demyelination.
As such, TMEV-induced demyelinating disease in mice provides a highly relevant experimental animal model for multiple sclerosis.
Mathematical models have proven valuable in understanding the in vivo dynamics of persistent virus infections, such as HIV-1, hepatitis B virus, and hepatitis C virus infections.
However, viral dynamic modeling has not been used for understanding TMEV infection.
We constructed the first mathematical model of TMEV-host kinetics during acute and early chronic infections in mice and fit measured viral kinetic data with the model.
The data fitting allowed us to estimate several unknown parameters, including the following: the rate of infection of neurons, 0.5 × 10(-8) to 5.6 × 10(-8) day(-1); the percent reduction of the infection rate due to the presence of virus-specific antibodies, which reaches 98.5 to 99.9% after day 15 postinfection (p.i.); the half-life of infected neurons, 0.1 to 1.2 days; and a cytokine-enhanced macrophage source rate of 25 to 350 M/day into the spinal cord starting at 10.9 to 12.9 days p.i.
The model presented here is a first step toward building a comprehensive model for TMEV-induced demyelinating disease.
Moreover, the model can serve as an important tool in understanding TMEV infectious mechanisms and may prove useful in evaluating antivirals and/or therapeutic modalities to prevent or inhibit demyelination.
PMID: 22222509
Transsynaptic retinal degeneration in optic neuropathies: optical coherence tomography study.
Recently demonstrated neuronal loss in the inner nuclear layer of the retina in multiple sclerosis (MS) and glaucoma raises the question of a primary (possibly immune-mediated) or secondary (transsynaptic) mechanism of retinal damage in these diseases.
In the present study we used optical coherence tomography to investigate retrograde retinal transsynaptic degeneration in patients with long-standing and severe loss of ganglion cells due to optic neuropathy.
Fifteen eyes of glaucoma patients with visual field defect limited to upper hemifield and 15 eyes of MS patients with previous episode of optic neuritis (ON) and extensive loss of ganglion cells were imaged using spectral-domain optical coherence tomography and compared with two groups of age-matched controls.
Combined retinal ganglion cell layer/inner plexiform layer (GCL/IPL) thickness and inner nuclear layer (INL) thickness were analyzed.
In the glaucoma group there was a significant (P = 0.0005) reduction of GCL/IPL thickness in the lower (affected) retina compared with normal controls; however INL thickness was not statistically reduced (P = 0.49).
In the MS group reduction of GCL/IPL thickness in both hemifields of ON eyes was also significant (P = 0.0001 and P &lt; 0.0001 for inferior and superior retina respectively).
However, similar to the glaucomatous eyes, there was no significant reduction of INL thickness in both hemifields (P = 0.25 and P = 0.45).
This study demonstrates no significant loss of INL thickness in parts of the retina with long-standing and severe loss of retinal ganglion cells.
PMID: 23109666
The discovery of natalizumab, a potent therapeutic for multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the major inflammatory demyelinating disease of the central nervous system.
There is strong evidence that an immune response in the brain is a critical component of the disease.
In 1992, in a collaboration between academia and biotechnology, my colleagues and I showed that α4 integrin was the critical molecule involved in the homing of immune cells into the inflamed brain.
Was it sheer luck that these results led to the development of a drug for MS?
PMID: 21406249
Mitochondrial changes associated with demyelination: consequences for axonal integrity.
The loss of myelin sheath (demyelination) renders axons vulnerable to a variety of insults.
Axonal degeneration is well recognised in inflammatory demyelinating disorders of the central nervous system (CNS) such as multiple sclerosis (MS) and also certain neurodegenerative diseases.
Energy required for nerve impulse conduction and maintenance of structural integrity of axons is met by mitochondria.
Based on the distribution of ion channels and the Na(+)/K(+) ATPase, the energy requirements of demyelinated and dysmyelinated axons are likely to differ from myelinated axons.
In this review we discuss the changes in mitochondrial presence within axons in relation to presence or absence of healthy myelin sheaths and propose the increase in mitochondrial presence following demyelination as an adaptive process.
An energy deficit within demyelinated axons is likely to be more detrimental compared to myelinated axons, judging by the neuropathological findings in primary mitochondrial disorders due to mitochondrial and nuclear DNA mutations and the mitochondrial changes that follow demyelination.
Agents that enhance and protect mitochondria, as potential therapy, need to be considered and investigated in earnest for demyelinating disorders of the CNS such as MS.
Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. and Mitochondria Research Society.
All rights reserved.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23482989
Assessing fracture risk in people with MS: a service development study comparing three fracture risk scoring systems.
Suboptimal bone health is increasingly recognised as an important cause of morbidity.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) has been consistently associated with an increased risk of osteoporosis and fracture.
Various fracture risk screening tools have been developed, two of which are in routine use and a further one is MS-specific.
We set out to compare the results obtained by these in the MS clinic population.
This was a service development study.
The 10-year risk estimates of any fracture and hip fracture generated by each of the algorithms were compared.
The MS clinic at the Royal London Hospital.
88 patients with a confirmed diagnosis of MS.
Mean 10-year overall fracture risk and hip fracture risk were calculated using each of the three fracture risk calculators.
The number of interventions that would be required as a result of using each of these tools was also compared.
Mean 10-year fracture risk was 4.7%, 2.3% and 7.6% using FRAX, QFracture and the MS-specific calculator, respectively (p&lt;0.0001 for difference).
The agreement between risk scoring tools was poor at all levels of fracture risk.
The agreement between these three fracture risk scoring tools is poor in the MS population.
Further work is required to develop and validate an accurate fracture risk scoring system for use in MS.
This service development study was approved by the Clinical Effectiveness Department at Barts Health NHS Trust (project registration number 156/12).
PMID: 22480437
Pilates based core stability training in ambulant individuals with multiple sclerosis: protocol for a multi-centre randomised controlled trial.
People with Multiple Sclerosis (MS) frequently experience balance and mobility impairments, including reduced trunk stability.
Pilates-based core stability training, which is aimed at improving control of the body's stabilising muscles, is popular as a form of exercise with people with MS and therapists.
A replicated single case series study facilitated by the Therapists in MS Group in the United Kingdom (UK) provides preliminary evidence that this approach can improve balance and mobility in ambulant people with MS; further evidence is needed to substantiate these findings to ensure that limited time, energy, finances and resources are used to best effect.This study builds upon the pilot work undertaken in the case series study by implementing a powered randomised controlled study, with the aims of: 1 Establishing the effectiveness of core stability training; 2 Comparing core stability training with standardised physiotherapy exercise; 3 Exploring underlying mechanisms of change associated with this intervention This is a multi-centre, double blind, block randomised, controlled trial.
Eligible participants will be recruited from 4 UK centres.
Participants will be randomly allocated to one of three groups: Pilates based core stability training, standardised physiotherapy exercise or contract-relax relaxation sessions (placebo control).
All will receive face to face training sessions over a 12 week period; together with a 15 minute daily home programme.
All will be assessed by a blinded assessor before training, at the end of the 12 week programme and at 4 week follow-up.
The primary outcome measure is the 10 metre timed walk.
Secondary outcome measures are the MS walking Scale (MSWS-12), the Functional Reach (forwards and lateral), a 10 point Numerical Rating Scale to determine Difficulty in carrying a drink when walking, and the Activities-specific Balance Confidence (ABC) Scale.
In addition, ultrasound imaging of the abdominal muscles will be performed before and after intervention to assess changes in abdominal musculature at one of the four centres (Plymouth).
This pragmatic trial will assess the effect of these exercise programmes on ambulatory people with MS.
It may not be possible to extrapolate the conclusions to those who are non-ambulatory.
ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT01414725.
PMID: 22527232
Quality of life and depression in multiple sclerosis patients: longitudinal results of the BetaPlus study.
Enhancing quality of life (QoL) is an important objective of disease-modifying therapies in multiple sclerosis (MS).
Strategies to substantiate the effect on QoL and depression have been suggested, including injection devices and nursing support.
This study assesses QoL and depression in MS patients treated with interferon beta-1b (IFNB-1b) and evaluates the impact of different elements of a patient support programme and of coping strategies on QoL and depression.
A prospective, observational, 2-year cohort study was conducted.
MS patients were eligible if they had previously switched to IFNB-1b.
Data were collected every 6 months.
For the measurement of QoL the Functional Assessment of MS (FAMS) was used.
Depression symptoms were assessed using the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D); coping strategies were assessed using the 66-item version of Ways of Coping Questionnaire.
A total of 1,077 patients were recruited into the study.
Seven hundred (65 %) patients completed the study.
Within the subgroup completing questionnaires on QoL (N = 472) and depression (N = 363), QoL increased (110.4 vs. 115.8, p &lt; 0.001), and the proportion of depressed patients decreased from 53.7 to 43.3 % (p &lt; 0.001).
Modelling QoL and depressions, the use of the autoinjector Betaject(®) over time showed a positive association with QoL (p = 0.049).
The support from a nurse was positively associated with lower depressive symptoms (p = 0.039).
The coping strategies 'planful problem-solving' and 'positive reappraisal' were associated with higher QoL and lower depressive symptoms.
Patients on IFNB-1b treatment who were included in the patient support programme and completed the study showed an improvement in QoL.
Moreover, compared to baseline the proportion of depressive patients decreased.
Coping strategies as well as supportive elements such as autoinjectors and nurses had a significant impact on QoL and depression.
However, the study had the general limitations of a non-controlled design.
PMID: 22527237
Background information on multiple sclerosis patients stopping ongoing immunomodulatory therapy: a multicenter study in a community-based environment.
Adherence to an immunomodulatory therapy still needs to be improved in MS patients.
We analyzed the data of 396 MS patients of 40 German MS outpatient centers who had stopped an ongoing immunomodulatory treatment.
Items analyzed were among others adherence data, reasons for the interruption and willingness to start a new therapy.
It became obvious that 74.6 % of the patients made the decision to withdraw from therapy on their own.
The most commonly mentioned reasons for the withdrawal were proven or putative lack of efficacy (51.4 %), side effects (58.1 %), and complaints of fatigue and depression.
There was no difference concerning sex, duration of the treatment and medication taken.
The expectations correlated with the empathy of the treating physician and the setting with MS nurses taking care of the patient.
A total of 199 patients (51.8 % of the females, 48.9 % of the males) wanted to restart another IMT.
Reasons for not wanting to restart were lack of conviction that a therapy may influence the disease (29.4 %), fear of injection (18.7 %), fear of bringing the disease to mind regularly (17.9 %) and doubt about the diagnosis (11.2 %).
The results suggest that adherence is most effectively promoted by cultivating an appropriate and individual therapeutic setting for each MS patient on a medical, organizational and last but not least psychological level.
PMID: 21991843
[The effects of whole-body cryotherapy and melatonin supplementation on total antioxidative status and some antioxidative enzymes in multiple sclerosis patients].
Oxidative stress is an important factor which contribute to the pathogenesis of lesions in multiple sclerosis (MS).
Whole body cryotherapy (WBCT) is often used in treatment neurological and orthopedic diseases.
The aim of this study was to determinate the level of total antioxidative status (TAS) in plasma and activity of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT) in erythrocytes of MS patients (n = 28) before and after 10 exposures of WBCT (-120 degrees C/3 minutes/day).
16 MS patients during 10 exposures of WBCT additionally were supplemented by 10 mg of melatonin.
Increasing of TAS level in plasma as well as supplemented with melatonin and non-supplemented MS patients was observed after 10 exposures of WBCT Melatonin statistically significant increased activity of SOD and CAT in erythrocytes of MS patients treated with WBCT.
Results of our study indicate significant increase of TAS level in plasma of MS patients of WBCT treatment.
This indicate that WBCT might be a therapy which suppress oxidative stress in MS patients.
PMID: 22292010
Amelioration of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis in C57BL/6 mice by photobiomodulation induced by 670 nm light.
The approved immunomodulatory agents for the treatment of multiple sclerosis (MS) are only partially effective.
It is thought that the combination of immunomodulatory and neuroprotective strategies is necessary to prevent or reverse disease progression.
Irradiation with far red/near infrared light, termed photobiomodulation, is a therapeutic approach for inflammatory and neurodegenerative diseases.
Data suggests that near-infrared light functions through neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory mechanisms.
We sought to investigate the clinical effect of photobiomodulation in the Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis (EAE) model of multiple sclerosis.
The clinical effect of photobiomodulation induced by 670 nm light was investigated in the C57BL/6 mouse model of EAE.
Disease was induced with myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) according to standard laboratory protocol.
Mice received 670 nm light or no light treatment (sham) administered as suppression and treatment protocols.
670 nm light reduced disease severity with both protocols compared to sham treated mice.
Disease amelioration was associated with down-regulation of proinflammatory cytokines (interferon-γ, tumor necrosis factor-α) and up-regulation of anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-4, IL-10) in vitro and in vivo.
These studies document the therapeutic potential of photobiomodulation with 670 nm light in the EAE model, in part through modulation of the immune response.
PMID: 21420982
Influence of the cold challenge on the discriminatory capacity of the digital distal-dorsal difference in the thermographic assessment of Raynaud's phenomenon.
To investigate the influence of a standardised cold stress test (CST) on the thermographic 'distal-dorsal difference' (DDD) and its capacity to differentiate between disease states in the assessment of Raynaud's phenomenon (RP), and to compare the discriminatory capacity of the DDD of individual digits with composite indices of multiple digits.
Thermographic images of 55 patients with primary RP (PRP, n=27) and systemic sclerosis (SSc, n=28) who had undergone assessment of RP were retrospectively reviewed.
The DDD for individual digits, and composite scores of multiple digits, were calculated at baseline (23°C), and at 10 min following CST.
The discriminatory capacity of the mean DDD, and the proportion of patients with a clinically meaningful DDD of &lt;-1°C, were assessed for individual digits and composite indices, at baseline and following cold challenge.
There was a more pronounced decrease of the DDD (indicating reduced distal perfusion) following CST in patients with PRP compared to SSc.
The disparity in response to CST between groups narrowed the differences that were present at baseline, reducing the discriminatory capacity of the DDD for all endpoints.
Sparing of the thumbs occurs to a greater extent in SSc (P&lt;0.005) compared with PRP (P&lt;0.05) but does not facilitate differentiation between groups.
Large variability of the DDD within groups precludes easy differentiation between disease states.
Composite indices of multiple digits are preferable to individual digital assessment.
The discriminatory capacity of the DDD is lost following CST.
The CST may not be essential in the thermographic assessment of RP, potentially allowing greater use of thermography in clinical practise.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23294496
Self-reported health promotion and disability progression in multiple sclerosis.
Health behavior may be associated with disability progression in multiple sclerosis (MS).
To investigate health-promoting behavior as measured by the Health-Promoting Lifestyle Profile II, which includes the subscales of health responsibility, physical activity, nutrition, spiritual growth, interpersonal relationships and stress management.
We conducted a cross-sectional survey among individuals with MS, registered by the Flemish MS society, Belgium.
Scores for the total scale and subscales were categorized into quintiles.
A time-to-event analysis and Cox proportional hazard regression were performed with time to Expanded Disability Status Score (EDSS) of 6 (requires a cane) as an outcome measure.
Hazard ratios for the time from onset and the time from birth were adjusted for gender, age at onset and immunomodulatory treatment.
The first category was the reference group (first quintile).
Data on 1372 respondents with definite MS were collected.
Subjects with relapsing onset MS and higher scores for overall health-promoting behavior, and the subscales of physical activity, nutrition and spiritual growth, had a reduced risk of reaching EDSS 6 compared to the reference group.
No associations were found for the subscales of health responsibility, stress management and interpersonal relations.
In progressive onset MS, no significant associations were obtained.
Our study shows an association of self-reported health promoting behavior with disability progression in subjects with relapsing onset MS.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23258662
Neuromyelitis optica antibody in Leber hereditary optic neuropathy: case report.
Neuromyelitis optica antibody (or aquaporin-4 antibody) is a well established serum marker associated to high-risk neuromyelitis optica syndrome that presents as an inflammatory demyelinating disease characterized by the occurrence of bilateral and simultaneous optic neuritis without complete visual recovery or it occurs as an isolated episode of transverse myelitis accompanied by longitudinally extensive spinal cord lesions.
On the other hand, Leber hereditary optic neuropathy is a primarily hereditary disorder that affects all tissues of the body and its clinical presentation is tissue-specific for the optic nerve and, eventually, it might reach the spinal cord.
Overlapping clinical features of neuromyelitis optica and Leber hereditary optic neuropathy may suggest common target organ diseases.
The case report described herein emphasizes the coexistence of serum markers of both diseases, and suggests that further investigation of this challenging clinical presentation is warranted to confirm or rule out this association.
PMID: 21573818
Expanding the spectrum of neurological disease associated with Epstein-Barr virus activity.
The purpose of this study was to delineate the spectrum of neurological diseases attributed to Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) activity.
The approach was a retrospective study on patients with EBV activity proven by a positive EBV antibody-specific index (AI) and/or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) PCR.
One hundred six children and adults (AI positive = 77, AI + PCR positive = 3, PCR positive = 26) were identified, most with reactivated infections.
Twenty-eight showed typical EBV-related diseases (encephalitis, neuritis, meningitis), 19 further infections (HSV encephalitis, neuroborreliosis, HIV infection, bacterial meningitis), nine immune-mediated disorders (multiple sclerosis, optic neuritis), and 50 further diseases not typical for EBV.
The highest AI values occurred in patients with encephalitis.
No relationship between disease category or AI values and viral loads was found.
Additional reanalysis of 1,500 consecutive CSF EBV PCR studies revealed the highest positive rates among patients with further infections (n = 18/227, 7.9%) but lower rates among patients with typical EBV-related disorders (5/395; 1.3%), immune-mediated disorders (n = 2/174; 1.1%) and other conditions (n = 4/704; 0.6%).
Intrathecal EBV activity is not restricted to typical EBV-related disorders, unexpectedly frequent in further CNS infections and also present in non-inflammatory conditions.
Prospective studies should assess the pathogenic role of EBV in these different diseases.
PMID: 23664330
CD8⁺ T cell help is required for efficient induction of EAE in Lewis rats.
The role of CD8⁺ T cells in multiple sclerosis (MS) and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) is still unclear.
We describe here significantly reduced disease activity of EAE both in Lewis rats depleted of CD8⁺ T cells by monoclonal antibodies and CD8 knockout rats, which was accompanied by reduced leukocyte infiltration into the spinal cord.
We detected myelin basic protein (MBP)-specific CD8⁺ T cells in peripheral lymphoid organs of CD8-depleted animals which, however, failed to differentiate into interferon-γ-producing effector cells.
Our results indicate that CD8⁺ T cells interact with myelin-specific CD8⁺ T cells early in EAE enabling them to differentiate into pathogenic effector cells.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23078359
Multiple sclerosis and restless legs syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Restless legs syndrome (RLS) has been reported to occur more frequently in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) than in people without MS.
Systematic review and meta-analysis of studies investigating RLS in patients with MS published through April 2012.
We calculated the prevalences and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) of RLS in patients with MS and people without MS as well as odds ratios (ORs) and 95% CIs of the association between MS and RLS based on data from the publications.
We then calculated pooled effect estimates for the association between MS and RLS.
We identified 24 studies.
RLS prevalence amongst patients with MS ranged from 12.12% to 57.50% and from 2.56% to 18.33% amongst people without MS.
Heterogeneity amongst studies was high (RLS prevalence in patients with MS I(2) =94.4%; RLS prevalence amongst people without MS I(2) =82.2%).
Hence, we did not pool the prevalence data for meta-analysis.
Heterogeneity amongst studies investigating the association between MS and RLS was moderate (I(2) =53.6%).
Pooled analysis indicates that MS is associated with a fourfold increased odds for RLS (pooled OR=4.19, 95% CI 3.11-5.66).
This association was smaller amongst studies published as full papers (pooled OR=3.94, 95% CI 2.81-5.54) than amongst studies published as abstracts only (pooled OR=6.23, 95% CI 3.25-11.95).
This systematic review indicates that RLS prevalence amongst patients with MS ranges from 12.12% to 57.50% in different populations.
Pooled analysis further indicates that the odds of RLS amongst patients with MS are fourfold higher compared to people without MS.
© 2012 The Author(s) European Journal of Neurology © 2012 EFNS.
PMID: 23088946
Advanced techniques using contrast media in neuroimaging.
This article presents an overview of advanced magnetic resonance (MR) imaging techniques using contrast media in neuroimaging, focusing on T2*-weighted dynamic susceptibility contrast MR imaging and T1-weighted dynamic contrast-enhanced MR imaging.
Image acquisition and data processing methods and their clinical application in brain tumors, stroke, dementia, and multiple sclerosis are discussed.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22070192
Histamine pharmacology and new CNS drug targets.
During the last decade, the identification of a number of novel drug targets led to the development of promising new compounds which are currently under evaluation for their therapeutic prospective in CNS related disorders.
Besides the established pleiotropic regulatory functions in the periphery, the interest in the potential homeostatic role of histamine in the brain was revived following the identification of H(3)  and H(4)  receptors some years ago.
Complementing classical CNS pharmacology, the development of selective histamine receptor agonists, antagonists, and inverse agonists provides the lead for the potential exploitation of the histaminergic system in the treatment of brain pathologies.
Although no CNS disease entity has been associated directly to brain histamine dysfunction until now, the H(3)  receptor is recognized as a drug target for neuropathic pain, sleep-wake disorders, including narcolepsy, and cognitive impairment associated with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, schizophrenia, Alzheimer's, or Parkinson's disease, while the first H(3)  receptor ligands have already entered phase I-III clinical trials.
Interestingly, the localization of the immunomodulatory H(4)  receptor in the nervous system exposes attractive perspectives for the therapeutic exploitation of this new drug target in neuroimmunopharmacology.
This review focuses on a concise presentation of the current translational research approach that exploits the latest advances in histamine pharmacology for the development of beneficial drug targets for the treatment of neuronal disorders, such as neuropathic pain, cognitive, and sleep-wake pathologies.
Furthermore, the role of the brain histaminergic system(s) in neuroprotection and neuroimmunology/inflammation remains a challenging research area that is currently under consideration.
© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
PMID: 23764350
Siponimod for patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (BOLD): an adaptive, dose-ranging, randomised, phase 2 study.
Siponimod is an oral selective modulator of sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor types 1 and type 5, with an elimination half-life leading to washout in 7 days.
We aimed to determine the dose-response relation of siponimod in terms of its effects on brain MRI lesion activity and characterise safety and tolerability in patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
In this double-blind, adaptive dose-ranging phase 2 study, we enrolled adults (aged 18-55 years) with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis at 73 medical centres in Europe and North America.
We tested two patient cohorts sequentially, separated by an interim analysis at 3 months.
We randomly allocated patients in cohort 1 (1:1:1:1) to receive once-daily siponimod 10 mg, 2 mg, or 0·5 mg, or placebo for 6 months.
We randomly allocated patients in cohort 2 (4:4:1) to siponimod 1·25 mg, siponimod 0·25 mg, or placebo once-daily for 3 months.
Randomisation was done with a central, automated system and patients and investigators were masked to treatment assignment.
The primary endpoint was dose-response, assessed by percentage reduction in monthly number of combined unique active lesions at 3 months for siponimod versus placebo; this endpoint was analysed by a multiple comparison procedure with modelling techniques in all patients with at least one MRI scan up to 3 months.
We assessed safety in all patients who received at least one dose of study drug.
This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00879658.
Between March 30, 2009, and Oct 22, 2010, we recruited 188 patients into cohort 1 and 109 patients into cohort 2.
We showed a dose-response relation (p=0·0001) across the five doses of siponimod, with reductions in combined unique active lesions at 3 months compared with placebo of 35% (95% CI 17-57) for siponimod 0·25 mg (51 patients included in the primary endpoint analysis), 50% (29-69) for siponimod 0·5 mg (43 patients), 66% (48-80) for siponimod 1·25 mg (42 patients), 72% (57-84) for siponimod 2 mg (45 patients), and 82% (70-90) for siponimod 10 mg (44 patients).
In patients treated for 6 months, 37 (86%) of 43 patients who received siponimod 0·5 mg had adverse events (eight serious), as did 48 (98%) of 49 patients who received siponimod 2 mg (four serious), 48 (96%) of 50 patients who received siponimod 10 mg (three serious), and 36 (80%) of 45 controls (none serious).
For individuals treated to 3 months, 38 (74%) of 51 patients who received siponimod 0·25 mg had adverse events (none serious), as did 29 (69%) of 42 patients who received siponimod 1·25 mg (two serious) and 13 (81%) of 16 controls (none serious).
Therapeutic effects of siponimod on MRI lesion activity in model-based analyses and its tolerability in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis warrant investigation in a phase 3 trial.
Novartis Pharma AG.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22782451
Sex ratio of infectious mononucleosis and possible relevance to multiple sclerosis.
Infectious mononucleosis (IM) is associated with the risk of developing multiple sclerosis (MS).
Using databases of hospital admissions for England (1999-2005), we investigated the female-to-male ratios (FMRs) for admission to hospital for IM and MS stratified by age.
Males were more frequently admitted for IM for all age groups apart from ages 10-14 (FMR 1.50; 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.36-1.64) and, borderline significantly, at ages 15-19 (FMR 1.03, 95% CI 0.99-1.08).
This intriguing aspect of IM epidemiology in adolescence, the atypical female excess, may be linked to the sex ratio of MS, where females predominate from adolescence.
PMID: 22349452
GABAergic signaling and connectivity on Purkinje cells are impaired in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
A significant proportion of multiple sclerosis (MS) patients have functionally relevant cerebellar deficits, which significantly contribute to disability.
Although clinical and experimental studies have been conducted to understand the pathophysiology of cerebellar dysfunction in MS, no electrophysiological and morphological studies have investigated potential alterations of synaptic connections of cerebellar Purkinje cells (PC).
For this reason we analyzed cerebellar PC GABAergic connectivity in mice with MOG((35-55))-induced experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), a mouse model of MS.
We observed a strong reduction in the frequency of the spontaneous inhibitory post-synaptic currents (IPSCs) recorded from PCs during the symptomatic phase of the disease, and in presence of prominent microglia activation not only in the white matter (WM) but also in the molecular layer (ML).
The massive GABAergic innervation on PCs from basket and stellate cells was reduced and associated to a decrease of the number of these inhibitory interneurons.
On the contrary no significant loss of the PCs could be detected.
Incubation of interleukin-1beta (IL-1β) was sufficient to mimic the electrophysiological alterations observed in EAE mice.
We thus suggest that microglia and pro-inflammatory cytokines, together with a degeneration of basket and stellate cells and their synaptic terminals, contribute to impair GABAergic transmission on PCs during EAE.
Our results support a growing body of evidence that GABAergic signaling is compromised in EAE and in MS, and show a selective susceptibility to neuronal and synaptic degeneration of cerebellar inhibitory interneurons.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23777648
The MAO inhibitor phenelzine can improve functional outcomes in mice with established clinical signs in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE).
Many symptoms in multiple sclerosis (MS) can be related to changes in the levels of key neurotransmitters.
These neurotransmitters have a direct role in the maintenance of neurons and also have immunomodulatory properties.
Previously we have shown that when treatment began prior to the onset of clinical signs, daily treatment with the monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitor phenelzine (PLZ), which also elevates CNS levels of GABA, lead to substantial behavioral improvements in the experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), the animal model for MS.
To determine whether PLZ could have beneficial effects in an already established disease state, we conducted experiments in which PLZ treatment only began when mice with EAE exhibited the first clinical signs of the disease.
Using this more clinically relevant treatment approach, we find that PLZ treatment can reduce the severity of clinical signs and improve exploratory behaviors for the duration of the experiment in mice with EAE.
Treatment with PLZ did not affect the infiltration of CD4+ T-cells into the spinal cord nor did it reduce the degree of reactive gliosis as measured by Iba1 immunostaining.
Beginning PLZ treatment after the start of clinical signs did however lead to significantly better 5-HT innervation density in the ventral horn of the spinal cord and also resulted in higher levels of GABA, dopamine and norepinephrine in the brain and spinal cord.
These results indicate that even in an established EAE disease state, PLZ can have clinical benefits.
These benefits likely derive from PLZ's ability to normalize the innervation to ventral horn motor neuron pools as well as the elevations in GABA and biogenic amines that have been shown to have anti-inflammatory properties.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21925910
Schilder's disease: non-invasive diagnosis and successful treatment with human immunoglobulins.
Schilder's disease (SD) is a rare variant of multiple sclerosis with a predilection to children.
It is characterized by focal neurological abnormalities, which are atypical for MS, in conjunction with tumor-like white matter lesions on MRI.
We report the case of an 11-year-old girl that demonstrates two important features of the disease: a) the clinical presentation and subsequent course in conjunction with the serial neuroradiological findings stress the feasibility of a non-invasive diagnosis of SD; and b) we report a significant clinical response to treatment with intravenous human Immunoglobulins.
Copyright © 2011 European Paediatric Neurology Society.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22782458
4-aminopyridine toxicity: a case report and review of the literature.
4-Aminopyridine (4-AP) selectively blocks voltage-gated potassium channels, prolongs the action potential, increases calcium influx, and subsequently, enhances interneuronal and neuromuscular synaptic transmission.
This medication has been studied and used in many disease processes hallmarked by poor neuronal transmission in both the central and peripheral nervous systems including: multiple sclerosis (MS), spinal cord injuries (SCI), botulism, Lambert-Eaton syndrome, and myasthenia gravis.
It has also been postulated as a potential treatment of verapamil toxicity and reversal agent for anesthesia-induced neuromuscular blockade.
To date, there have been limited reports of either intentional or accidental 4-AP toxicity in humans.
Both a case of a patient with 4-AP toxicity and review of the literature are discussed, highlighting commonalities observed in overdose.
A 37-year-old man with progressive MS presented with diaphoresis, delirium, agitation, and choreathetoid movements after a presumed 4-AP overdose.
4-AP concentration at 6 h was 140 ng/mL.
With aggressive benzodiazepine administration and intubation, he recovered uneventfully.
The commonalities associated with 4-AP toxicity conforms to what is known about its mechanism of action combining cholinergic features including diaphoresis, altered mental status, and seizures with dopamine-related movement abnormalities including tremor, choreoathetosis, and dystonia.
Management of patients poisoned by 4-AP centers around good supportive care with definitive airway management and controlling CNS hyperexcitability aggressively with gamma-aminobutyric acid agonist agents.
Adjunctive use of dopamine antagonists for extrapyramidal effects after sedation is a treatment possibility.
As 4-aminopyridine recently received Federal Drug Administration approval for the treatment of ambulation in patients with MS, physicians should be keenly aware of its presentation, mechanism of action, and management in overdose.
PMID: 23778162
Concomitant analysis of arterial, venous, and CSF flows using phase-contrast MRI: a quantitative comparison between MS patients and healthy controls.
Venous dysfunction has recently been hypothesized to contribute to the pathophysiology of multiple sclerosis (MS).
2D phase-contrast (PC) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a non-invasive and innocuous technique enabling reliable quantification of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and blood flows in the same imaging session.
We compared PC-MRI measurements of CSF, arterial and venous flows in MS patients to those from a normative cohort of healthy controls (HC).
Nineteen MS patients underwent a standardized MR protocol for cerebral examination on a 3T system including Fast cine PC-MRI sequences with peripheral gating in four acquisition planes.
Quantitative data were processed using a homemade software to extract CSF and blood flow regions of interest, animate flows, and calculate cervical and intracranial vascular flow curves during the cardiac cycle (CC).
Results were compared with values obtained in 21 HC using multivariate analysis.
Venous flow patterns were comparable in both groups without signs of reflux.
Arterial flows (P=0.02) and cervical CSF dynamic oscillations (P=0.01) were decreased in MS patients.
No significant differences in venous cerebral and cervical outflows were observed between groups, thereby contradicting the recently proposed theory of venous insufficiency.
Unexpected decrease in arterial perfusion in MS patients warrants further correlation to volumetric measurements of the brain.
PMID: 21825217
No cerebral or cervical venous insufficiency in US veterans with multiple sclerosis.
To determine if chronic cerebral venous insufficiency exists in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) using ultrasonography and 4-dimensional color Doppler ultrasonography examination and unverified criteria proposed by Zamboni et al.
Patients with MS and clinically isolated syndrome were matched by age and sex with subjects with migraine or no neurological disease.
All subjects underwent gray-scale, color, and spectral Doppler ultrasonography examination of the internal jugular veins (IJVs), vertebral veins, and deep cerebral veins for stenosis, absence of signal, and reflux.
Academic MS center.
All patients with MS fulfilled revised McDonald criteria for the diagnosis of MS.
Patients with clinically isolated syndrome exhibited a typical transient focal neurological deficit and had magnetic resonance imaging lesions typical of MS.
Control subjects were recruited from the VA migraine clinic or staff.
Five parameters of venous outflow used by Zamboni et al were examined: (1) IJV or vertebral vein reflux, (2) deep cerebral vein reflux, (3) IJV stenosis, (4) absence of flow in IJVs or vertebral veins, and (5) change in cross-sectional area of the IJV with postural change.
There was no significant difference in the number and type of venous outflow abnormalities in patients with MS compared with controls.
This study does not support the theory that chronic cerebral venous insufficiency exists in MS.
PMID: 22341206
Rituximab in central nervous system manifestations of patients with primary Sjögren's syndrome: results from the AIR registry.
To evaluate the efficacy of rituximab in central nervous system (CNS) manifestations of patients with primary Sjögren's syndrome (pSS).
Prospective data from patients with pSS and CNS involvement included in the French AutoImmunity and Rituximab registry were analysed.
All patients had diffuse white matter T2-weigted hypersignals.
Neurological response was defined as improvement or disappearance of neurological signs.
Eleven patients (mean age 55 years [38-77]) were treated with rituximab for their neurological involvement.
The mean duration of pSS was 9 years (4-24).
Mean baseline ESSDAI score was 17 (5-25).
Neurological features were progressive multiple sclerosis-like manifestations (n=6), transverse myelitis (n=1), anxiety and depression disorder (n=1) and cognitive dysfunction (n=3).
Mean Expanded Disability Status Score (EDSS) before rituximab was 4 (3-5.5).
The mean follow-up was of 13 months (6-58).
No neurological change occurred in all 6 patients with multiple sclerosis-like symptoms, in 2/3 patients with cognitive dysfunction or in the patient with anxiety-depression.
One patient with depression and cognitive dysfunction disclosed subjective improvement.
One patient with transverse myelitis, refractory to cyclophosphamide had an improvement of his walk perimeter (160 meters vs. 116).
Mean EDSS score and ESSDAI remained stable.
Rituximab does not seem to be effective in progressive multiple sclerosis-like manifestations of patients with pSS-related CNS involvement.
PMID: 21825214
Myasthenia gravis-associated neuromyelitis optica-like disease: an immunological link between the central nervous system and muscle?
Although overt involvement of the central nervous system (CNS) in myasthenia gravis (MG) is considered rare, hyperreflexia is a common and yet unexplained finding.
Aquaporin 4 (AQP4), the target autoantigen in neuromyelitis optica, is expressed both in the CNS and in the neuromuscular junction.
To evaluate the prevalence of even mild CNS involvement in patients with MG and to identify features indicative of neuromyelitis optica-like disease.
Cohort study.
Outpatient clinic.
A cohort of 164 patients with MG.
In 24 patients with MG, signs of CNS involvement were detected; 15 of these patients had at least 1 additional paraclinical indication of neuromyelitis optica-like disease (presence of antibodies against AQP4, pathological visual evoked potentials, or white matter lesions detected on brain and/or spinal magnetic resonance imaging scans) and fulfilled the inclusion and exclusion criteria for our study.
Of the 15 patients who had at least 1 additional paraclinical indication of neuromyelitis optica-like disease, 14 had abnormal visual evoked potentials, and in 6 of 9 patients in whom magnetic resonance imaging was performed, there was evidence of lesions in the white matter of the brain and/or spinal cord.
Anti-AQP4 antibodies were detected in 7 patients (out of the 14 tested).
Thymic enlargement (hyperplasia or thymoma) was more frequent in patients with MG who had signs of CNS involvement than in patients with MG who did not.
The incidence of CNS involvement in MG is higher than previously reported and is expressed predominantly as a pyramidal syndrome accompanied by optical tract involvement (frequently subclinical).
These features bear some resemblance to neuromyelitis optica spectrum disease, supported also by the presence of anti-AQP4 antibodies in 7 of the 14 patients tested.
This association may represent a new nosological entity or may indicate that an autoimmune process targeting AQP4 is an integral part of the immunopathogenetic mechanisms in MG.
PMID: 21732666
A single intrathecal injection of DNA and an asymmetric cationic lipid as lipoplexes ameliorates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Intrathecal delivery of gene therapeutics is a route of administration that overcomes several of the limitations that plague current immunosuppressive treatments for autoimmune diseases of the central nervous system (CNS).
Here we report intrathecal delivery of small amounts (3 μg) of plasmid DNA that codes for an immunomodulatory fusion protein, OX40-TRAIL, composed of OX40, a tumor necrosis factor receptor, and tumor necrosis factor related apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL).
This DNA was delivered in a formulated nucleic acid-lipid complex (lipoplexes) with an asymmetric two-chain cationic lipid myristoyl (14:0) and lauroyl (12:1) rosenthal inhibitor-substituted compound (MLRI) formed from the tetraalkylammonium glycerol-based compound N-(1-(2,3-dioleoyloxy)-propyl-N-1-(2-hydroxy)ethyl)-N,N-dimethyl ammonium iodide.
Delivery and expression in the CNS of OX40-TRAIL in the mouse prior to onset of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model for multiple sclerosis, decreased the severity of clinical disease.
We believe this preclinical demonstration of rapid, widespread, and biologically therapeutic nonviral gene delivery to the CNS is important in further development of clinical lipid-based therapeutics for CNS disorders.
PMID: 22402204
Interferon, azathioprine and corticosteroids in multiple sclerosis: 6-year follow-up of the ASA cohort.
To evaluate long-term effects of 2-year treatment with interferon beta combined with low-dose azathioprine and prednisone in multiple sclerosis.
In the original 2-year ASA study, 181 patients with early relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis were randomised into 3 treatment arms: those treated with interferon beta (n=60), with interferon beta and low-dose azathioprine (n=58), and interferon beta, azathioprine and low-dose prednisone (n=63).
Of these, 172 were included in this 4-year non-study extension.
Three monthly clinical controls and annual MRI scans were carried out.
The primary endpoint was annual relapse activity.
The secondary endpoints were disability and quantitative MRI parameters.
Nine patients were lost to follow-up and 172 were included in the analyses.
None of relapse activity, disability accumulation or MRI parameters differed significantly between the groups over 6 years.
Only 5.5% and 0.6% of patients were free from disease activity at year 2 and year 6 of the treatment initiation.
The tested combined therapeutic regimen does not improve long-term outcomes in patients with multiple sclerosis.
Furthermore, interferon is not able to completely abolish disease activity.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21897447
Genome-wide homozygosity and multiple sclerosis in Orkney and Shetland Islanders.
There is strong evidence for both genetic and environmental risk factors comprising the aetiology of multiple sclerosis (MS).
While much progress has been made in recent years in identifying common genetic variants using genome-wide association studies, alternative approaches have remained relatively neglected.
The prevalence of MS in Orkney and Shetland is among the highest in the world.
Previous studies have suggested that a higher degree of parental relatedness in these isolated communities may contribute to the high rates of MS, indicating that recessive effects have an important role in MS aetiology.
The Northern Isles Multiple Sclerosis (NIMS) study investigated the potential role of genome-wide homozygosity in MS risk by genotyping 88 MS patients, 89 controls matched by age, sex and ancestry, and a further 89 controls matched for sex and ancestry, but passed the majority of lifetime risk of developing MS (&gt;70 years of age).
Three participants were removed on the basis of pedigree-genomic anomalies (n=263).
Three measures of genome-wide homozygosity were generated for each individual, and association with MS was assessed using logistic regression models.
No effect of genome-wide homozygosity was detected, indicating that inbreeding and consanguinity are not risk factors for MS in this population.
PMID: 23144775
Relevance of brain lesion location to cognition in relapsing multiple sclerosis.
To assess the relationship between cognition and brain white matter (WM) lesion distribution and frequency in patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RR MS).
MRI-based T2 lesion probability map (LPM) was used to assess the relevance of brain lesion location for cognitive impairment in a group of 142 consecutive patients with RRMS.
Significance of voxelwise analyses was p&lt;0.05, cluster-corrected for multiple comparisons.
The Rao Brief Repeatable Battery was administered at the time of brain MRI to categorize the MS population into cognitively preserved (CP) and cognitively impaired (CI).
Out of 142 RRMS, 106 were classified as CP and 36 as CI.
Although the CI group had greater WM lesion volume than the CP group (p = 0.001), T2 lesions tended to be less widespread across the WM.
The peak of lesion frequency was almost twice higher in CI (61% in the forceps major) than in CP patients (37% in the posterior corona radiata).
The voxelwise analysis confirmed that lesion frequency was higher in CI than in CP patients with significant bilateral clusters in the forceps major and in the splenium of the corpus callosum (p&lt;0.05, corrected).
Low scores of the Symbol Digit Modalities Test correlated with higher lesion frequency in these WM regions.
Overall these results suggest that in MS patients, areas relevant for cognition lie mostly in the commissural fiber tracts.
This supports the notion of a functional (multiple) disconnection between grey matter structures, secondary to damage located in specific WM areas, as one of the most important mechanisms leading to cognitive impairment in MS.
PMID: 22344829
An entropy-based nonparametric test for the validation of surrogate endpoints.
We present a nonparametric test to validate surrogate endpoints based on measure of divergence and random permutation.
This test is a proposal to directly verify the Prentice statistical definition of surrogacy.
The test does not impose distributional assumptions on the endpoints, and it is robust to model misspecification.
Our simulation study shows that the proposed nonparametric test outperforms the practical test of the Prentice criterion in terms of both robustness of size and power.
We also evaluate the performance of three leading methods that attempt to quantify the effect of surrogate endpoints.
The proposed method is applied to validate magnetic resonance imaging lesions as the surrogate endpoint for clinical relapses in a multiple sclerosis trial.
Copyright © 2012 John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd.
PMID: 21352349
Cardiac arrhythmia induced by interferon beta-1a.
Cardiac adverse effects have never been reported with interferon (INF) beta.
We report a case of left bundle branch block in a 35-year-old woman treated with INF beta-1a for multiple sclerosis.
Five years after INF therapy, she presented loss of consciousness, retrosternal pains, short breath and lowered tolerance of effort.
ECG and Holter 24-h ECG monitoring revealed permanent complete left bundle branch block.
Nine months after stopping INF, no abnormalities were found at ECG and echocardiogram examination.
© 2011 The Authors Fundamental and Clinical Pharmacology © 2011 Société Française de Pharmacologie et de Thérapeutique.
PMID: 21513711
Contrasting effects of TNF and anti-TNF on the activation of effector T cells and regulatory T cells in autoimmunity.
Anti-TNF treatment is effective in a majority of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), however, this treatment can unexpectedly trigger the onset or exacerbate multiple sclerosis (MS).
Recent progress in cellular immunology research provides a new framework to analyze the possible mechanism underlying these puzzling contradictory effects.
The delicate balance of protective CD4(+)FoxP3(+) regulatory T cells (Tregs) and pathogenic CD4(+)FoxP3(-) effector T cells (Teffs) is crucial for the outcome of anti-TNF treatment of autoimmune disease.
There is convincing evidence that TNF, in addition to stimulating Teffs, is able to activate and expand Tregs through TNFR2, which is preferentially expressed by Tregs.
Therefore, the contrasting effects of TNF on Tregs and Teffs are likely to determine the therapeutic effect of anti-TNF treatment.
In this review, we discuss the current understanding of the general effect of TNF on the activation of T cells, and the impact of TNF on the function of Teffs and Tregs.
Understanding the differential effects of TNF on Teffs and Tregs is fundamentally required for the design of more effective and safer anti-TNF or anti-TNF receptor(s) therapeutic strategy for autoimmune diseases.
Published by Elsevier B.V.
PMID: 22354705
Cannabinoids and muscular pain. Effectiveness of the local administration in rat.
Pain associated with musculoskeletal disorders can be difficult to control and the incorporation of new approaches for its treatment is an interesting challenge.
Activation of cannabinoid (CB) receptors decreases nociceptive transmission in acute, inflammatory and neuropathic pain states; however, although the use of cannabis derivatives has been recently accepted as a useful alternative for the treatment of spasticity and pain in patients with multiple sclerosis, the effects of CB receptor agonists in muscular pain have hardly been studied.
Here, we characterized the antinociceptive effect of non selective and selective CB agonists by systemic and local administration, in two muscular models of pain, masseter and gastrocnemius, induced by hypertonic saline (HS) injection.
Drugs used were: the non-selective agonist WIN 55,212-2 and two selective agonists, ACEA (CB 1) and JWH 015 (CB 2); AM 251 (CB 1) and AM 630 (CB 2) were used as selective antagonists.
In the masseter pain model, both systemic (intraperitoneal) and local (intramuscular) administration of CB 1 and CB 2 agonists reduced the nociceptive behaviour induced by HS, whereas in the gastrocnemius model the local administration was more effective than systemic.Conclusions:Our results provide evidence that both, CB 1 and CB 2 receptors can contribute to muscular antinociception and, interestingly, suggest that the local administration of CB agonists could be a new and useful pharmacological strategy in the treatment of muscular pain, avoiding adverse effects induced by systemic administration.
© 2012 European Federation of International Association for the Study of Pain Chapters.
PMID: 22012268
Discrepant effects of human interferon-gamma on clinical and immunological disease parameters in a novel marmoset model for multiple sclerosis.
The core pathogenic process in the common marmoset model of multiple sclerosis (MS) is the activation of memory-like T cells specific for peptide 34 to 56 derived from the extracellular domain of myelin/oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG(34-56)).
Immunization with MOG(34-56) in incomplete Freund's adjuvant is a sufficient stimulus for in vivo activation of these T cells, together with the induction of MS-like disease and CNS pathology.
Ex vivo functional characteristics of MOG(34-56) specific T cells are specific cytolysis of peptide pulsed target cells and high IL-17A production.
To indentify possible functions in this new model of T helper 1 cells, which play a central pathogenic role in MS models induced with complete Freund's adjuvant, we tested the effect of human interferon-γ (IFNγ) administration during disease initiation of the disease (day 0-25) and around the time of disease expression (psd 56-81).
The results show a clear modulatory effect of early IFNγ treatment on humoral and cellular autoimmune parameters, but no generalized mitigating effect on the disease course.
These results argue against a prominent pathogenic role of T helper 1 cells in this new marmoset EAE model.
PMID: 21838759
Insights into the pharmacological relevance of lysophospholipid receptors.
The discovery of lysophospholipid (LP) 7-transmembrane, G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) that began in the 1990s, together with research into the functional roles of the major LPs known as lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) and sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P), have opened new research avenues into their biological processes and mechanisms.
Major examples of LP signalling effects include embryogenesis, nervous system development, vascular development, uterine implantation, immune cell trafficking, and inflammatory reactions.
LP signalling also influences the pathophysiology of many diseases including cancer, autoimmune and inflammatory diseases, which indicate that LP receptors may be attractive targets for pharmacological therapies.
A key example of such a therapeutic agent is the S1P receptor modulator FTY720, which upon phosphorylation and continued drug exposure, acts as an S1P receptor functional antagonist.
This compound (also known as fingolimod or Gilenya) has recently been approved by the FDA for the treatment of relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis.
Continued basic and translational research on LP signalling should provide novel insights into both basic biological mechanisms, as well as novel therapeutic approaches to combat a range of human diseases.
© 2011 The Authors.
British Journal of Pharmacology © 2011 The British Pharmacological Society.
PMID: 22138643
Cytosolic RIG-I-like helicases act as negative regulators of sterile inflammation in the CNS.
The action of cytosolic RIG-I-like helicases (RLHs) in the CNS during autoimmunity is largely unknown.
Using a mouse model of multiple sclerosis, we found that mice lacking the RLH adaptor IPS-1 developed exacerbated disease that was accompanied by markedly higher inflammation, increased axonal damage and elevated demyelination with increased encephalitogenic immune responses.
Furthermore, activation of RLH ligands such as 5'-triphosphate RNA oligonucleotides decreased CNS inflammation and improved clinical signs of disease.
RLH stimulation repressed the maintenance and expansion of committed T(H)1 and T(H)17 cells, whereas T-cell differentiation was not altered.
Notably, T(H)1 and T(H)17 suppression required type I interferon receptor engagement on dendritic cells, but not on macrophages or microglia.
These results identify RLHs as negative regulators of T(H)1 and T(H)17 responses in the CNS, demonstrate a protective role of the RLH pathway for brain inflammation, and establish oligonucleotide ligands of RLHs as potential therapeutics for the treatment of multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 24250889
Clinical and demographic factors affecting disease severity in patients with multiple sclerosis.
The clinical course of multiple sclerosis (MS) evolves over many years.
Its prognosis is highly variable among affected individuals, i.e. while some suffer from early severe disabilities, others remain ambulatory and functional for many years.
We used Multiple Sclerosis Severity Score (MSSS) and the new classification for MS severity Herbert et al. introduced in 2006 according to MSSS, to investigate some clinical and demographic factors as potential indicators of disease severity in in MS.
During a six-month period, patients with definite MS according to the revised McDonald's criteria who referred to three neurology and MS clinics in Tehran (Iran) were included in the study.
All patients were interviewed and examined by a neurology resident who had been trained for employing the Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS).
For each patient, MSSS was determined by using EDSS and disease duration.
Overall, 338 (266 female and 72 male) patients were enrolled.
Among demographic features, gender, younger age at onset, positive family history, and parental consanguinity were not associated with disease severity.
Education was weakly associated with disease severity.
Among clinical factors, presenting symptoms such as poly-symptomatic attacks, walking difficulty, and upper and lower extremity dysfunction were associated with more disability while presentation with optic neuritis had better prognosis.
Complete recovery after the first attack, longer interval between the first and second attacks, lower number of symptoms at presentation, shorter duration of attacks, and relapsing-remitting course were associated with less disability and better prognosis.
These results were noticed in ordinal logistic regression.
However when multiple logistic regression was performed, the strongest determinant of disease severity was disease course with odds ratio (OR) = 49.12 for secondary progressive course and OR = 53.25 for primary progressive (± relapse) course.
Walking difficulty as the presenting symptom had a borderline association with disease severity (OR = 2.31; P = 0.055).
Increased number of onset symptoms was associated (but not significantly) with more severe disease.
Early prediction of disease severity by demographic and clinical features is currently impossible.
We need to determine stronger predictors, possibly a combination of demographic, clinical, biomarkers, and imaging findings.
PMID: 22366800
A representative cohort of patients with non-progressive multiple sclerosis at the age of normal life expectancy.
Multiple sclerosis may have a non-progressive symptomatology for decades; however, it is not clear whether the disease activity may abate completely.
We identified a cohort of patients, resident in Gothenburg at the time of disease onset, between the years 1950-64 (n = 307).
These geographical and temporal restrictions, along with favourable conditions for a 'spider' epidemiological study, were optimal for an unbiased selection; this 15-year incidence cohort was essentially followed prospectively for 37-59 years after onset.
The shortest follow-up time for patients without primary or secondary progression was 45 years.
For patients with an initial relapsing-remitting course and multiple sclerosis diagnosis according to the Poser criteria (n = 202), the probability of non-progressive disease after 40 years was 22% (standard error 3.0%), and after 50 years it was 14% (standard error 3.2%).
For attack onset including patients with possible multiple sclerosis, the corresponding probabilities after 40 and 50 years were 35% (standard error 3.3%) and 28% (standard error 3.5%), respectively.
At the last follow-up in 2009-10, when patients reached the average age of the Swedish population life expectancy, only 13 patients from the multiple sclerosis diagnosis cohort, according to the Poser criteria, remained alive and non-progressive.
Their annualized attack frequency diminished with time from 0.29 to 0.015.
These patients had been functioning well socially.
Nine patients had an Expanded Disability Status Scale score of 0-2.5, and four patients had a score of 3 or 3.5, with deficits dating back to attacks decades ago.
Eight patients participated in a complete neuropsychological examination, which showed a slight difference (P &lt; 0.01) concerning verbal memory and executive function compared to an age and socially matched reference group, whereas results for five other cognitive domains were within the normal range.
Magnetic resonance images fulfilled the Barkhof-Tintoré criteria for multiple sclerosis in 10 of 11 patients, with conspicuously few subcortical lesions relative to extensive periventricular lesions and lesions extending from the inferior midline aspect of the corpus callosum.
Prediction of the non-progressive stage was possible with moderate hazard ratios and low sensitivity.
Early features that predicted a non-progressive course were complete remission of the onset attack, low or moderate initial relapse frequency and-when the patients with possible multiple sclerosis were included-dominating afferent symptoms.
The clinical disease activity had abated in these 13 patients, with the caveat that transition to secondary progression continued to occur after four decades, albeit with decreasing risk.
PMID: 24205443
Body Mass Index in Multiple Sclerosis: Associations with CSF Neurotransmitter Metabolite Levels.
Body weight and height of patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) or clinically isolated syndrome suggesting MS (CIS) in the age range 18 to 60 years (154 males and 315 females) were compared with those of subjects (146 males and 212 females) free of any major neurological disease.
In drug-free patients, CSF levels of the metabolites of noradrenaline (MHPG), serotonin (5-HIAA), and dopamine (HVA), neurotransmitters involved in eating behavior, were estimated in searching for associations with body mass index (BMI).
Statistical evaluations were done separately for males and females.
Lower BMI was found in female MS patients compared to female controls, more pronounced in RRMS.
BMI was not associated with duration of illness, smoking, present or previous drug treatment, or disability score.
Body height showed a shift towards greater values in MS patients compared to controls.
Patients in the lower BMI quartile (limits defined from control subjects) had lower 5-HIAA and HVA compared to patients in the upper quartile.
The results provide evidence for weight reduction during disease process in MS, possibly related to deficits in serotoninergic and dopaminergic activities that develop during disease course, resulting in impairments in food reward capacity and in motivation to eat.
PMID: 22659298
Altered microRNA expression in B lymphocytes in multiple sclerosis: towards a better understanding of treatment effects.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are posttranscriptional regulators of gene expression.
We compared the expression of 1059 miRNAs in B lymphocytes from untreated and natalizumab treated relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) patients and healthy volunteers (HV).
Forty nine miRNAs were down-regulated in untreated MS patients compared with HV.
A distinct pattern of 10 differentially expressed miRNAs was found in natalizumab treated patients compared with untreated patients.
Two clusters, i.e. miR-106b-25 and miR-17-92, were particularly deregulated.
MiRNA-mRNA interaction analysis revealed B cell receptor, phosphatidyl-inositol-3-kinase (PI3K) and phosphatase and tensin homology (PTEN) signaling being the key affected pathways.
We discovered deregulated viral miRNAs in untreated patients as compared with HV and natalizumab treated patients, a novel finding that may be related to latency and activation of viruses in MS.
Our findings provide first insights into miRNA dependent regulation of B cell function in MS and the impact of a therapy not primarily targeting B cells on this regulation.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21969238
Tau protein: a possible prognostic factor in optic neuritis and multiple sclerosis.
Tau protein has been proposed as biomarker of axonal damage leading to irreversible neurological impairment in MS.
CSF concentrations may be useful when determining risk of progression from ON to MS.
To investigate the association between tau protein concentration and 14-3-3 protein in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of patients with monosymptomatic optic neuritis (ON) versus patients with monosymptomatic onset who progressed to multiple sclerosis (MS).
To evaluate results against data found in a complete literature review.
A total of 66 patients with MS and/or ON from the Department of Neurology of Glostrup Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Denmark, were included.
CSF samples were analysed for tau protein and 14-3-3 protein, and clinical and paraclinical information was obtained from medical records.
The study shows a significantly increased concentration of tau protein in CSF from patients with relapsing-remitting MS and patients monosymptomatic at onset who progressed to MS, but interestingly no increased tau protein concentration in monosymptomatic ON.
The concentration of tau protein was significantly correlated to Expanded Disability Status Scale score.
No 14-3-3 protein was detected in any CSF sample.
The results of this study invite further exploration of the possible role of tau protein as a prognostic factor to predict progression from ON to MS in future studies.
PMID: 21969239
Effect of time of day on walking capacity and self-reported fatigue in persons with multiple sclerosis: a multi-center trial.
Many persons with multiple sclerosis (PwMS) report increased fatigue in the afternoon and evening compared with the morning.
It is commonly accepted that physical capacity also decreases as time of day progresses, potentially influencing the outcomes of testing.
The objective of this article was to determine whether self-reported fatigue level and walking capacity are influenced by time of day in PwMS.
A total of 102 PwMS from 8 centers in 5 countries, with a diverse level of ambulatory dysfunction (Expanded Disability Status Scale [EDSS] &lt;6.5), participated.
Patients performed walking capacity tests and reported fatigue level at three different time points (morning, noon, afternoon) during 1 day.
Walking capacity was measured with the 6-Minute Walk Test (6MWT) and the 10-m walk test performed at usual and fastest speed.
Self-reported fatigue was measured by the Rochester Fatigue Diary (RFD).
Subgroups with mild (EDSS 1.5-4.0, n = 53) and moderate (EDSS 4.5-6.5, n = 49) ambulatory dysfunction were formed, as changes during the day were hypothesized to depend on disability status.
Subgroups had different degree of ambulatory dysfunction (p &lt; 0.001) but reported similar fatigue levels.
Although RFD scores were affected by time of day with significant differences between morning and noon/afternoon (p &lt; 0.0001), no changes in walking capacity were found in any subgroup.
Additional analyses on subgroups distinguished by diurnal change in self-reported fatigue failed to reveal analogous changes in walking capacity.
Testing of walking capacity is unaffected by time of day, despite changes in subjective fatigue.
PMID: 23812288
HPA axis activity in multiple sclerosis correlates with disease severity, lesion type and gene expression in normal-appearing white matter.
The hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis is activated in most, but not all multiple sclerosis (MS) patients and is implicated in disease progression and comorbid mood disorders.
In this post-mortem study, we investigated how HPA axis activity in MS is related to disease severity, neurodegeneration, depression, lesion pathology and gene expression in normal-appearing white matter (NAWM).
In 42 MS patients, HPA axis activity was determined by measuring cortisol in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and counting hypothalamic corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH)-expressing neurons.
Degree of neurodegeneration was based on levels of glutamate, tau and neurofilament in CSF.
Duration of MS and time to EDSS 6 served as indicators of disease severity.
Glutamate levels correlated with numbers of CRH-expressing neurons, most prominently in primary progressive MS patients, suggesting that neurodegeneration is a strong determinant of HPA axis activity.
High cortisol levels were associated with slower disease progression, especially in females with secondary progressive MS.
Patients with low cortisol levels had greater numbers of active lesions and tended towards having less remyelinated plaques than patients with high cortisol levels.
Interestingly, NAWM of patients with high cortisol levels displayed elevated expression of glucocorticoid-responsive genes, such as CD163, and decreased expression of pro-inflammatory genes, such as tumor necrosis factor-α.
Thus, HPA axis hyperactivity in MS coincides with low inflammation and/or high neurodegeneration, and may impact on lesion pathology and molecular mechanisms in NAWM and thereby be of great importance for suppression of disease activity.
PMID: 22425067
Short interval intracortical facilitation correlates with the degree of disability in multiple sclerosis.
The Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) is the most widely used measure of disability in MS, however because of its limitations surrogate markers of clinical disability progression are of high interest.
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) measures of demyelination and cortical excitability correlate with disability levels in MS.
Aim of this study was testing whether paired pulse (pp) TMS represents a reliable surrogate marker to measure clinical disability in MS. ppTMS measures of intracortical synaptic transmission such as short interval intracortical inhibition (SICI), long interval intracortical inhibition (LICI), short interval intracortical facilitation (SICF) and intracortical facilitation (ICF) were collected from 74 patients affected by MS.
Correlation of EDSS scores with ppTMS measures was analyzed.
EDSS scores correlated with patient's age, disease duration, Motor Evoked Potentials latency and thresholds and SICF measures but not with age of onset, SICI, ICF and LICI.
These findings support a possible use of SICF and MEP latency as surrogate markers of disability in MS.
Further research is warranted to determine the role of SICF in the follow up of disease progression and to validate its use as an endpoint in multiple sclerosis clinical trials.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23242079
Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis presenting as neuromyelitis optica.
Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE) is a slowly progressing inflammatory and degenerative disorder of the brain caused by a mutant measles virus.
The diagnosis of SSPE is based on characteristic clinical and EEG findings (periodic complexes) and demonstration of elevated antibody titres against measles in cerebrospinal fluid.
SSPE can have atypical clinical features at the onset.
The authors here report a case of a 3-year-old child who presented with vision loss followed 15 months later by quadriparesis with bladder involvement.
These clinical features resembled that of neuromyelitis optica.
However, as the disease progressed, appearance of myoclonic jerks, periodic discharges on EEG and positive cerebrospinal fluid serology for measles led to the final diagnosis of SSPE.
PMID: 22107156
Managed approaches to multiple sclerosis in special populations.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic demyelinating disorder of the  central nervous system that is classified as an immune-mediated inflammatory  disease.
In managed care, patients with MS can be managed through care  coordination that engages an interprofessional approach to a comprehensive  spectrum of preventive, medical, rehabilitative, cognitive, and long-term health  care services.
In addition, the management paradigm for MS is currently in a  stage of rapid evolution, with a number of new agents, including more oral  drugs, expected to become available in the near future.
Pharmacy and therapeutic  committees may soon be faced with evaluating a hierarchy of new scientific data  to differentiate the safety and efficacy of these new agents.
Decisions will  need to be made regarding the utility of these potential new agents among  existing therapies with longer-term safety and efficacy data available in the  scientific literature.
For those MS patients managed under Medicaid, formulary  and medication management decisions may be further impacted by psychosocial,  cultural, educational, attitudinal, and/or economic factors that may be unique  to the Medicaid population.
The need to maximize immediate and long-term  resource utilization is usually an important consideration when managing a  Medicaid population.
There is also an increasing focus on quality measures and  quality outcomes by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
Many managed  care professionals can be involved in establishing quality measures and quality  improvement processes to effectively appropriate and manage the resources  required for Medicaid patients with MS.
As a result, medication and medical  management of this special population can involve a comprehensive approach by  managed care professionals.
For purposes of this article, the term special  populations applies to patients with MS who are managed under Medicaid plans.
To review (a) particular challenges managed care organizations  (MCOs) encounter when managing special populations of Medicaid patients with MS,  (b) recent efficacy and safety data for oral therapies for relapsing forms of  MS, (c) costs of current MS therapies, and (d) potential strategies for managed  care to improve care of their MS patient population and optimize clinical and  economic outcomes.
Review of recent published literature, abstracts  related to MS presented at major medical conferences, and recommendations from  key organizations including the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services and  the National Multiple Sclerosis Society.
The health economics of MS are  a central issue for MCOs managing Medicaid patient populations.
Additional  challenges include the anticipated expansion of the marketplace to include  several new oral agents and the lack of consensus guidelines for management of  patients with MS.
The benefit-risk profile of new agents will need to be  considered in the context of established first-line parenteral drugs.
Management  of patients with MS should include an individualized approach for each patient  as part of a shared decision-making process.
In the overall management of  special patient populations, case management and collaborative practice models  in managed care may help to ensure that critical benchmarks are achieved.
PMID: 22146409
Comparison of two dosing frequencies of subcutaneous interferon beta-1a in patients with a first clinical demyelinating event suggestive of multiple sclerosis (REFLEX): a phase 3 randomised controlled trial.
In patients presenting with a first clinical demyelinating event that is suggestive of multiple sclerosis (MS), treatment with interferon beta can delay the occurrence of further attacks and the onset of MS.
We investigated the effects of two dosing frequencies of subcutaneous interferon beta-1a in patients with a first clinical demyelinating event.
We undertook a multicentre phase 3 study (REbif FLEXible dosing in early MS [REFLEX]) that included patients (aged 18-50 years) with a single clinical event suggestive of MS, and at least two clinically silent T2 lesions on brain MRI.
Participants were randomly assigned in a 1:1:1 ratio by use of a centralised interactive voice response system to receive the serum-free formulation of subcutaneous interferon beta-1a 44 μg three times a week or once a week (plus placebo twice a week for masking), or placebo three times a week for up to 24 months.
Patients and physicians were masked to group allocation.
The primary endpoint was time to a diagnosis of MS as defined by the 2005 McDonald criteria and the main secondary endpoint was time to clinically definite MS (CDMS) as defined by the Poser criteria.
Analysis was by intention to treat.
The study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00404352.
517 patients were randomly assigned (171 to subcutaneous interferon beta-1a three times a week, 175 to subcutaneous interferon beta-1a once a week, and 171 to placebo) and 515 were treated.
The 2-year cumulative probability of McDonald MS was significantly lower in patients treated with subcutaneous interferon beta-1a (three times a week 62·5%, p&lt;0·0001, hazard ratio [HR] 0·49 [95% CI 0·38-0·64]; once a week 75·5%, p=0·008, HR 0·69 [0·54-0·87]) versus placebo (85·8%).
2-year rates of conversion to CDMS were lower for both interferon beta-1a dosing regimens (three times a week 20·6%, p=0·0004, HR 0·48 [0·31-0·73]; once a week 21·6%, p=0·0023, HR 0·53 [0·35-0·79]) than for placebo (37·5%).
Adverse events were within the established profile for subcutaneous interferon beta-1a.
Both regimens of subcutaneous interferon beta-1a delayed clinical relapses and subclinical disease activity.
The potential differences between the regimens warrant longer-term study.
Merck Serono SA, Geneva, Switzerland.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22414400
[Emotions and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a psychopathological perspective].
Emotions have not often been studied in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Most existing studies have assessed the psychopathological manifestations involved, essentially depression and less frequently anxiety.
The results have shown that major depressive episodes and anxious episodes are not frequent in ALS patients, although moderate depressive or anxious symptoms are often observed, but less frequently than in other diseases like multiple sclerosis or Parkinson's disease.
Depressive symptoms are not correlated to the duration or severity of the disease.
This has led us to investigate the coping mechanisms involved in ALS.
Results of previously published studies have shown that they did not differ from those observed in other somatic diseases, but ALS patients show more frequent concern with spirituality and religious preoccupations.
It thus appears necessary to make a more detailed study of how ALS patients cope with the disease and its ominous consequences.
Emotional processing difficulties may be a factor underlying quite diverse somatic and psychological disorders.
The Baker's model propose five stages in emotional processing: emotional experience, emotional expression, labelling, linkage and awareness.
Assessment of the emotional processing used by ALS patients should improve our comprehension of their adaptive functioning.
The patients' caregivers play an essential role, and studies have shown that they often suffer themselves from depression and the burdens involved, and that the perceived social support has an impact on the quality of life and on the depression of the patients.
Therefore, it seems important to assess the emotional processing not only of patients but also of their caregivers.
PMID: 22081216
Response shift in patients with multiple sclerosis: an application of three statistical techniques.
With the evolution of theory and methods for detecting recalibration, reprioritization, and reconceptualization response shifts, the time has come to evaluate and compare the current statistical detection techniques.
This manuscript presents an overview of a cross-method validation done on the same patient sample.
Three statistical techniques were used: Structural Equation Modeling, Latent Trajectory Analysis, and Recursive Partitioning and Regression Tree modeling.
The study sample (n = 3,008) was drawn from the North American Research Committee on Multiple Sclerosis (NARCOMS) Registry to represent patients soon after diagnosis, classified as having either a self-reported relapsing, progressive, or stable disease trajectory.
Patient-reported outcomes included the disease-specific Performance Scales and the Patient-Derived Disease Steps, and the generic SF-12v2 measure.
Small response shift effect sizes were detected by all of the methods.
Recalibration response shift was detected by Structural Equation Modeling, Recursive Partitioning Regression Tree demonstrated patterns consistent with all three types of response shift, and Latent Trajectory Analysis, although unable to distinguish types of response shift, did detect response shift in less than 1% of the sample.
The methods and their findings were discussed for operationalization, interpretability, assumptions, ability to use all data points from the study sample, limitations, and strengths.
Directions for future research are discussed.
PMID: 22362474
[Normalisation and validation of the Brief Neuropsychological Battery as the reference neuropsychological test in multiple sclerosis].
INTRODUCTION.
The current batteries such as the Brief Repeatable Battery of Neuropsychological Tests (BRB-N) for evaluating cognitive decline in patients with multiple sclerosis are complex and time-consuming.
AIM.
To obtain normative values and validate a new battery.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS.
Four neuropsychological tests were finally included (episodic memory, the Symbol-Digit Modalities Test, a category fluency test, and the Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test).
Normative values (overall and by age group) were derived by administering the battery to healthy subjects (5th percentile was the limit of normal).
External validity was explored by comparison with the BRB-N.
The new battery was also administered to a subsample after 4 weeks to assess reproducibility.
RESULTS.
To provide normative data, 1036 healthy subjects were recruited.
The mean completion time was 18.5 ± 5.2 minutes.
For the 229 subjects who were administered the new battery and the BRB-N, no statistically significant differences were found except for mean completion time (19 ± 4 vs 25 ± 5 minutes).
In the reproducibility study, there were no significant differences except in the memory tests.
CONCLUSION.
The scores on the new battery and the BRB-N were strongly correlated although the shorter completion time and ease of administration could make the new battery preferable in clinical practice.
PMID: 23217086
Self-assessed health status changes in a community cohort of people with multiple sclerosis: 11 years of follow-up.
Few data are available on the health status of people with multiple sclerosis (PwMS) in the community.
We assessed changes in self-perceived health status and health related quality of life of a community-based cohort of PwMS over a decade, and identified predictors of such changes.
In 1999 we started the POSMOS study (Postal Survey of Self-Assessed Health of MS Adults and their Significant Others) on a random sample of 251 adults with MS from the Milan area (mean age 42 years, range 18-71 years), and prospectively assessed changes in self-perceived health status over 11 years.
Participants completed the Multiple Sclerosis Quality-of-Life-54 (MSQOL-54) and a general/clinical questionnaire.
We re-assessed the cohort in 2004 and 2010, sending the same questionnaires plus the Chicago Multiscale Depression Inventory.
There were 205 (86%) respondents in 2004, 171 (74%) in 2010; 28 (11%) died during the study.
Severely impaired [self-determined Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) &gt; 6.5] increased from 19% to 32%.
One-fifth remained fully ambulatory (EDSS &lt;4.0): 25% women (median age 44 years [interquartile range, IQR 39-53], median years from diagnosis 16 [IQR 12-19]); and 17% men (median age 40 years [IQR 38-45], median years from diagnosis 14 [IQR 12-17]).
Changes in MSQOL-54 composite scores were negligible; but among individual scales, change in health, cognitive function and general health worsened, and social function and emotional wellbeing improved significantly.
Depressive symptoms were high and stable.
Multiple sclerosis had a pervasive but inhomogeneous impact on the lives of our MS sufferers.
Notwithstanding overall clinical deterioration and aging, hospital admissions and medical consultations decreased, suggesting reduced use of health care resources.
By contrast, housing adaptations and home care increased, psychological burden was high and self-perceived cognitive functioning worsened.
© 2012 The Author(s) European Journal of Neurology © 2012 EFNS.
PMID: 21590721
Calibration and validation of TRUST MRI for the estimation of cerebral blood oxygenation.
Recently, a T(2) -Relaxation-Under-Spin-Tagging (TRUST) MRI technique was developed to quantitatively estimate blood oxygen saturation fraction (Y) via the measurement of pure blood T(2) .
This technique has shown promise for normalization of fMRI signals, for the assessment of oxygen metabolism, and in studies of cognitive aging and multiple sclerosis.
However, a human validation study has not been conducted.
In addition, the calibration curve used to convert blood T(2) to Y has not accounted for the effects of hematocrit (Hct).
In this study, we first conducted experiments on blood samples under physiologic conditions, and the Carr-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill T(2) was determined for a range of Y and Hct values.
The data were fitted to a two-compartment exchange model to allow the characterization of a three-dimensional plot that can serve to calibrate the in vivo data.
Next, in a validation study in humans, we showed that arterial Y estimated using TRUST MRI was 0.837 ± 0.036 (N=7) during the inhalation of 14% O2, which was in excellent agreement with the gold-standard Y values of 0.840 ± 0.036 based on Pulse-Oximetry.
These data suggest that the availability of this calibration plot should enhance the applicability of T(2) -Relaxation-Under-Spin-Tagging MRI for noninvasive assessment of cerebral blood oxygenation.
Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
PMID: 22177943
Investigation of autoantibody profiles for cerebrospinal fluid biomarker discovery in patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
Using the UNIarray® marker technology platform, cerebrospinal fluid immunoglobulin G reactivities of 15 controls and 17 RRMS patients against human recombinant proteins were investigated.
Patient cerebrospinal fluids were oligoclonal band positive and reactivities were compared to that of sex- and age-matched controls.
We hereby aimed at the characterization of autoreactivity in patients with RRMS.
Differences in autoreactivities between control and RRMS samples were identified comprising autoantigens identified in this study only and previously reported autoantigens as well.
A combination of the 10-15 most significant proteins may be investigated further as autoantigens for diagnostic purposes.
Additional investigations may include minimizing the number of proteins used in such diagnostic tests.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21590725
Optimized double inversion recovery for reduction of T₁ weighting in fluid-attenuated inversion recovery.
Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) is a routinely used technique in clinical practice to detect long T(2) lesions by suppressing the cerebrospinal fluid.
Concerns remain, however, that the inversion pulse in FLAIR imparts T(1) weighting that can decrease the detectability and mischaracterize some lesions.
Hence, FLAIR is usually acquired in conjunction with a standard T(2) to guard against these concerns.
Recently, double inversion recovery (DIR) preparations have highlighted certain types of lesions by suppressing both cerebrospinal fluid and white matter but produce even stronger T(1) contrast than FLAIR.
This work shows that the inversion times in a DIR sequence can be optimized to minimize unwanted T(1) weighting, enabling the acquisition of cerebrospinal fluid-suppressed images with pure T(2) weighting.
This technique is referred to as T(1) -nulled DIR.
The theory to determine the optimized inversion times is discussed and the results are shown by simulations, normal volunteer studies, and multiple sclerosis patient studies.
T(1) -nulled DIR provides equivalent or superior contrast between gray and white matters as well as white matter and multiple sclerosis lesion at the same repetition time.
Multiple sclerosis lesions appeared sharper on T(1) -nulled DIR compared to FLAIR.
T(1) -nulled DIR has the potential to replace the combination of standard T(2) and FLAIR acquisitions in many clinical protocols.
Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
PMID: 21941466
Regulation by glycogen synthase kinase-3 of inflammation and T cells in CNS diseases.
Elevated markers of neuroinflammation have been found to be associated with many psychiatric and neurodegenerative diseases, such as mood disorders, Alzheimer's disease, and multiple sclerosis (MS).
Since neuroinflammation is thought to contribute to the pathophysiology of these diseases and to impair responses to therapeutic interventions and recovery, it is important to identify mechanisms that regulate neuroinflammation and potential targets for controlling neuroinflammation.
Recent findings have demonstrated that glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK3) is an important regulator of both the innate and adaptive immune systems' contributions to inflammation.
Studies of the innate immune system have shown that inhibitors of GSK3 profoundly alter the repertoire of cytokines that are produced both by peripheral and central cells, reducing pro-inflammatory cytokines, and increasing anti-inflammatory cytokines.
Furthermore, inhibitors of GSK3 promote tolerance to inflammatory stimuli, reducing inflammatory cytokine production upon repeated exposure.
Studies of the adaptive immune system have shown that GSK3 regulates the production of cytokines by T cells and the differentiation of T cells to subtypes, particularly Th17 cells.
Regulation of transcription factors by GSK3 appears to play a prominent role in its regulation of immune responses, including of NF-κB, cyclic AMP response element binding protein, and signal transducer and activator of transcription-3.
Invivo studies have shown that GSK3 inhibitors ameliorate clinical symptoms of both peripheral and central inflammatory diseases, particularly experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, the animal model of MS.
Therefore, the development and application of GSK3 inhibitors may provide a new therapeutic strategy to reduce neuroinflammation associated with many central nervous system diseases.
PMID: 22052286
An aggregation sensing reporter identifies leflunomide and teriflunomide as polyglutamine aggregate inhibitors.
Intracellular protein aggregation is a common pathologic feature in neurodegenerative diseases such as Huntington' disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Parkinson' disease.
Although progress towards understanding protein aggregation in vitro has been made, little of this knowledge has translated to patient therapy.
Moreover, mechanisms controlling aggregate formation and catabolism in cellulo remain poorly understood.
One limitation is the lack of tools to quantitatively monitor protein aggregation and disaggregation.
Here, we developed a protein-aggregation reporter that uses huntingtin exon 1 containing 72 glutamines fused to the N-terminal end of firefly luciferase (httQ72-Luc). httQ72-Luc fails to aggregate unless seeded by a non-luciferase-containing polyglutamine (polyQ) protein such as Q80-cfp.
Upon co-aggregation, httQ72-luc becomes insoluble and loses its enzymatic activity.
Using httQ72-Luc with Q80(CFP/YFP) as seeds, we screened the Johns Hopkins Clinical Compound Library and identified leflunomide, a dihydroorotate dehydrogenase inhibitor with immunosuppressive and anti-psoriatic activities, as a novel drug that prevents polyQ aggregation.
Leflunomide and its active metabolite teriflunomide inhibited protein aggregation independently of their known role in pyrimidine biosynthesis, since neither uridine treatment nor other pyrimidine biosynthesis inhibitors affected polyQ aggregation.
Inducible cell line and cycloheximide-chase experiments indicate that these drugs prevent incorporation of expanded polyQ into an aggregate.
This study demonstrates the usefulness of luciferase-based protein aggregate reporters for high-throughput screening applications.
As current trials are under-way for teriflunomide in the treatment of multiple sclerosis, we propose that this drug be considered a possible therapeutic agent for polyQ diseases.
PMID: 22855861
Distinct lesion morphology at 7-T MRI differentiates neuromyelitis optica from multiple sclerosis.
To investigate distinct white matter and cortical gray matter pathology in neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders (NMOSDs) and multiple sclerosis (MS) at 7-T MRI in a cross-sectional study.
We included 10 patients with NMOSDs and 18 patients with MS in our 7-T MRI study.
The imaging protocol comprised T2*-weighted fast low angle shot and turbo inversion recovery magnitude sequences.
White matter and cortical gray matter lesions were assessed with special regard to their (perivascular) localization as well as the expression of a hypointense rim.
In total, we detected 140 white matter lesions in 7 of 10 patients with NMOSDs.
In contrast to MS plaques, which were nearly exclusively centered by a small vein (92%) and showed a characteristic hypointense rim (23%), white matter changes in patients with NMOSDs were nonspecific in appearance and were only infrequently neighbored by a blood vessel (49 lesions [35%], p = 0.003).
Hypointense rims were very rarely detectable (3 lesions [2%], p &lt; 0.001).
Cortical pathology was absent in NMOSDs.
In our MS cohort, we detected 36 leukocortical, 8 intracortical, and 8 subpial cortical lesions in 7 of 18 patients.
The MRI features of white matter and the absence of cortical gray matter findings substantially differentiate NMOSDs from MS and can be used as a potential marker to distinguish these 2 entities.
The fact that cortical pathology is common in MS but is not present in patients with NMOSDs may reflect the difference in the underlying pathogenesis.
PMID: 22509165
The ketogenic diet as a treatment paradigm for diverse neurological disorders.
Dietary and metabolic therapies have been attempted in a wide variety of neurological diseases, including epilepsy, headache, neurotrauma, Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, sleep disorders, brain cancer, autism, pain, and multiple sclerosis.
The impetus for using various diets to treat - or at least ameliorate symptoms of - these disorders stems from both a lack of effectiveness of pharmacological therapies, and also the intrinsic appeal of implementing a more natural treatment.
The enormous spectrum of pathophysiological mechanisms underlying the aforementioned diseases would suggest a degree of complexity that cannot be impacted universally by any single dietary treatment.
Yet, it is conceivable that alterations in certain dietary constituents could affect the course and impact the outcome of these brain disorders.
Further, it is possible that a final common neurometabolic pathway might be influenced by a variety of dietary interventions.
The most notable example of a dietary treatment with proven efficacy against a neurological condition is the high-fat, low-carbohydrate ketogenic diet (KD) used in patients with medically intractable epilepsy.
While the mechanisms through which the KD works remain unclear, there is now compelling evidence that its efficacy is likely related to the normalization of aberrant energy metabolism.
The concept that many neurological conditions are linked pathophysiologically to energy dysregulation could well provide a common research and experimental therapeutics platform, from which the course of several neurological diseases could be favorably influenced by dietary means.
Here we provide an overview of studies using the KD in a wide panoply of neurologic disorders in which neuroprotection is an essential component.
PMID: 22641523
[Translation and cross-cultural adaptation of the Multiple Sclerosis Walking Scale (MSWS-12) into Brazilian Portuguese].
Poor walking performance is predictive of heart disease and osteoporosis and increases the risk of death in the elderly.
Gait and vision have been identified as the most valuable physical functions according to multiple sclerosis patients' perceptions.
The objective of this study was to perform a translation and cross-cultural adaptation of the Multiple Sclerosis Walking Scale (MSWS-12) into Brazilian Portuguese.
A study of cross-cultural adaptation was conducted in ten steps.
Participation in the study included four translators, two back-translators, twelve medical experts, twelve patients, twelve healthy subjects, and a Portuguese language expert.
Only the question Did standing make it more difficult to do things? posed difficulty in the translation process.
Maximum time for completion was less than three minutes (171 seconds).
Internal consistency analyses showed high reliability (Cronbach's alpha = 0.94).
The content validation and internal consistency stages were completed satisfactorily.
PMID: 22738091
Exercise in multiple sclerosis -- an integral component of disease management.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most common chronic inflammatory disorder of the central nervous system (CNS) in young adults.
The disease causes a wide range of symptoms depending on the localization and characteristics of the CNS pathology.
In addition to drug-based immunomodulatory treatment, both drug-based and non-drug approaches are established as complementary strategies to alleviate existing symptoms and to prevent secondary diseases.
In particular, physical therapy like exercise and physiotherapy can be customized to the individual patient's needs and has the potential to improve the individual outcome.
However, high quality systematic data on physical therapy in MS are rare.
This article summarizes the current knowledge on the influence of physical activity and exercise on disease-related symptoms and physical restrictions in MS patients.
Other treatment strategies such as drug treatments or cognitive training were deliberately excluded for the purposes of this article.
PMID: 22504460
The role of T cell apoptosis in nervous system autoimmunity.
Fas is a transmembrane receptor involved in the death program of several cell lines, including T lymphocytes.
Deleterious mutations hitting genes involved in the Fas pathway cause the autoimmune lymphoprolipherative syndrome (ALPS).
Moreover, defective Fas function is involved in the development of common autoimmune diseases, including autoimmune syndromes hitting the nervous system, such as multiple sclerosis (MS) and chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP).
In this review, we first explore some peculiar aspects of Fas mediated apoptosis in the central versus peripheral nervous system (CNS, PNS); thereafter, we analyze what is currently known on the role of T cell apoptosis in both MS and CIDP, which, in this regard, may be seen as two faces of the same coin.
In fact, we show that, in both diseases, defective Fas mediated apoptosis plays a crucial role favoring disease development and its chronic evolution.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22323875
Hereditary sclerosing poikiloderma.
Hereditary sclerosing poikiloderma (HSP) is a very rare disease.
The clinical features are principally widespread poikiloderma and linear hyperkeratotic and sclerotic bands.
We report an 18-yr-old male who presented reticular hyperpigmented lesions on the trunk and extremities since 2-yr-old.
Also, linear sclerosing bands appeared on both antecubital and popliteal fossae after yr.
Histopathologic finding showed dense sclerotic collagen fibers with telangiectasia in the upper dermis and fragmentations of damaged elastic fibers in the elastic stain, consistent with HSP.
We report the first Korean case of HSP.
PMID: 23193094
Evaluation of new immunological targets in neuromyelitis optica.
The detection of reactivity against autoantigens plays a crucial role in the diagnosis of autoimmune diseases.
However, only a few autoantibodies are known in each disease, and their precise targets are often not precisely defined.
In neuromyelitis optica (NMO), an autoimmune disease of the central nervous system, anti-aquaporin 4 antibodies are currently the only available immunological markers, although they are not detected in 10-50% of patients.
Using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays, we evaluated the reactivity against 19 structurally defined peptides in 26 NMO sera compared with 21 healthy subjects.
We observed increased levels of IgG against myelin basic protein sequence MBP(156-175), pyruvate dehydrogenase sequence PDH(167-186) and CSF114(Glc), the last of these having a possible correlation with onset of inflammatory relapse.
These preliminary results may suggest that the aquaporin 4 is not the unique target in NMO and that the study of reactivity against these peptides would be helpful for the diagnosis and follow-up of the disease.
Complementary studies are however warranted to confirm these results.
Copyright © 2012 European Peptide Society and John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd.
PMID: 22014378
Seroprevalence of NMO-IgG among patients with neuromyelitis optica and opticospinal multiple sclerosis.
In this study we sought to compare the seropositivity of NMO-IgG in patients presenting with demyelinative involvement of optic nerve and spinal cord with and without longitudinally extensive spinal cord lesion (LESCL).
Patients who were referred to Isfahan Multiple Sclerosis Clinic and Isfahan Devic's Disease Clinic at Al-Zahra Hospital in Iran were screened for this study.
Patients with signs and symptoms indicating the demyelinating involvement of optic nerve(s) and spinal cord were included.
Patients were evaluated by a neurologist and spinal cord and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were obtained.
Patients with normal first brain MRI and with spinal cord demyelinative lesions visible on spinal MRI were included.
Patients were then put into two groups: (i) patients with LESCL [neuromyelitis optica (NMO)] and (ii) patients with spinal plaques which do not extend over three vertebrae [opticospinal multiple sclerosis (OSMS)].
NMO-IgG was measured in the serum of the included patients.
Totally we recruited 33 patients with LESCL and 32 patients without LESCL.
The mean age of patients without LESCL was 34.61±10.98 and it was 33.48±11.93 for the NMO patients.
In both groups there were 24 females and the rest were males.
Among the NMO patients 16 (48.5%) were positive for NMO-IgG, while in the OSMS group there were none.
The results of this study are in line with previous observations, and imply that the presence of LESCL is associated with the presence of NMO-IgG and thus an indicator of NMO.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22130643
Tuberous sclerosis complex-associated angiomyolipomas: focus on mTOR inhibition.
Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is an autosomal dominant disorder promoting the development of benign tumors in multiple organ systems, including the skin, brain, and kidneys.
In contrast to asymptomatic spontaneous angiomyolipomas, angiomyolipomas in patients with TSC are mostly bilateral and are accompanied by other typical clinical features of TSC.
Kidney angiomyolipomas are benign tumors composed of blood vessels, adipose tissue, and smooth muscle and are associated with spontaneous bleeding and potential life-threatening hemorrhage if &gt;4 cm.
Current treatment options for angiomyolipoma are focused on conserving kidney function and limiting potentially fatal hemorrhage.
TSC is caused by mutations in either TSC1 or TSC2 suppressor genes, resulting in increased mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) activity.
Preclinical studies have shown the efficacy of mTOR inhibitors in inhibiting the growth of patient-derived cell lines and suppressing tumors in animal models of TSC.
In the clinical setting, mTOR inhibitors have shown promising efficacy in patients with TSC-associated angiomyolipomas and subependymal giant cell astrocytomas.
This review explores the diagnosis and current management of TSC-associated angiomyolipomas, the relevance of the mTOR pathway in the pathogenesis of TSC, and the potential promise of mTOR-inhibitor therapy as a systemic therapeutic approach to treat the underlying cause of TSC.
Copyright © 2012 National Kidney Foundation, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22130640
Viruses and multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic demyelinating disorder of unknown etiology, possibly caused by a virus or virus-triggered immunopathology.
The virus might reactivate after years of latency and lyse oligodendrocytes, as in progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, or initiate immunopathological demyelination, as in animals infected with Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus or coronaviruses.
The argument for a viral cause of MS is supported by epidemiological analyses and studies of MS in identical twins, indicating that disease is acquired.
However, the most important evidence is the presence of bands of oligoclonal IgG (OCBs) in MS brain and CSF that persist throughout the lifetime of the patient.
OCBs are found almost exclusively in infectious CNS disorders, and antigenic targets of OCBs represent the agent that causes disease.
Here, the authors review past attempts to identify an infectious agent in MS brain cells and discuss the promise of using recombinant antibodies generated from clonally expanded plasma cells in brain and CSF to identify disease-relevant antigens.
They show how this strategy has been used successfully to analyze antigen specificity in subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, a chronic encephalitis caused by measles virus, and in neuromyelitis optica, a chronic autoimmune demyelinating disease produced by antibodies directed against the aquaporin-4 water channel.
PMID: 22473675
Implication of perturbed axoglial apparatus in early pediatric multiple sclerosis.
Cerebrospinal fluid samples collected from children during initial presentation of central nervous system inflammation, who may or may not subsequently be diagnosed as having multiple sclerosis (MS), were subjected to large-scale proteomics screening.
Unexpectedly, major compact myelin membrane proteins typically implicated in MS were not detected.
However, multiple molecules that localize to the node of Ranvier and the surrounding axoglial apparatus membrane were implicated, indicating perturbed axon-glial interactions in those children destined for diagnosis of MS.
Copyright © 2012 American Neurological Association.
PMID: 21806074
NMR and pattern recognition can distinguish neuroinflammation and peripheral inflammation.
Multiple Sclerosis (MScl) is a neurodegenerative disease of the CNS, associated with chronic neuroinflammation.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), being in closest interaction with CNS, was used to profile neuroinflammation to discover disease-specific markers.
We used the commonly accepted animal model for the neuroinflammatory aspect of MScl: the experimental autoimmune/allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE).
A combination of advanced (1)H NMR spectroscopy and pattern recognition methods was used to establish the metabolic profile of CSF of EAE-affected rats (representing neuroinflammation) and of two control groups (healthy and peripherally inflamed) to detect specific markers for early neuroinflammation.
We found that the CSF metabolic profile for neuroinflammation is distinct from healthy and peripheral inflammation and characterized by changes in concentrations of metabolites such as creatine, arginine, and lysine.
Using these disease-specific markers, we were able to detect early stage neuroinflammation, with high accuracy in a second independent set of animals.
This confirms the predictive value of these markers.
These findings from the EAE model may help to develop a molecular diagnosis for the early stage MScl in humans.
PMID: 22705497
Transplantation for autoimmune diseases in north and South America: a report of the Center for International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research.
Hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) is an emerging therapy for patients with severe autoimmune diseases (AID).
We report data on 368 patients with AID who underwent HCT in 64 North and South American transplantation centers reported to the Center for International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research between 1996 and 2009.
Most of the HCTs involved autologous grafts (n = 339); allogeneic HCT (n = 29) was done mostly in children.
The most common indications for HCT were multiple sclerosis, systemic sclerosis, and systemic lupus erythematosus.
The median age at transplantation was 38 years for autologous HCT and 25 years for allogeneic HCT.
The corresponding times from diagnosis to HCT were 35 months and 24 months.
Three-year overall survival after autologous HCT was 86% (95% confidence interval [CI], 81%-91%).
Median follow-up of survivors was 31 months (range, 1-144 months).
The most common causes of death were AID progression, infections, and organ failure.
On multivariate analysis, the risk of death was higher in patients at centers that performed fewer than 5 autologous HCTs (relative risk, 3.5; 95% CI, 1.1-11.1; P = .03) and those that performed 5 to 15 autologous HCTs for AID during the study period (relative risk, 4.2; 95% CI, 1.5-11.7; P = .006) compared with patients at centers that performed more than 15 autologous HCTs for AID during the study period.
AID is an emerging indication for HCT in the region.
Collaboration of hematologists and other disease specialists with an outcomes database is important to promote optimal patient selection, analysis of the impact of prognostic variables and long-term outcomes, and development of clinical trials.
Copyright © 2012.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
PMID: 21367665
Immune mechanisms of new therapeutic strategies in MS: teriflunomide.
At present, a series of oral disease-modifying agents is being introduced for the treatment of multiple sclerosis.
With the exception of laquinimod, the new oral compounds have already been approved for other indications such as organ transplantation (FTY720), psoriasis (dimethylfumarate), hairy cell leukemia (cladribine), and rheumatoid arthritis (leflunomide).
Leflunomide is the prodrug of teriflunomide which is the latest compound that has successfully been tested in a large phase III clinical trial in relapsing MS.
Due to its favorable safety profile and its efficacy in rheumatoid arthritis where the aberrant immune response is in various aspects similar to the autoimmune reaction in MS patients, teriflunomide is a promising treatment option for MS patients.
Here, we review the most important cell biological and immunological modes of action of teriflunomide, report on the available data on its pharmacokinetics in humans, and summarize the recent clinical trials of teriflunomide in relapsing MS.
Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22379456
Idiopathic transverse myelitis and neuromyelitis optica: clinical profiles, pathophysiology and therapeutic choices.
Transverse myelitis is a focal inflammatory disorder of the spinal cord which may arise due to different etiologies.
Transverse myelitis may be idiopathic or related/secondary to other diseases including infections, connective tissue disorders and other autoimmune diseases.
It may be also associated with optic neuritis (neuromyelitis optica), which may precede transverse myelitis.
In this manuscript we review the pathophysiology of different types of transverse myelitis and neuromyelitis optica and discuss diagnostic criteria for idiopathic transverse myelitis and risk of development of multiple sclerosis after an episode of transverse myelitis.
We also discuss treatment options including corticosteroids, immunosuppressives and monoclonal antibodies, plasma exchange and intravenous immunoglobulins.
PMID: 22379455
Multiple sclerosis: pathogenesis and treatment.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory autoimmune demyelinating disease of the central nervous system.
It affects approximately 400,000 people in the United States and onset is usually during young adulthood.
There are four clinical forms of MS, of which relapsing remitting type is the most common.
As the etiology of MS is unknown, finding a cure will remain challenging.
The main mechanism of injury appears to be inflammation and 8 agents are now FDA approved to help control MS.
These agents for relapsing forms of MS target different parts of the immune system, with the end goal of decreasing and avoiding further inflammation.
No agents are FDA approved for the primary progressive version of MS.
FDA approved agents include four preparations of interferon β (Avonex, Rebif, Betaseron and Extavia), glatiramer acetate (Copaxone), mitoxantrone (Novantrone), natalizumab (Tysabri) and fingolimod (Gilenya).
There are several drug undergoing phase II and III trials.
The heterogeneity of the MS disease process, individual patient response, and medication toxicities continue to challenge the treating physician.
PMID: 22443691
Pathogenic and regulatory roles for B cells in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
A dual role of B cells in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), the animal model of the human autoimmune disease multiple sclerosis (MS), has been established.
In the first role, B cells contribute to the pathogenesis of EAE through the production of anti-myelin antibodies that contribute to demyelination.
On the contrary, B cells have also been shown to have protective functions in that they play an essential role in the spontaneous recovery from EAE.
In this review, we summarize studies conducted in a number of species demonstrating the conditions under which B cells are pathogenic in EAE.
We also discuss the phenotype and anti-inflammatory mechanisms of regulatory B cells.
PMID: 22747960
Clusters of activated microglia in normal-appearing white matter show signs of innate immune activation.
In brain tissues from multiple sclerosis (MS) patients, clusters of activated HLA-DR-expressing microglia, also referred to as preactive lesions, are located throughout the normal-appearing white matter.
The aim of this study was to gain more insight into the frequency, distribution and cellular architecture of preactive lesions using a large cohort of well-characterized MS brain samples.
Here, we document the frequency of preactive lesions and their association with distinct white matter lesions in a cohort of 21 MS patients.
Immunohistochemistry was used to gain further insight into the cellular and molecular composition of preactive lesions.
Preactive lesions were observed in a majority of MS patients (67%) irrespective of disease duration, gender or subtype of disease.
Microglial clusters were predominantly observed in the vicinity of active demyelinating lesions and are not associated with T cell infiltrates, axonal alterations, activated astrocytes or blood-brain barrier disruption.
Microglia in preactive lesions consistently express interleukin-10 and TNF-α, but not interleukin-4, whereas matrix metalloproteases-2 and -9 are virtually absent in microglial nodules.
Interestingly, key subunits of the free-radical-generating enzyme NADPH oxidase-2 were abundantly expressed in microglial clusters.
The high frequency of preactive lesions suggests that it is unlikely that most of them will progress into full-blown demyelinating lesions.
Preactive lesions are not associated with blood-brain barrier disruption, suggesting that an intrinsic trigger of innate immune activation, rather than extrinsic factors crossing a damaged blood-brain barrier, induces the formation of clusters of activated microglia.
PMID: 22898310
Dystrophic neurites express C9orf72 in Alzheimer's disease brains.
Chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 (C9orf72) is an evolutionarily conserved protein with unknown function, expressed at high levels in the brain.
An expanded hexanucleotide GGGGCC repeat located in the first intron of the C9orf72 gene represents the most common genetic cause of familial frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Previous studies by immunohistochemistry with two different anti-C9orf72 antibodies named sc-138763 and HPA023873 showed that C9orf72 is expressed chiefly in the cytoplasm of neurons, and is concentrated in the synaptic terminals in the brains of FTD/ALS with or without C9orf72 repeat expansion as well as those of controls.
At present, a pathological role of C9orf72 in the process of neurodegeneration remains unknown.
Using immunohistochemistry we studied C9orf72 expression in the frontal cortex and the hippocampus of six Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 13 control cases, including ALS, Parkinson's disease, multiple system atrophy, and non-neurological cases.
The HPA023873 antibody showed a cross-reactivity to glial fibrillary acidic protein, and therefore stained intensely reactive astrocytes in AD and non-AD brains.
Both sc-138763 and HPA023873 antibodies labeled the neuronal cytoplasm and the neuropil with variable intensities, and intensely stained a cluster of p62-negative, UBQLN1-positive swollen neurites, which were distributed in the CA1 region and the molecular layer in the hippocampus of both AD and non-AD brains.
Most notably, both of these antibodies reacted strongly with dystrophic neurites accumulated on senile plaques in AD brains.
These results suggest a general role of C9orf72 in the process of neurodegeneration in a range of human neurodegenerative diseases.
PMID: 23302880
T cell epitope mapping of JC polyoma virus-encoded proteome reveals reduced T cell responses in HLA-DRB1*04:01+ donors.
JC polyomavirus (JCV) infection is highly prevalent and usually kept in a persistent state without clinical signs and symptoms.
It is only during immunocompromise and especially impaired CD4(+) T cell function in the brain, as seen in AIDS patients or natalizumab-treated multiple sclerosis patients, that JCV may cause progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), an often life-threatening brain disease.
Since CD4(+) T cells likely play an important role in controlling JCV infection, we here describe the T cell response to JCV in a group of predominantly HLA-DR-heterozygotic healthy donors (HD) by using a series of overlapping 15-mer peptides spanning all JCV-encoded open reading frames.
We identified immunodominant epitopes and compared T cell responses with anti-JCV VP1 antibody production and with the presence of urinary viral shedding.
We observed positive JCV-specific T cell responses in 28.6% to 77.6%, humoral immune response in 42.6% to 89.4%, and urinary viral shedding in 36.4% to 45.5% of HD depending on the threshold.
Four immunodominant peptides were mapped, and at least one immunogenic peptide per HLA-DRB1 allele was detected in DRB1*01(+), DRB1*07(+), DRB1*11(+), DRB1*13(+), DRB1*15(+), and DRB1*03(+) individuals.
We show for the first time that JCV-specific T cell responses may be directed not only against JCV VP1 and large T antigen but also against all other JCV-encoded proteins.
Heterozygotic DRB1*04:01(+) individuals showed very low T cell responses to JCV together with normal anti-VP1 antibody levels and no urinary viral shedding, indicating a dominant-negative effect of this allele on global JCV-directed T cell responses.
Our data are potentially relevant for the development of vaccines against JCV.
PMID: 22647206
Research and innovation in the development of everolimus for oncology.
Introduction:  The critical role of increased activity of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) in the pathophysiology of multiple diseases is well established.
Inhibition of the mTOR pathway may block disease progression and improve patient outcomes.
Everolimus, an mTOR inhibitor, began in clinical development as part of a regimen (Certican, Zortress) for prevention of organ transplant rejection and is now an approved oncology agent.
Areas covered:  The objective of this review is to discuss the history of key findings and innovative cancer research undertaken to successfully develop everolimus as an oncology therapy (Afinitor) now approved for patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and for subependymal giant cell astrocytomas (SEGAs) associated with tuberous sclerosis.
In addition, data for the use of everolimus in the treatment of other cancers and rare diseases are also discussed.
A PubMed search of English articles without time restrictions was conducted using the search terms 'everolimus or rapamycin' and 'cancer'.
Bibliographies of retrieved articles were manually searched for additional relevant articles.
Major cancer congresses were also searched.
Expert opinion:  The clinical efficacy of everolimus alone and in combination with other agents has been observed in recently completed Phase II-III studies in a wide spectrum of tumors, including RCC, neuroendocrine tumors, tuberous sclerosis complex, SEGAs and angiomyolipomas, lymphoma and gastric, breast and hepatocellular cancers.
These findings emphasize the importance of mTOR in diverse cancers and rare diseases and underscore the potential role for everolimus as an effective agent in multiple indications.
PMID: 22183929
Natalizumab remains detectable in patients with multiple sclerosis long after treatment is stopped.
Natalizumab is frequently used as a treatment for multiple sclerosis (MS).
The occurrence of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) in natalizumab-treated patients indicates that its prominent beneficial effects need to be balanced against the risks.
Also, cessation of the drug seems to be associated with recurrence of disease activity.
Both the moment of rebound disease activity and the outcome of PML are related to clearance of the drug.
Specific features of this IgG4 antibody (i.e. half-antibody exchange) may result in underestimated drug levels.
Here, we demonstrate natalizumab levels in 10 patients with relapsing MS, using a recently developed sensitive assay.
Remarkably, natalizumab was detectable up to 200 days after cessation of therapy.
PMID: 23058309
Influence of cognitive function on speech and articulation rate in multiple sclerosis.
We examined cognitive predictors of speech and articulation rate in 50 individuals with multiple sclerosis (MS) and 23 healthy controls.
We measured speech and articulation rate from audio-recordings of participants reading aloud and talking extemporaneously on a topic of their choice (i.e., self-generated speech).
Articulation rate was calculated for each speech sample by removing lexically irrelevant vocalizations and pauses of &gt;200 ms.
Speech rate was similarly calculated including pauses.
Concurrently, the Minimal Assessment of Cognitive Function in Multiple Sclerosis (MACFIMS) battery, as well as standardized tests of sentence intelligibility and syllable repetition were administered.
Analysis of variance showed that MS patients were slower on three of the four rate measures.
Greater variance in rate measures was accounted for by cognitive variables for the MS group than controls.
An information processing speed composite, as measured by the Symbol Digit Modalities Test (SDMT) and the Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test (PASAT), was the strongest predictor among cognitive tests.
A composite of memory tests related to self-generated speech, above and beyond information processing speed, but not to oral reading.
Self-generated speech, in this study, was not found to relate more strongly to cognitive tests than simple reading.
Implications for further research are discussed.
PMID: 21902649
Gastrointestinal immune system and brain dialogue implicated in neuroinflammatory and neurodegenerative diseases.
A common characteristic of the central nervous system (CNS) neurodegenerative disorders is neuroinflammation, marked by augmented numbers of activated and primed microglia, increased inflammatory cytokines and decreased anti-inflammatory molecules.
CNS neuroinflammation is a critical component in the progression of several neurodegenerative diseases which sensitize the brain to produce an exaggerated response to immune stimuli in the periphery.
Neuroinflammation might initiate from the periphery and peripheral conditions through disrupted blood-brain barrier powerfully influence various brain pathologies.
Gastrointestinal tract (GIT) represents a vulnerable area through which pathogens influence the brain and induce CNS neuroinflammation.
The pathogens may access the CNS through blood, the nasal olfactory pathways and the GIT.
Potential GI pathogens, such as Helicobacter pylori, induce humoral and cellular immune responses that, owing to the sharing of homologous epitopes (molecular mimicry), cross-react with CNS components thereby contributing and possibly perpetuating neural tissue damage.
GIT is strictly connected to the CNS and a bi-directional communication exists between them.
The brain is involved in regulating the immune and gut system.
Conversely, limited attention has been paid on the GIT role in the development and regulation of the CNS autoimmune diseases.
The GIT is the primary immune organ with specialized immunoregulatory and anti-inflammatory functions, represented by the gastrointestinal immune system (GIS).
This review focuses on the potential GIS and brain dialogue implicated in neurodegenerative diseases.
Gaining a better understanding of the relationship between GIS and CNS could provide an insight on the pathogenesis and therapeutic strategies of these disorders.
PMID: 22733908
T2 hyperintensity of medial lemniscus is an indicator of small-vessel disease.
Small-vessel disease is a common MRI finding that can be difficult to differentiate from other white matter (WM) diseases because of the lack of a specific pattern of brain involvement.
The purpose of our study was to evaluate medial lemniscus hyperintensity seen on FLAIR images as an imaging marker for small-vessel disease.
Two blinded neuroradiologists retrospectively reviewed 103 consecutive outpatient brain MRI studies.
Medial lemniscus signal in the dorsal pons was evaluated visually on FLAIR images and after placing regions of interest (ROIs) on T2-weighted images.
On the basis of the original interpretations, scans were divided into three categories: small-vessel disease, multiple sclerosis (MS), and normal or nonspecific WM changes.
Cardiovascular risk factors were recorded.
Analysis of variance and Fisher exact tests were used to determine group differences, and kappa statistics was used to determine interrater agreement.
Thirty-seven patients had small-vessel disease, 14 patients had MS, and 52 had nonspecific WM changes.
Medial lemniscus hyperintensity was seen in about 20% of patients with small-vessel disease and was generally bilateral.
Although ROI analyses identified a slightly higher number of patients with medial lemniscus signal &gt; 20% of adjacent to normal-appearing brainstem, interrater reliability was moderate, and there were false-positive and false-negative cases in comparison with visual data.
When small-vessel disease patients were further subdivided into mild or advanced subgroups, medial lemniscus hyperintensity was selectively seen in advanced small-vessel disease.
Patients with medial lemniscus hyperintensity were older (p &lt; 0.001) and had higher prevalence of diabetes (p = 0.03), hypertension (p = 0.009), and hypercholesterolemia (p = 0.03).
Medial lemniscus hyperintensity seen on FLAIR images is a reliable radiologic marker of advanced small-vessel disease.
PMID: 22733907
Comparison of MERGE and axial T2-weighted fast spin-echo sequences for detection of multiple sclerosis lesions in the cervical spinal cord.
The purpose of our study was to compare axial multiple-echo recombined gradient echo (MERGE) with axial T2-weighted fast spin-echo (FSE) imaging for the detection of multiple sclerosis (MS) lesions in the cervical spinal cord on MRI.
Twenty-nine cervical spine MRI studies of patients with MS lesions and 29 control cases were reviewed retrospectively.
Two blinded neuroradiologists independently assessed randomized axial MERGE and axial T2-weighted FSE sequences from each study, documenting the location and number of cord lesions, the degree of confidence in calling each lesion, and the presence of artifacts.
The reference standard was determined by an unblinded consensus review of all sequences performed for each case, with lesions considered present if detected on two or more sequences.
Lesion detection rates and conspicuity, false-positive findings, and reader confidence and artifact scores were compared for the sequences, and interreader agreement was assessed.
Eighty-three lesions were assessed.
The mean true-positive lesion detection rate was 87% (95% CI, 79-93%) with MERGE and 67% (60-75%) with T2-weighted FSE, with interreader positive agreement scores of 74% and 75%, respectively.
A greater number of false-positive findings were seen with MERGE for both the MS and control cases.
Average confidence and artifact scores were similar for both sequences.
Subjectively, lesions were more conspicuous in 21 cases with MERGE and four cases with T2-weighted FSE and were equally conspicuous in four cases.
MERGE and T2-weighted FSE sequences are complementary.
MERGE provided greater sensitivity for cord lesions whereas axial T2-weighted FSE provided improved lesion specificity.
Further investigation is required to assess the clinical impact of MERGE in the diagnosis and management of MS.
PMID: 22216338
Reassessment of blood gene expression markers for the prognosis of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
Despite considerable advances in the treatment of multiple sclerosis, current drugs are only partially effective.
Most patients show reduced disease activity with therapy, but still experience relapses, increasing disability, and new brain lesions.
Since there are no reliable clinical or biological markers of disease progression, long-term prognosis is difficult to predict for individual patients.
We identified 18 studies that suggested genes expressed in blood as predictive biomarkers.
We validated the prognostic value of those genes with three different microarray data sets comprising 148 patients in total.
Using these data, we tested whether the genes were significantly differentially expressed between patients with good and poor courses of the disease.
Poor progression was defined by relapses and/or increase of disability during a two-year follow-up, independent of the administered therapy.
Of 110 genes that have been proposed as predictive biomarkers, most could not be confirmed in our analysis.
However, the G protein-coupled membrane receptor GPR3 was expressed at significantly lower levels in patients with poor disease progression in all data sets.
GPR3 has therefore a high potential to be a biomarker for predicting future disease activity.
In addition, we examined the IL17 cytokines and receptors in more detail and propose IL17RC as a new, promising, transcript-based biomarker candidate.
Further studies are needed to better understand the roles of these receptors in multiple sclerosis and its treatment and to clarify the utility of GPR3 and IL17RC expression levels in the blood as markers of long-term prognosis.
© 2011 Hecker et al.
PMID: 22078237
Opposite effects of interferon-β on new B and T cell release from production sites in multiple sclerosis patients.
The release of newly produced B and T lymphocytes from the production sites was analyzed in 30 multiple sclerosis patients treated with interferon-beta by measuring T-cell receptor excision circles and k-deleting recombination excision circles.
We found that the therapy induces opposite effects on B- and T-cell mobilization in 33% of patients.
New B-cell production, which peaks after 6 months of therapy and then decreases to levels that, however, are still higher than in controls, may cause a renewal of the B-cell compartment.
On the contrary, the decreased number of newly produced T lymphocytes observed at 12 months of treatment and the association between reduced thymic output and low peripheral T lymphocytes can be a cause of leukopenia, a frequent side effect of the therapy.
Copyright © 2011.
Published by Elsevier B.V.
PMID: 22141294
Hyperexcitability of the facial nerve in tuberculous meningitis.
Facial myokymias (FM) are continuous, involuntary, undulating movements of the facial muscles associated with spontaneous electromyographic activity, such as fasciculations and myokymic discharges.
They may occur in healthy individuals, or be secondary to multiple sclerosis, posterior fossa tumors, or an inflammatory process.
We describe the case of a 31-year-old man who presented with headache, vomiting, low fever, and disorientation.
Cerebrospinal fluid findings included low glucose and high protein content and lymphocyte pleocytosis, with positive culture for Myobacterium tuberculosis.
The patient was diagnosed with tuberculous meningitis.
Magnetic resonance imaging showed high contrast enhancement in the basal meninges and a left frontal tuberculoma.
Over the course of the disease, he experienced FM and persistent, involuntary contraction of the facial muscles.
The electromyogram recorded myokymic discharges.
Tuberculous meningitis is a rare cause of FM.
The presence of myokymic discharges on electromyography verified the peripheral origin of facial nerve hyperexcitability in this case, in contrast to persistent contraction of the facial muscles, which has a central origin.
The phenomena were transitory and only positive symptoms were observed, with no facial nerve injury.
Tuberculous meningitis is a rare cause of facial nerve hyperexcitability, which can have a peripheral, nuclear, or supranuclear origin.
PMID: 22141291
Sporadic CJD in a patient with relaplsing-remitting multiple sclerosis on an immunomodulatory treatment.
Creutzfeld-Jacob disease (CJD) is a degenerative, invariably fatal brain disorder.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic, potentially disabling, immune-mediated inflammatory demyelinating disease of the central nervous system.
Here, we report a 50-year-old woman who, two years after the diagnosis of relapsing remitting MS, developed altered consciousness, dystonic posture of the left hand and myoclonic jerks.
Repeated brain MRI showed hyperintensities on T2 sequences in basal ganglia bilaterally and diffusion restriction in these areas, and, since typical EEG and CSF features were present, the diagnosis of CJD was made.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of a glatiramer acetate-treated MS patient who developed sporadic CJD.
This combination is interesting in the light of recent data suggesting that CJD and MS may share similar mechanisms of molecular mimicry and autoimmunity.
This case also emphasizes the importance of critically assessing every new symptom even in a patient with an established diagnosis of MS.
PMID: 22362918
A randomised, double blind, placebo controlled trial with vitamin D3 as an add on treatment to interferon β-1b in patients with multiple sclerosis.
To study the safety and efficacy of vitamin D3 as an add on therapy to interferon β-1b (IFNB) in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS).
1 year, double blind, placebo controlled, randomised study in 66 MS patients.
The primary outcomes were T2 burden of disease (BOD) on MRI scans, proportion of patients with serum levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D) ≥85 nmol/l or intact parathyroid hormone (PTH) ≤20 ng/l, and number of adverse events.
Secondary outcomes were number of MRI enhancing T1 lesions and new T2 lesions, annual relapse rate, changes in the Expanded Disability Status Scale score, timed 25 foot walk test and timed 10 foot tandem walk tests.
Median change in BOD was 287 mm(3) in the placebo group and 83 mm(3) in the vitamin D group (p=0.105).
Serum levels of 25(OH)D increased from a mean of 54 (range 19-82) nmol/l to 110 (range 67-163) nmol/l in the vitamin D group.
84% of patients reached a serum 25(OH)D level &gt;85 nmol/l in the vitamin D group and 3% in the placebo group (p&lt;0.0001).
Patients in the vitamin D group showed fewer new T2 lesions (p=0.286) and a significantly lower number of T1 enhancing lesions (p=0.004), as well as a tendency to reduced disability accumulation (p=0.071) and to improved timed tandem walk (p=0.076).
There were no significant differences in adverse events or in the annual relapse rate.
Vitamin D3 add on treatment to IFNB reduces MRI disease activity in MS.
EudraCT number 2007-001958-99 and ClinicalTrialsGov number NCT01339676.
PMID: 22709796
Risk of vascular disease in patients with multiple sclerosis: a review.
Vascular dysfunction and shared risk factors may lead to an increased risk of arterial and venous vascular disease in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS).
The aim of this review was to describe studies examining the risk of vascular diseases in MS patients.
A PubMed search combined with review of reference lists and table of contents revealed eight relevant studies describing the occurrence or risk of one or more vascular diseases.
One cohort study and three cross-sectional studies described stroke occurrence in 898 to 13 963  MS patients.
MS was associated with an increased risk of stroke and cerebrovascular diseases compared with the general population and other hospitalized patients, particularly within the first years after MS diagnosis and in young and middle-aged MS patients.
In contrast, data are conflicting  with regard to the association between MS and coronary artery disease including myocardial infarction.
Cross-sectional studies found a lower prevalence of coronary artery disease in MS patients, while the only cohort study found an increased risk within the first year after MS diagnosis only.
MS was, however, associated with an increased risk of venous thromboembolism, including deep venous thromboembolism and pulmonary embolism, in particular within the first years after MS diagnosis.
MS is associated with an increased risk of vascular diseases within the  first years after a first-time MS diagnosis compared with the general population.
The risk declines thereafter, but remains elevated for stroke and venous thromboembolism.
Shared risk factors, linked pathogenesis, and bias may contribute to the association.
PMID: 21976406
The effect of hypointense white matter lesions on automated gray matter segmentation in multiple sclerosis.
Previous imaging studies assessing the relationship between white matter (WM) damage and matter (GM) atrophy have raised the concern that Multiple Sclerosis (MS) WM lesions may affect measures of GM volume by inducing voxel misclassification during intensity-based tissue segmentation.
Here, we quantified this misclassification error in simulated and real MS brains using a lesion-filling method.
Using this method, we also corrected GM measures in patients before comparing them with controls in order to assess the impact of this lesion-induced misclassification error in clinical studies.
We found that higher WM lesion volumes artificially reduced total GM volumes.
In patients, this effect was about 72% of that predicted by simulation.
Misclassified voxels were located at the GM/WM border and could be distant from lesions.
Volume of individual deep gray matter (DGM) structures generally decreased with higher lesion volumes, consistent with results from total GM.
While preserving differences in GM volumes between patients and controls, lesion-filling correction revealed more lateralised DGM shape changes in patients, which were not evident with the original images.
Our results confirm that WM lesions can influence MRI measures of GM volume and shape in MS patients through their effect on intensity-based GM segmentation.
The greater effect of lesions at increasing levels of damage supports the use of lesion-filling to correct for this problem and improve the interpretability of the results.
Volumetric or morphometric imaging studies, where lesion amount and characteristics may vary between groups of patients or change over time, may especially benefit from this correction.
Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 23319365
Oxidative modifications of cerebral transthyretin are associated with multiple sclerosis.
Transthyretin (TTR) is a homotetrameric protein of the CNS that plays a role of as the major thyroxine (T4) carrier from blood to cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
T4 physiologically helps oligodendrocyte precursor cells to turn into myelinating oligodendrocytes, enhancing remyelination after myelin sheet damage.
We investigated post-translational oxidative modifications of serum and CSF TTR in multiple sclerosis subjects, highlighting high levels of S-sulfhydration and S-sulfonation of cysteine in position ten only in the cerebral TTR, which correlate with an anomalous TTR protein folding as well as with disease duration.
Moreover, we found low levels of free T4 in CSF of multiple sclerosis patients, suggestive of a potential role of these modifications in T4 transport into the brain.
© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH &amp; Co.
KGaA, Weinheim.
PMID: 21986996
Adversarial growth in patients with multiple sclerosis and their partners: relationships with illness perceptions, disability and distress.
The purpose of this study was to investigate whether patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) and their partners show adversarial growth and to examine which psychological and disability variables contribute to this in patients and their partners.
The study also investigated the relationship between growth and distress.
Seventy-two patients with MS and their partners provided demographic information and completed measures of posttraumatic growth, illness perceptions, depression, cognitive function and disability.
Both patients and partners showed adversarial growth, with patients reporting significantly higher growth than partners.
The only significant predictor for patient growth was partner growth, and vice versa.
Dissimilarity in illness representations between patients and their partners on the consequences of MS dimension, patient mood and patient growth accounted for significant variance in partner growth.
The findings support the idea of a 'communal search for meaning' where patients and their partners experience the trauma of having a chronic illness and subsequently find positive aspects together.
PMID: 23922043
Lack of association between CD226 genetic variants and inflammatory demyelinating diseases in Korean population.
This study was conducted to find the possible association between CD226 polymorphisms and inflammatory demyelinating diseases in Korean population.
A total of 14 CD226 SNPs were selected based on their linkage disequilibrium, minor allele frequency, and location.
Then, the SNPs were genotyped in 178 IDD patients and 237 healthy controls.
Subsequently, we conducted logistic analysis to find possible associations Statistical analyses revealed only a marginal signal for a common SNP rs1788229 with inflammatory demyelinating disease (p=0.05), while other SNPs failed to show associations with any diseases.
However, the significance of rs1788229 disappeared after a multiple testing correction of the data (p&gt;0.05).
Interestingly, rs763361, which showed significant associations with multiple sclerosis in several previous studies, did not show any association at all.
While prior studies have found CD226 polymorphisms to be significantly associated with inflammatory demyelinating diseases, our results indicate the CD226 polymorphisms to be not associated with the diseases in Korean population.
However, our results suggest that the causal genes for inflammatory demyelinating diseases may vary depending on the population.
PMID: 23021230
[Central nervous system demyelinating disease-associated uveitis].
To describe the epidemiology, clinical features and visual prognosis in uveitis associated with demyelinating disease (DD) of the CNS.
A clinical, retrospective, and descriptive study was performed.
Data regarding age at presentation, gender, time from onset was recorded, as well as, type of uveitis, complications, treatment and initial and final visual acuity (BCVA) on all patients with DD-associated uveitis diagnosed in our Unit between January 2009 and June 2011.
Five women and 4 men were finally included (1.3% of 697 with uveitis).
There was associated multiple sclerosis in 78% of cases.
Mean age at presentation was 36.6 years for uveitis and 40 years for DD.
The uveitis preceded the DD in 3 cases (33%).
Typically, uveitis was bilateral (89%), chronic (89%), intermediate (89%), and associated with previous inflammation (29%), with synechiae (65%), and granulomatous (44%).
The most frequent complications were cataract (71%) and macular oedema (53%).
Besides local treatment, uveitis was managed with systemic steroids (78%), immunosuppressants (44%), and surgery (41% of eyes).
After a mean follow up of 5 years, 47% of the eyes had a worse BCVA, among which, 12% lost ≥ 3 Snellen lines.
The only patient treated with interferon (IFN), remained stable without treatment for the last 7 years.
DD-associated uveitis typically affected young adult women with intermediate-anterior uveitis of chronic, bilateral and synechiae type.
Complications are common and there is a risk of visual loss, despite treatment.
IFN therapy may be an effective alternative to be investigated.
Copyright © 2011 Sociedad Española de Oftalmología.
Published by Elsevier Espana.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 24109519
Dynamics of B-Cell Populations in CSF and Blood in Patients Treated with a Combination of Rituximab and Mitoxantrone.
Background.
Mitoxantrone (MTX) and Rituximab (RTX) are successfully used for treatment of multiple sclerosis (MS) and can be combined to increase efficacy.
Objective.
We used MTX, RTX, and methylprednisolone in a single combined regiment and observed patients prospectively.
Methods.
We present results of observational pilot study of combined therapy of RTX and MTX in 28 patients with active MS.
Therapeutic protocol consisted of two infusions within 14 days.
First infusion was 1000 mg methylprednisolone (MP) IV, 1000 mg RTX IV, and 20 mg MTX IV.
On day 14, 1000 mg MP IV and 1000 mg RTX IV were given.
Patients were followed prospectively from 12 to 48 months.
Results and Conclusion.
There were no relapses among all 28 patients during the observation period.
B-cell depletion of CD19+ and CD19+/CD27+ memory B-cell subpopulation in both compartments was confirmed in all patients at 6 months.
We found a more rapid reconstitution of B cells in the CSF than in the peripheral blood and longstanding depression of CD19+CD27+ memory B-cell.
Conclusion.
Effectiveness of combined regimen of RTX and MTX could be related to longstanding depletion of CD19+CD27+ memory B-cell subset.
PMID: 23080037
Clinical designs of recent robot rehabilitation trials.
Rehabilitation robots are increasingly being tested and promoted for clinical neurorehabilitation.
Compared with conventional and manual methods, robots allow for a variety of advantages, particularly in the areas of interventional control and the ability to provide a high volume of facilitated movement.
Since 1997, there have been more than 60 clinical trials reporting the use of two dozen different robots for neurorehabilitation.
Although there are a number of smaller pilot studies, there are only few larger clinical trials.
There may be a number of reasons why pilot robot studies do not materialize into larger studies.
Beyond devices that failed to perform as intended, what are the clinical design issues that have limited these studies? Some basic considerations include randomization, inclusion of a control group, power calculation based on a clinically meaningful outcome, and finally, reproducible descriptions of the intervention being tested.
Although many of these issues are general challenges presented for all rehabilitation studies, there are clinical design features that would likely greatly improve interpretation of results and better position robot devices toward the next clinical trial step.
On the other hand, the absence of these elements, even in the setting of a pilot study, may significantly hamper the interpretation of results and not yield sufficient information on treatment effects, adverse event rates, dropout rate, and so on, to allow further testing to proceed to follow-up Food and Drug Administration phase II and III studies.
Development of rehabilitation robots for clinical use needs to occur hand in hand with well-conducted clinical trials to provide evidence of efficacy while also taking into account costs.
PMID: 22740603
Assessing walking disability in multiple sclerosis.
Most patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) eventually experience walking disability.
The objective of this review was to evaluate the clinical utility of measures specific for walking in MS.
Walking assessments had high reliability and were correlated with related measures, including the 12-item multiple sclerosis walking scale (MSWS-12).
Shorter timed walking tests (Timed 25-foot Walk (T25FW), 10-metre Timed Walk, 30-metre Timed Walk) measure overall walking disability and are best suited for clinical settings, whereas longer timed or distance tests (100-metre Timed Walk, 6-minute Walk Test, 2-minute Walk Test) are better for the assessment of walking fatigability, distance limitations and functional capacity.
The MSWS-12 measures different, but related, aspects of walking than the objective tests.
The T25FW is the best characterised objective measure of walking disability and can be used across a wide range of walking disabilities.
Additional work is needed to fully characterise the other objective walking assessments in MS.
PMID: 22492477
[Vitamin D for prevention of diseases?].
Vitamin D3 shows a multitude of possible preventive effects in various diseases.
Calcitriol, the biologically active form of vitamin D3, affects not only bone metabolism but also acts on the renal renin secretion, the pancreatic insulin production in the beta cells, growth and proliferation of smooth and cardiac muscle cells and the function of lymphocytes and macrophages.
Although the human body can synthesise vitamin D3 itself, vitamin D deficiency is common in the German population.
Numerous trials studied the association between vitamin D deficiency and different diseases.
It is known that even mild forms of vitamin D deficiency increase the risk for cardiovascular diseases or diabetes mellitus.
Furthermore, an association with cancer such as pancreatic or colorectal cancer was observed.
This is attributed to the influence of vitamin D on cell differentiation, angiogenesis, DNA repair mechanisms and the transcription of numerous genes.
In addition, effects of vitamin D deficiency in diseases such as Parkinson's disease, multiple sclerosis and autoimmune diseases are discussed.
However, up to now the level of evidence of all these observations is low.
There are missing confirmatory randomized controlled trials.
Noting the possible preventive effects of vitamin D, a moderate exposure to sunlight to increase vitamin D synthesis can be recommended.
Even a controlled supplementation of vitamin D in patients with vitamin D deficiency is considered as reasonable.
However, an uncritical substitution of high-dose vitamin D should be avoided because of the risk of hypercalcaemia.
© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.
PMID: 23801742
Sodium accumulation is associated with disability and a progressive course in multiple sclerosis.
Neuroaxonal loss is a major substrate of irreversible disability in multiple sclerosis, however, its cause is not understood.
In multiple sclerosis there may be intracellular sodium accumulation due to neuroaxonal metabolic dysfunction, and increased extracellular sodium due to expansion of the extracellular space secondary to neuroaxonal loss.
Sodium magnetic resonance imaging measures total sodium concentration in the brain, and could investigate this neuroaxonal dysfunction and loss in vivo.
Sodium magnetic resonance imaging has been examined in small cohorts with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis, but has not been investigated in patients with a progressive course and high levels of disability.
We performed sodium magnetic resonance imaging in 27 healthy control subjects, 27 patients with relapsing-remitting, 23 with secondary-progressive and 20 with primary-progressive multiple sclerosis.
Cortical sodium concentrations were significantly higher in all subgroups of multiple sclerosis compared with controls, and deep grey and normal appearing white matter sodium concentrations were higher in primary and secondary-progressive multiple sclerosis.
Sodium concentrations were higher in secondary-progressive compared with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis in cortical grey matter (41.3 ± 4.2 mM versus 38.5 ± 2.8 mM, P = 0.008), normal appearing white matter (36.1 ± 3.5 mM versus 33.6 ± 2.5 mM, P = 0.018) and deep grey matter (38.1 ± 3.1 mM versus 35.7 ± 2.4 mM, P = 0.02).
Higher sodium concentrations were seen in T₁ isointense (44.6 ± 7.2 mM) and T1 hypointense lesions (46.8 ± 8.3 mM) compared with normal appearing white matter (34.9 ± 3.3 mM, P &lt; 0.001 for both comparisons).
Higher sodium concentration was observed in T₁ hypointense lesions in secondary-progressive (49.0 ± 7.0 mM) and primary-progressive (49.3 ± 8.0 mM) compared with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (43.0 ± 8.5 mM, P = 0.029 for both comparisons).
Independent association was seen of deep grey matter sodium concentration with expanded disability status score (coefficient = 0.24, P = 0.003) and timed 25 ft walk speed (coefficient = -0.24, P = 0.01), and of T1 lesion sodium concentration with the z-scores of the nine hole peg test (coefficient = -0.12, P &lt; 0.001) and paced auditory serial addition test (coefficient = -0.081, P &lt; 0.001).
Sodium concentration is increased within lesions, normal appearing white matter and cortical and deep grey matter in multiple sclerosis, with higher concentrations seen in secondary-progressive multiple sclerosis and in patients with greater disability.
Increased total sodium concentration is likely to reflect neuroaxonal pathophysiology leading to clinical progression and increased disability.
PMID: 23046487
Factors affecting anxiety in multiple sclerosis.
Anxiety is common in people with multiple sclerosis (MS).
Little is known about the factors related to anxiety.
The aim was to identify factors associated with the presence of anxiety.
This was a cohort study.
Participants were sent questionnaires to measure factors potentially related to anxiety.
The factors included disability, depression, self-efficacy, locus of control, general stress, psychological distress and factors specific to MS.
Participants with significant levels of anxiety, as measured by the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS), were compared to those who were not anxious.
Of the 157 participants who took part, 89 (57%) were clinically anxious.
Participants who were anxious had a lower level of self-efficacy (p &lt; 0.001), higher level of disability (p &lt; 0.001), higher level of depression (p &lt; 0.001) and higher level of stress (p &lt; 0.001).
The regression analysis showed that experiencing depression (χ(2) = 5.05, OR = 1.32, p &lt; 0.05) was the only factor that significantly predicted whether someone was anxious or not, accounting for 46% of the variance.
There was a high prevalence of anxiety in people with MS.
Depression, low levels of self-efficacy, disability and stress increased the likelihood of experiencing anxiety.
PMID: 22322424
The remyelination Philosopher's Stone: stem and progenitor cell therapies for multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease that leads to oligodendrocyte loss and subsequent demyelination of the adult central nervous system (CNS).
The pathology is characterized by transient phases of recovery during which remyelination can occur as a result of resident oligodendroglial precursor and stem/progenitor cell activation.
However, myelin repair efficiency remains low urging the development of new therapeutical approaches that promote remyelination activities.
Current MS treatments target primarily the immune system in order to reduce the relapse rate and the formation of inflammatory lesions, whereas no therapies exist in order to regenerate damaged myelin sheaths.
During the last few years, several transplantation studies have been conducted with adult neural stem/progenitor cells and glial precursor cells to evaluate their potential to generate mature oligodendrocytes that can remyelinate axons.
In parallel, modulation of the endogenous progenitor niche by neural and mesenchymal stem cell transplantation with the aim of promoting CNS progenitor differentiation and myelination has been studied.
Here, we summarize these findings and discuss the properties and consequences of the various molecular and cell-mediated remyelination approaches.
Moreover, we address age-associated intrinsic cellular changes that might influence the regenerative outcome.
We also evaluate the extent to which these experimental treatments might increase the regeneration capacity of the demyelinated human CNS and hence be turned into future therapies.
PMID: 23557239
Comparison of ActiGraph activity monitors in persons with multiple sclerosis and controls.
The current study compared output from the vertical axis of two models of ActiGraph accelerometers under free-living and laboratory conditions in persons with multiple sclerosis (MS) and matched controls.
The sample included 41 cases of MS and 41 controls matched by age, sex, height and weight.
Participants concurrently wore 7164 and GT3X accelerometers for 6 days under free-living conditions, and undertook up to five, 6-minute periods of walking at five speeds on a motor-driven treadmill.
Under free-living conditions, there was substantial, but not absolute, agreement (Intraclass correlation = 0.983) between devices and the output from the model 7164 accelerometer was significantly greater (p &lt; 0.01) than that of the GT3X, resulting in a 7.0% difference between devices.
The treadmill-walking conditions indicated that this difference in output between accelerometers was based on slow-walking speeds where there was a statistically significant (p &lt; 0.01) and 30.3% discrepancy.
The ActiGraph model 7164 and GT3X accelerometers are not interchangeable under free-living conditions, and the discrepancy in measurement between devices might be explained by the difference in output under slow-walking conditions.
Researchers and clinicians should be aware of the difference in output between generations of ActiGraph accelerometers, and perhaps other brands, in future applications involving persons with MS and controls.
PMID: 23746426
Establishment of monoclonal antibodies against the extracellular domain that block binding of NMO-IgG to AQP4.
Neuromyelitis optica is a demyelinating disease characterized by a disease-specific autoantibody designated as NMO-IgG that specifically recognizes aquaporin-4, and the binding of NMO-IgG to AQP4 causes the progress of the disease.
Prevention of the binding of NMO-IgG, therefore, may alleviate the disease.
Here we have developed monoclonal antibodies against AQP4 with a baculovirus display system in order to obtain high affinity monoclonal antibodies against the extracellular domains of AQP4.
Our monoclonal antibodies can block the binding of NMO-IgG in spite of their heterogeneity.
Taken together, we propose that our monoclonal antibodies can be applied in clinical therapy for NMO patients.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23391123
Implications of real-world adherence on cost-effectiveness analysis in multiple sclerosis.
Adherence to medication is essential for optimal outcomes, especially for chronic diseases such as multiple sclerosis (MS).
Studies in MS indicate that lower adherence is associated with an increased risk of relapse, hospitalization or emergency room (ER) visits, and higher medical costs.
A previous investigation assessed the cost per relapse avoided for patients with MS receiving first-line disease modifying therapies (DMTs); however, the model assumed 100% adherence.
Because real-world utilization patterns influence the actual effectiveness of medications, this analysis assessed the impact of real-world adherence from a US commercial payer perspective, using updated costs.
As was seen in the original study, in this revised model, fingolimod was associated with the lowest cost per relapse avoided ($90,566), followed by SC IFN β-1b (Extavia: $127,024), SC IFN β-1b (Betaseron: $137,492), SC IFN β-1a ($144,016), glatiramer acetate ($160,314), and IM IFN β-1a ($312,629).
The model inputs that had the greatest impact on the results were adherence-adjusted relative relapse rate reduction (RRR) of fingolimod, the wholesale acquisition costs of fingolimod, and the average number of relapses in untreated patients with MS.
The estimates of DMT adherence are from a single claims database study of a large national pharmacy benefit manager that only measured adherence, not actual relapses, and the model does not incorporate manufacturer discounts and rebates, which are not publicly available.
These results suggest that economic analyses of MS therapies should incorporate real-world adherence rates where available, rather than relying exclusively on trial-based efficacy estimates when considering the economic value of treatment alternatives, and that highly efficacious therapies with low adherence may yield real-world efficacy that is substantially lower than that observed in closely monitored clinical trials.
PMID: 22454721
Functional assessment of magno, parvo and konio-cellular pathways; current state and future clinical applications.
The information generated by cone photoreceptors in the retina is compressed and transferred to higher processing centers through three distinct types of ganglion cells known as magno, parvo and konio cells.
These ganglion cells, which travel from the retina to the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) and then to the primary visual cortex, have different structural and functional characteristics, and are organized in distinct layers in the LGN and the primary visual cortex.
Magno cells are large, have thick axons and usually collect input from many retinal cells.
Parvo cells are smaller, with fine axons and less myelin than mango cells.
Konio cells are diverse small cells with wide fields of input consisting of different cells types.
The three cellular pathways also differ in function.
Magno cells respond rapidly to changing stimuli, while parvo cells need time to respond.
The distinct patterns of structure and function in these cells have provided an opportunity for clinical assessment of their function.
Functional assessment of these cells is currently used in the field of ophthalmology where frequency-doubling technology perimetry selectively assesses the function of magno cells.
Evidence has accrued that the three pathways show characteristic patterns of malfunctions in multiple sclerosis, schizophrenia, Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases, and several other disorders.
The combination of behavioral assessment with other techniques, such as event related potentials and functional magnetic resonance imaging, seems to bear promising future clinical applications.
PMID: 22306614
Translating stem cell therapies to the clinic.
One of the most remarkable advances in translational neuroscience of the last few years has been the emergence of cell-based approaches for a wide range of neurological disease and injuries.
Molecular approaches designed for the treatment of neurological injuries and insults such as stroke, spinal cord injury and multiple sclerosis have proven to be of limited effectiveness in large part because it has become clear that there is not a single magic bullet that allows for neuronal survival, axonal regeneration and/or remyelination.
Rather the pathogenesis of insults such as stroke, spinal cord injury and MS are complex, engaging multiple cell types and signaling pathways and as a result require the simultaneous intervention in multiple arenas in order to facilitate functional recovery.
Cell therapies, because of their inherent complexity offer the opportunity to intervene at several points in the pathological process and thus may provide a more effective treatment strategy.
Among the multiple cell types assessed as therapeutic treatment for neural insults, stem cells have emerged as possibly the most effective class.
The particular characteristics of stem cells, namely their ability to self-renew and generate multiple cell types promoted their use as sources of cell replacement in the injured CNS.
It is likely, however that the major advance that stem cells have over more restricted cell types is their ability to modulate the responses of the immune system and to influence endogenous tissue stem cells to accentuate repair.
While preclinical studies are moving extremely rapidly, the effective translation of these studies to the clinical arena remains extremely challenging.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23516559
1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 suppresses TLR8 expression and TLR8-mediated inflammatory responses in monocytes in vitro and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis in vivo.
1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH)2D3) suppresses autoimmunity and inflammation; however, the mechanism of its action has not been fully understood.
We sought in this study to determine whether the anti-immune/anti-inflammatory action of 1,25(OH)2D3 is in part mediated through an interplay between 1,25(OH)2D3 and toll-like receptor (TLR)7/8 signaling.
1,25(OH)2D3 treatment prior to and/or following experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) induction effectively reduced inflammatory cytokine expression in the spinal cord and ameliorated EAE.
These effects were accompanied with a reduction in expression of several TLRs with the most profound effect observed for TLR8.
The expression of TLR8 adaptor protein MyD88 was also significantly reduced by 1,25(OH)2D3.
To determine the molecular mechanism by which 1,25(OH)2D3 suppresses EAE induction of TLR8 and inflammatory cytokine expression, we evaluated whether 1,25(OH)2D3 can directly inhibit TLR8 signaling and the resulting inflammatory responses in human THP-1 monocytes.
1,25(OH)2D3 treatment not only significantly reduced TLR8 expression but also the expression or activity of MyD88, IRF-4, IRF-7 and NF-kB in monocytes challenged with TLR8 ligands.
TLR8 promoter-luciferase reporter assays indicated that 1,25(OH)2D3 decreases TLR8 mRNA level in part via inhibiting TLR8 gene transcription activity.
As a result of inhibition on TLR8 signaling cascade at various stages, 1,25(OH)2D3 significantly diminished the TLR8 target gene expression (TNF-α and IL-1β).
In summary, our novel findings suggest that TLR8 is a new target of 1,25(OH)2D3 and may mediate the anti-inflammatory action of 1,25(OH)2D3.
Our findings also point to a destructive role of TLR8 in EAE and shed lights on pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 22248039
IFN-gamma signaling in the central nervous system controls the course of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis independently of the localization and composition of inflammatory foci.
Murine experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), a model for multiple sclerosis, presents typically as ascending paralysis.
However, in mice in which interferon-gamma (IFNγ) signaling is disrupted by genetic deletion, limb paralysis is accompanied by atypical deficits, including head tilt, postural imbalance, and circling, consistent with cerebellar/vestibular dysfunction.
This was previously attributed to intense cerebellar and brainstem infiltration by peripheral immune cells and formation of neutrophil-rich foci within the CNS.
However, the exact mechanism by which IFNγ signaling prohibits the development of vestibular deficits, and whether the distribution and composition of inflammatory foci within the CNS affects the course of atypical EAE remains elusive.
We induced EAE in IFNγ-/- mice and bone marrow chimeric mice in which IFNγR is not expressed in the CNS but is intact in the periphery (IFNγRCNSKO) and vice versa (IFNγRperiKO).
Blood-brain barrier permeability was determined by Evans blue intravenous administration at disease onset.
Populations of immune cell subsets in the periphery and the CNS were quantified by flow cytometry.
CNS tissues isolated at various time points after EAE induction, were analyzed by immunohistochemistry for composition of inflammatory foci and patterns of axonal degeneration.
Incidence and severity of atypical EAE were more pronounced in IFNγRCNSKO as compared to IFNγRperiKO mice.
Contrary to what we anticipated, cerebella/brainstems of IFNγRCNSKO mice were only minimally infiltrated, while the same areas of IFNγRperiKO mice were extensively populated by peripheral immune cells.
Furthermore, the CNS of IFNγRperiKO mice was characterized by persistent neutrophil-rich foci as compared to IFNγRCNSKO.
Immunohistochemical analysis of the CNS of IFNγ-/- and IFNγR chimeric mice revealed that IFNγ protective actions are exerted through microglial STAT1.
Alterations in distribution and composition of CNS inflammatory foci are not sufficient for the onset of atypical EAE.
IFNγ dictates the course of neuroinflammatory disorders mainly through actions exerted within the CNS.
This study provides strong evidence that link microglial STAT1 inactivation to vestibular dysfunction.
PMID: 23142918
Chronic pain in episodic illness and its influence on work occupations: a scoping review.
The aim of this review was to understand and synthesize the realm of knowledge on intermittent work capacity (IWC) about strategies to support work sustainability.
Specifically, this review focused on literature that examined productive work with individuals who have chronic pain due to Fibromyalgia, Breast Cancer, Multiple Sclerosis, and Human Immunodeficiency Virus.
A scoping review of research conducted across 10 databases.
Nature of the knowledge base on return to work barriers and strategies and future recommended strategies needed to support persons with IWC in maintaining work participation were charted and thematically analyzed and organized into micro, meso and macro categories.
Majority of the knowledge base reflects factors impeding and facilitating employment or re-employment at the micro level.
At the micro level, self advocacy was a strategy that persons with IWC used to maintain employment and navigate stigmatizing work environments to meet their needs.
At the meso level education and knowledge sharing with employers to increase awareness was underscored; at the macro level introduction of new policies was recommended.
These findings suggest the need for future greater examination of the dialectical relationships across micro, meso and macro level strategies to overcome work disparities for persons with IWC.
PMID: 23735284
Block of a subset of sodium channels exacerbates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Voltage-gated sodium channels (Navs) are involved in several aspects of the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis (MS).
Within acute MS plaques, they are expressed along demyelinated axons.
Studies in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) demonstrated a neuroprotective effect of non-specific Nav blockers.
Further, block of specific Navs involved in MS is suggested to have an advantage over non-specific blockers.
We investigated the effects of the synthetic Midi peptide in EAE, as it potently and specifically blocks Nav1.2, Nav1.4 and Nav1.6.
Administration of this Midi peptide worsens the clinical disease pattern and Nav1.2 and Nav1.6 expression levels were elevated in brain but not in spinal cord of Midi-treated mice, implicating that Navs play a complex role in the pathogenesis of EAE.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23735283
Gender differences in circulating levels of neutrophil extracellular traps in serum of multiple sclerosis patients.
Neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) trap and kill pathogens very efficiently but also activate dendritic cells and prime T cells.
Previously, we demonstrated that neutrophils are primed and circulating NETs are elevated in relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS), a T cell-mediated autoimmune disease.
Here, we demonstrate gender specific differences in circulating NETs but not in neutrophil priming in RRMS patients.
Although the results from our systematic and in depth characterization of these patients argue against a major role of circulating NETs in this disease, they suggest that NETs may underlie gender-specific differences in MS pathogenesis.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23608693
Mimics and rare presentations of pediatric demyelination.
This article reviews the features that should prompt consideration of diseases that mimic acquired demyelinating syndromes and multiple sclerosis using vignettes to highlight unusual clinical and radiologic features.
Cases of transverse myelitis, spinal infarction, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, fever-induced refractory epileptic encephalopathy in school-aged children, small-vessel vasculitis, Griscelli syndrome type 2, cysticercosis, vitamin B12 deficiency, and chronic relapsing inflammatory optic neuropathy are presented.
Crown Copyright © 2013.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23608690
Diagnosing neuromyelitis optica.
Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) is a severe inflammatory demyelinating disorder typically characterized by attacks of recurrent optic neuritis and transverse myelitis.
Advances in magnetic resonance imaging techniques and the discovery of the relatively specific NMO IgG biomarker have led to improved diagnostic accuracy and greater recognition of the broad clinical spectrum of aquaporin 4-related autoimmunity.
Brain lesions in NMO typically follow the distribution of aquaporin 4 expression and may be symptomatic.
Prompt diagnosis of NMO and NMO spectrum disorders has important therapeutic implications given the high risk of recurrent attacks and consequent severe disability, especially in childhood-onset disease.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23608694
Advanced magnetic resonance imaging in pediatric multiple sclerosis.
This review summarizes results from studies that have applied advanced magnetic resonance (MR) imaging techniques to patients with pediatric-onset multiple sclerosis (MS), and includes a discussion of cortical imaging techniques, volumetry, magnetization transfer and diffusion tensor imaging, proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy, and functional MR imaging.
Multicenter studies on the sensitivity of these techniques to natural history of disease and treatment response are required before their implementation into clinical practice.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23357161
Immunoadsorption in steroid-refractory multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disorder, with involvement of both the humoral and cellular components of the immune system.
The use of plasma exchange (PE) in steroid-refractory relapses has become an integral part of national and international guidelines for the treatment of steroid-resistant relapses of MS with an efficacy of 40-70%.
So far, 6 studies of immunoadsorption (IA) treatment in different forms of MS have been published, 4 of them in steroid-refractory MS relapses.
These 4 studies revealed a significant clinical improvement in 73-85% of patients with steroid-refractory MS relapses.
However in MS patients with non-active relapsing-remitting or secondary progressive course, there was no clinical improvement.
Despite the limited number of patients and studies, these data suggest a reasonably similar efficacy of IA in the treatment of steroid-refractory MS relapses compared to PE.
More prospective trials are needed to confirm and extend these results.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23357160
Immunoadsorption in steroid-refractory multiple sclerosis: clinical experience in 60 patients.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most common autoimmune inflammatory demyelinating disease of the central nervous system with a frequently relapsing or progressive course.
For steroid-resistant relapse, plasma exchange (PE) has been established as guidelines-recommended treatment option.
While PE is a non-selective extracorporeal blood purification process with elimination of plasma and subsequent substitution, immunoadsorption (IA) is a selective technique for the removal of autoantibodies and immune complexes with less adverse effects.
So far there are only few reports on the treatment of MS by IA.
The aim of this retrospective study was to assess the efficacy and safety of IA as an escalation therapy in MS patients.
A total of 60 patients with steroid-refractory MS relapse were treated by IA and analyzed retrospectively.
Patients received six standardized IA sessions using a non-regenerable tryptophan immunoadsorber, at average 58 days after first indications of relapse.
The treated plasma volume was two liters per IA session.
Outcome was measured as improvement in relapse symptoms.
From the pilot phase of the study comprising the first fourteen patients, detailed neurological examinations before and after IA such as Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS), Functional System Score (FS) and visual acuity are reported.
Of the following 46 patients, only qualitative data regarding the therapeutic success, and in addition clinical data on tolerability, are presently available.
In 53 of 60 patients clinically relevant improvement of the main symptom of MS relapse was noted after IA, there was no change in six patients, deterioration in one.
This corresponds to a response rate of 88%.
Symptomatic improvement was first registered on average after the third IA.
87.5% of patients could be treated through a peripheral venous access.
Only 12.5% needed a central venous catheter.
In four of 396 single treatments (1%) significant complications occurred, mild side effects or discomfort were registered 16 times (4%).
If peripheral venous access was chosen, missed puncture or puncture hematoma occurred in 22 cases (5.5%).
Immunoadsorption for the treatment of steroid-refractory MS relapse is safe and effective.
The response rate was 88% and non-inferior to previous results with plasma exchange.
Due to good tolerability, the treatment with immunoadsorption, which is usually possible through a peripheral venous access, can be performed on an outpatient basis.
Crown Copyright © 2012.
Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23516089
Comparing routine neurorehabilitation program with trunk exercises based on Bobath concept in multiple sclerosis: pilot study.
This study compared trunk exercises based on the Bobath concept with routine neurorehabilitation approaches in multiple sclerosis (MS).
Bobath and routine neurorehabilitation exercises groups were evaluated.
MS cases were divided into two groups.
Both groups joined a 3 d/wk rehabilitation program for 8 wk.
The experimental group performed trunk exercises based on the Bobath concept, and the control group performed routine neurorehabilitation exercises.
Additionally, both groups performed balance and coordination exercises.
All patients were evaluated with the Trunk Impairment Scale (TIS), Berg Balance Scale (BBS), International Cooperative Ataxia Rating Scale (ICARS), and Multiple Sclerosis Functional Composite (MSFC) before and after the physiotherapy program.
In group analysis, TIS, BBS, ICARS, and MSFC scores and strength of abdominal muscles were significantly different after treatment in both groups (p &lt; 0.05).
When the groups were compared, no significant differences were found in any parameters (p &gt; 0.05).
Although trunk exercises based on the Bobath concept are rarely applied in MS rehabilitation, the results of this study show that they are as effective as routine neurorehabilitation exercises.
Therefore, trunk exercises based on the Bobath concept can be beneficial in MS rehabilitation programs.
PMID: 22441536
Fluoxetine promotes remission in acute experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis in rats.
This study was carried out to clarify the effects of the antidepressant fluoxetine, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, for its potential use in autoimmune diseases like multiple sclerosis in a rat model of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE).
The rat EAE model was induced by subcutaneous injection of guinea pig spinal cord homogenate.
Rats received fluoxetine via daily intragastric administration, starting 2 weeks prior to immune induction (fluoxetine pretreatment).
Clinical scores and pathological changes in EAE rats were analyzed.
Changes in serum cytokine levels were assessed by ELISA.
Fluoxetine pretreatment significantly promoted remission in EAE.
Histologically, fluoxetine-induced neuroprotection was accompanied by reductions in inflammatory foci and in the degree of demyelination in the spinal cord of EAE rats.
The increase in serum IFN-γ in the EAE model was also suppressed by fluoxetine administration.
These findings suggest that the prophylactic use of fluoxetine can relieve symptoms during remission in the acute EAE model, and these neuroprotective effects are associated with its anti-inflammatory effects.
Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.
PMID: 23320797
TWEAK/Fn14 pathway modulates properties of a human microvascular endothelial cell model of blood brain barrier.
The TNF ligand family member TWEAK exists as membrane and soluble forms and is involved in the regulation of various human inflammatory pathologies, through binding to its main receptor, Fn14.
We have shown that the soluble form of TWEAK has a pro-neuroinflammatory effect in an animal model of multiple sclerosis and we further demonstrated that blocking TWEAK activity during the recruitment phase of immune cells across the blood brain barrier (BBB) was protective in this model.
It is now well established that endothelial cells in the periphery and astrocytes in the central nervous system (CNS) are targets of TWEAK.
Moreover, it has been shown by others that, when injected into mice brains, TWEAK disrupts the architecture of the BBB and induces expression of matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) in the brain.
Nevertheless, the mechanisms involved in such conditions are complex and remain to be explored, especially because there is a lack of data concerning the TWEAK/Fn14 pathway in microvascular cerebral endothelial cells.
In this study, we used human cerebral microvascular endothelial cell (HCMEC) cultures as an in vitro model of the BBB to study the effects of soluble TWEAK on the properties and the integrity of the BBB model.
We showed that soluble TWEAK induces an inflammatory profile on HCMECs, especially by promoting secretion of cytokines, by modulating production and activation of MMP-9, and by expression of cell adhesion molecules.
We also demonstrated that these effects of TWEAK are associated with increased permeability of the HCMEC monolayer in the in vitro BBB model.
Taken together, the data suggest a role for soluble TWEAK in BBB inflammation and in the promotion of BBB interactions with immune cells.
These results support the contention that the TWEAK/Fn14 pathway could contribute at least to the endothelial steps of neuroinflammation.
PMID: 22427288
Diagnostic approach of patients with longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis.
The aim of this study is to present a diagnostic and therapeutic approach in patients with LETM.
In a period between June 2008 and June 2010, all patients who fulfilled criteria for LETM were included in the study.
All patients underwent a standardized protocol of investigations presented in this paper.
Ten patients were included (5 male, 5 female, with the age distribution from 24 to 70 years).
Four patients were diagnosed with NMO/spatially limited NMO spectrum disorder, three patients were diagnosed with spinal cord ADEM, two multiple sclerosis (MS) and one patient with copper deficiency myelopathy.
Laboratory support for the diagnosis of NMO was positive NMO-IgG antibody; for the diagnosis of ADEM signs of peripheral nervous system involvement on electromyoneurography; and for the diagnosis of MS brain MRI lesions typical for MS, as well as positive oligoclonal bands (OCB) in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
All cases with inflammatory myelopathy were treated either with steroids or plasma exchange and copper replacement was started in the case of copper deficiency.
The mean time from the first symptom until the final diagnosis was 16.3 months (range 1 month to 7 years).
As each of idiopathic inflammatory demyelinating diseases that can present with LETM have specific therapy, the postponement in making the correct diagnosis can lead to a poor recovery.
In patients with LETM, a standardized diagnostic approach can result in a correct diagnosis and appropriate treatment.
PMID: 22932001
Uveitis- a rare disease often associated with systemic diseases and infections- a systematic review of 2619 patients.
Uveitis is an autoimmune disease of the eye that refers to any of a number of intraocular inflammatory conditions.
Because it is a rare disease, uveitis is often overlooked, and the possible associations between uveitis and extra-ocular disease manifestations are not well known.
The aim of this study was to characterize uveitis in a large sample of patients and to evaluate the relationship between uveitis and systemic diseases.
The present study is a cross-sectional study of a cohort of patients with uveitis.
Records from consecutive uveitis patients who were seen by the Uveitis Service in the Department of Ophthalmology at the Medical University of Vienna between 1995 and 2009 were selected from the clinical databases.
The cases were classified according to the Standardization of Uveitis Nomenclature Study Group criteria for Uveitis.
Data were available for 2619 patients, of whom 59.9% suffered from anterior, 14.8% from intermediate, 18.3% from posterior and 7.0% from panuveitis.
37.2% of all cases showed an association between uveitis and extra-organ diseases; diseases with primarily arthritic manifestations were seen in 10.1% of all cases, non-infectious systemic diseases (i.e., Behçet´s disease, sarcoidosis or multiple sclerosis) in 8.4% and infectious uveitis in 18.7%.
49.4% of subjects suffering from anterior uveitis tested positively for the HLA-B27 antigen.
In posterior uveitis cases 29% were caused by ocular toxoplasmosis and 17.7% by multifocal choroiditis.
Ophthalmologists, rheumatologists, infectiologists, neurologists and general practitioners should be familiar with the differential diagnosis of uveitis.
A better interdisciplinary approach could help in tailoring of the work-up, earlier diagnosis of co-existing diseases and management of uveitis patients.
PMID: 21678171
The nature of caregiving in children of a parent with multiple sclerosis from multiple sources and the associations between caregiving activities and youth adjustment overtime.
This study explored youth caregiving for a parent with multiple sclerosis (MS) from multiple perspectives, and examined associations between caregiving and child negative (behavioural emotional difficulties, somatisation) and positive (life satisfaction, positive affect, prosocial behaviour) adjustment outcomes overtime.
A total of 88 families participated; 85 parents with MS, 55 partners and 130 children completed questionnaires at Time 1.
Child caregiving was assessed by the Youth Activities of Caregiving Scale (YACS).
Child and parent questionnaire data were collected at Time 1 and child data were collected 12 months later (Time 2).
Factor analysis of the child and parent YACS data replicated the four factors (instrumental, social-emotional, personal-intimate, domestic-household care), all of which were psychometrically sound.
The YACS factors were related to parental illness and caregiving context variables that reflected increased caregiving demands.
The Time 1 instrumental and social-emotional care domains were associated with poorer Time 2 adjustment, whereas personal-intimate was related to better adjustment and domestic-household care was unrelated to adjustment.
Children and their parents exhibited highest agreement on personal-intimate, instrumental and total caregiving, and least on domestic-household and social-emotional care.
Findings delineate the key dimensions of young caregiving in MS and the differential links between caregiving activities and youth adjustment.
PMID: 23776780
Vitamin D and multiple sclerosis: Potential pathophysiological role and clinical implications.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is thought to arise due to an interplay of genetic and environmental risk factors.
Vitamin D, besides maintaining bone health and calcium metabolism, is thought to play an immunomodulatory role in the central nervous system.
Studies have shown that patients with the highest level of Vitamin D (99-152 nmol/l) had a significantly lower risk of MS than the subgroup with the lowest levels (15-63 nmol/l).
Furthermore, populations having a high oral intake of vitamin D had a decreased risk of MS.
Hypovitaminosis D is one of the environmental risk factors for MS based on numerous physiological, experimental and epidemiologic data, which can be corrected to provide an effective therapeutic option for this debilitating disease.
PMID: 22760102
Reproductive decision making after the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis (MS).
This study aimed to determine reproductive practices and attitudes of North Americans diagnosed with multiple sclerosis (MS) and the reasons for their reproductive decision making.
A self-administered questionnaire on reproductive practices was mailed to 13,312 registrants of the North American Research Committee on Multiple Sclerosis (NARCOMS) database who met inclusion criteria for the study.
Completed questionnaires were then returned to the authors in an anonymous format for analysis.
Among 5949 participants, the majority of respondents (79.1%) did not become pregnant following diagnosis of MS.
Of these, 34.5% cited MS-related reasons for this decision.
The most common MS-related reasons were symptoms interfering with parenting (71.2%), followed by concerns of burdening partner (50.7%) and of children inheriting MS (34.7%).
The most common reason unrelated to MS for not having children was that they already have a completed family (55.6%).
Of the 20.9% of participants who decided to become pregnant (or father a pregnancy) following a diagnosis of MS, 49.5% had two or more pregnancies.
This study indicates that an MS diagnosis does not completely deter the consideration of childbearing in MS patients of both genders.
PMID: 23203924
Early growth response gene-2 controls IL-17 expression and Th17 differentiation by negatively regulating Batf.
Early growth response gene (Egr)-2 is important for the maintenance of T cell homeostasis and controls the development of autoimmune disease.
However, the underlying mechanisms are unknown.
We have now discovered that Egr-2, which is induced by TGF-β and IL-6, negatively regulates the expression of IL-17, but not IL-2 or IFN-γ, in effector T cells.
In the absence of Egr-2, CD4 T cells produce high levels of Th17 cytokines, which renders mice susceptible to experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis induction.
T cells lacking Egr-2 show increased propensity for Th17, but not Th1 or Th2, differentiation.
Control of IL-17 expression and Th17 differentiation by Egr-2 is due to inhibition of Batf, a transcription factor that regulates IL-17 expression and Th17 differentiation.
Egr-2 interacts with Batf in CD4 T cells and suppresses its interaction with DNA sequences derived from the IL-17 promoter, whereas the activation of STAT3 and expression of retinoic acid-related orphan receptor γt are unchanged in Th17 cells in the absence of Egr-2.
Thus, Egr-2 plays an important role to intrinsically control Th17 differentiation.
We also found that CD4 T cells from multiple sclerosis patients have reduced expression of Egr-2 and increased expression of IL-17 following stimulation with anti-CD3 in vitro.
Collectively, our results demonstrate that Egr-2 is an intrinsic regulator that controls Th17 differentiation by inhibiting Batf activation, which may be important for the control of multiple sclerosis development.
PMID: 22138253
Mechanisms underlying muscle fatigue differ between multiple sclerosis patients and controls: a combined electrophysiological and neuroimaging study.
Increased sense of fatigue is an important and conspicuous symptom in multiple sclerosis (MS).
Muscle fatigue is associated with increased sense of fatigue in MS (Steens et al., 2011).
The aim of this study was to investigate mechanisms that can explain muscle fatigue in MS patients and controls.
We assessed changes in cortical activation (BOLD), voluntary activation (twitch interpolation) and muscle force during a sustained maximal voluntary contraction (MVC) in twenty MS patients and twenty healthy controls.
In control participants, individual differences in force decline (mean 65% MVC, 8 SD) during the sustained maximal contraction could be accounted for by differences in maximal voluntary force (R(2): 0.49, p = 0.001); stronger participants presented a larger force decline.
The small decline in voluntary activation (mean 7.8%, 11.8 SD) did not contribute significantly to the force decline.
During the sustained contraction, the force decline was accompanied by an increase in cortical activation in the main motor areas.
In MS patients, the differences in the decline in force (mean 67% MVC, 9 SD) were significantly associated (R(2): 0.51, p = 0.001) with a decline in voluntary activation (mean 20.1%, 20.6 SD) and not with maximal force or decline in rest twitch.
The corresponding cortical activation in motor areas showed an increase in the first two intervals of the sustained contraction but declined during the last interval.
Our data indicate that muscle fatigue during a sustained contraction in MS patients is associated with changes in the voluntary activation that are not sufficiently compensated by increased cortical activation.
Control participants, however, show increased cortical activation to compensate for these fatigue-related changes in voluntary activation and the major cause of force decline is therefore to be found in the periphery (muscles).
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22640499
Using magnetic resonance imaging as a means to study chronic cerebral spinal venous insufficiency in multiple sclerosis patients.
The goal of this work is to present a broad magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) protocol for use in the study of chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency (CCSVI).
The CCSVI MRI protocol includes the following sequences: time-resolved contrast-enhanced 3D MR angiography, 2D time-of-flight MR venography, and 3D volumetric interpolated breath-hold examination to assess venous structural abnormalities; phase-contrast MR imaging at different levels in the neck and thoracic cavity to quantify flow through the veins, arteries, and cerebrospinal fluid; T2-weighted imaging, T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery, and pre- and post-contrast T1-weighted imaging of the brain for examinations of parenchymal lesions; and finally, susceptibility-weighted imaging for quantification of iron deposition in the brain.
Data from 111 clinically definite multiple sclerosis patients were assessed for potential structural and flow CCSVI risk criteria, including stenosis, atresia, aplasia, dominant to subdominant venous flow ratio (D:sD), and the sum of their flow rates.
Of the 111 patients, 50 (45%) were determined to be nonstenotic (NST) with no stenosis or atresia in their internal jugular veins (IJV), and the rest 61 (55%) were stenotic (ST) having at least one internal jugular vein stenosis or atresia.
No occurrence of aplasia was observed.
A D:sD of greater than 3:1 was observed in 15 (24.6%) patients of the ST group and 2 (4.0%) patients of the NST group.
A sum of dominant and subdominant venous flow rate of &lt;8 mL/s was observed in 22 (36.1%) patients of the ST group and 6 (12.0%) patients of the NST group.
MRI provides valuable information in the observation of potential CCSVI risk factors.
Low total flow in the 2 dominant veins seemed to be the strongest indicator for risk of having stenoses in the multiple sclerosis population.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22640498
Chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency and multiple sclerosis: history and background.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the central nervous system (CNS) most commonly characterized by focal areas of myelin destruction, inflammation and axonal transection.
The multicentric inflammation and demyelination of the brain and spinal cord are associated with variable neurologic symptoms ranging from mild dysfunction to debilitating.
Typically, these symptoms are marked by episodes of clinical worsening followed by improvement.
The cause of this disease remains unclear currently, but the underlying etiology is generally considered to be immunologically based.
Other factors, including genetic, environmental and infectious influences have been implicated, as well.
Now recent studies have proposed that extracranial venous obstruction, termed chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency (CCSVI) may have a role in the pathogenesis of MS or many of its associated clinical manifestations.
It is postulated that venous narrowing affecting one or more of the jugular veins and/or the azygous vein in the chest may be responsible for abnormal blood flow in the veins draining the brain and spinal cord.
The abnormal flow may initiate and/or sustain a local inflammatory response at the blood-brain barrier that promote pathological changes within the CNS.
This review presents the history of the relationship between the vascular system and MS and explores the background of basic and clinical investigations that led to the concept of CCSVI.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21998709
A vesicular stomatitis virus replicon-based bioassay for the rapid and sensitive determination of multi-species type I interferon.
Type I interferons (IFN) comprise a family of cytokines that signal through a common cellular receptor to induce a plethora of genes with antiviral and other activities.
Recombinant IFNs are used for the treatment of hepatitis C virus infection, multiple sclerosis, and certain malignancies.
The capability of type I IFN to suppress virus replication and resultant cytopathic effects is frequently used to measure their bioactivity.
However, these assays are time-consuming and require appropriate biosafety containment.
In this study, an improved IFN assay is presented which is based on a recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) replicon encoding two reporter proteins, firefly luciferase and green fluorescent protein.
The vector lacks the essential envelope glycoprotein (G) gene of VSV and is propagated on a G protein-expressing transgenic cell line.
Several mammalian and avian cells turned out to be susceptible to infection with the complemented replicon particles.
Infected cells readily expressed the reporter proteins at high levels five hours post infection.
When human fibroblasts were treated with serial dilutions of human IFN-β prior to infection, reporter expression was accordingly suppressed.
This method was more sensitive and faster than a classical IFN bioassay based on VSV cytopathic effects.
In addition, the antiviral activity of human IFN-λ (interleukin-29), a type III IFN, was determined on Calu-3 cells.
Both IFN-β and IFN-λ were acid-stable, but only IFN-β was resistant to alkaline treatment.
The antiviral activities of canine, porcine, and avian type I IFN were analysed with cell lines derived from the corresponding species.
This safe bioassay will be useful for the rapid and sensitive quantification of multi-species type I IFN and potentially other antiviral cytokines.
PMID: 22818791
Pitfalls of 3D FLAIR brain imaging: a prospective comparison with 2D FLAIR.
To prospectively compare the image contrast of various brain lesions on two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) fluid-attenuated inversion-recovery (FLAIR) images and to highlight the pitfalls of 3D FLAIR.
Institutional review board approval was obtained.
We examined 94 brain lesions with 2D and 3D FLAIR at 3T.
First, we optimized the repetition time and echo time of 3D FLAIR with a volunteer study.
Then, we assessed the conspicuity and detection of the various lesions qualitatively, and the contrast ratio between the gray or white matter and lesions was calculated as a quantitative assessment.
We also performed a phantom study to investigate the effects of different flow velocities on 2D and 3D FLAIR.
With regard to the conspicuity and detection of most lesions (multiple sclerosis, ischemic lesions or infarction, brain tumors, or chronic trauma), 3D FLAIR was equal or superior to 2D FLAIR.
For these lesions, the mean contrast ratios were higher on 3D FLAIR than on 2D FLAIR images.
In terms of lesion conspicuity in the patients with hippocampal sclerosis and leptomeningeal metastasis, however, 3D FLAIR was equal or inferior to 2D FLAIR.
The ivy sign in patients with moyamoya disease was frequently obscured on 3D FLAIR.
The phantom study demonstrated that the signal-intensity ratio on 3D FLAIR decreased more rapidly with increasing velocity than that on 2D FLAIR.
Although 3D FLAIR may replace 2D FLAIR images for most patients, radiologists should keep in mind that 3D has some pitfalls.
Copyright © 2012 AUR.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22424554
Ex vivo gene therapy and vision.
Ex vivo gene therapy, a technique where genetic manipulation of cells is undertaken remotely and more safely since it is outside the body, is an emerging therapeutic strategy particularly well suited to targeting a specific organ rather than for treating a whole organism.
The eye and visual pathways therefore make an attractive target for this approach.
With blindness still so prevalent worldwide, new approaches to treatment would also be widely applicable and a significant advance in improving quality of life.
Despite being a relatively new approach, ex vivo gene therapy has already achieved significant advances in the treatment of blindness in pre-clinical trials.
In particular, advances are being achieved in corneal disease, glaucoma, retinal degeneration, stroke and multiple sclerosis through genetic re-programming of cells to replace degenerate cells and through more refined neuroprotection, modulation of inflammation and replacement of deficient protein.
In this review we discuss the latest developments in ex vivo gene therapy relevant to the visual pathways and highlight the challenges that need to be overcome for progress into clinical trials.
PMID: 23252517
Six-year follow-up of a case series with non-communicating syringomyelia in multiple sclerosis.
Non-communicating syringomyelia (NCS) has occasionally been described in case reports and small case series as an incidental finding of spinal cord (SC) pathology in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS), but only little is known on the clinical course and progression of NCS, and in more general terms on the prognosis of patients with MS and NCS.
Nine patients with MS with known NCS at baseline and a control group of 18 age-, sex- and disease course-matched patients with MS without NCS were recruited for a follow-up visit after 6 years.
All 27 patients underwent clinical examination and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and 8/9 patients with NCS were additionally studied with MRI of the SC.
MRI data were analysed for changes in length and maximal cross-sectional area of the NCS, lesion volumes of the brain and cord as well as for volumetric metrics of the whole brain (using SIENAX), the cerebellum and medulla oblongata (using ECCET).
NCS did not significantly change in size when corrected for multiple comparisons.
The clinical data (annual relapse rate, EDSS and disease duration) and MRI metrics (T2 and T1 lesion load; whole brain, cerebellar and medulla oblongata volumes as well as their percentage volume change per year) did not significantly differ between patients with MS with or without NCS.
The stable findings regarding size and shape of the syrinx and lack of distinguishing MRI and clinical features support the assumption that NCS is not defining a prognostically or pathogenetically distinct subgroup of patients with MS.
© 2012 The Author(s) European Journal of Neurology © 2012 EFNS.
PMID: 22942431
TCR bias and HLA cross-restriction are strategies of human brain-infiltrating JC virus-specific CD4+ T cells during viral infection.
Virus-specific CD4(+) T cells play a central role in control of viral pathogens including JC polyoma virus (JCV) infection.
JCV is a ubiquitous small DNA virus that leads to persistent infection of humans with no clinical consequences.
However, under circumstances of immunocompromise, it is able to cause an opportunistic and often fatal infection of the brain called progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML).
PML has emerged as a serious adverse event in multiple sclerosis patients treated with the anti-VLA-4 mAb natalizumab, which selectively inhibits cell migration across the blood-brain barrier and the gut's vascular endothelium thus compromising immune surveillance in the CNS and gut.
In a multiple sclerosis patient who developed PML under natalizumab treatment and a vigorous immune response against JCV after Ab washout, we had the unique opportunity to characterize in detail JCV-specific CD4(+) T cell clones from the infected tissue during acute viral infection.
The in-depth analysis of 14 brain-infiltrating, JCV-specific CD4(+) T cell clones demonstrated that these cells use an unexpectedly broad spectrum of different strategies to mount an efficient JCV-specific immune response including TCR bias, HLA cross-restriction that increases avidity and influences in vivo expansion, and a combination of Th1 and Th1-2 functional phenotypes.
The level of combinatorial diversity in TCR- and HLA-peptide interactions used by brain-infiltrating, JCV-specific CD4(+) T cells has not, to our knowledge, been reported before in humans for other viral infections and confirms the exceptional plasticity that characterizes virus-specific immune responses.
PMID: 23454903
Multiple sclerosis: managing patients in primary care.
In this era of the Patient Centered Medical Home model of care, chronic diseases such as multiple sclerosis (MS) are managed in partnership with specialty care practices.
For the patient and family living with MS, assuring that patients get proper care when and where they need it requires that nurse practitioners understand their role in assessing and managing complex chronic diseases.
PMID: 21703369
MRM assay for quantitation of complement components in human blood plasma - a feasibility study on multiple sclerosis.
As a proof-of-principle study, a multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) assay was developed for quantitation of proteotypic peptides, representing seven plasma proteins associated with inflammation (complement components and C-reactive protein).
The assay development and the sample analysis were performed on a linear ion trap mass spectrometer.
We were able to quantify 5 of the 7 target proteins in depleted plasma digests with reasonable reproducibility over a 2 orders of magnitude linear range (RSD≤25%).
The assay panel was utilized for the analysis of a small multiple sclerosis sample cohort with 10 diseased and 8 control patients.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 24179765
Regional cortical thickness in relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis: A multi-center study.
A comprehensive analysis of the global and regional values of cortical thickness based on 3D magnetic resonance images was performed on 250 relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis (MS) patients who participated in a multi-center, randomized, phase III clinical trial (the CombiRx Trial) and 125 normal controls.
The MS cohort was characterized by relatively low clinical disability and short disease duration.
An automatic pipeline was developed for identifying images with poor quality and artifacts.
The global and regional cortical thicknesses were determined using FreeSurfer software.
Our results indicate significant cortical thinning in multiple regions in the MS patient cohort relative to the controls.
Both global cortical thinning and regional cortical thinning were more prominent in the left hemisphere relative to the right hemisphere.
Modest correlation was observed between cortical thickness and clinical measures that included the extended disability status scale and disease duration.
Modest correlation was also observed between cortical thickness and T1-hypointense and T2-hyperintense lesions.
These correlations were very similar at 1.5 T and 3 T field strengths.
A much weaker inverse correlation between cortical thickness and age was observed among the MS subjects compared to normal controls.
This age-dependent correlation was also stronger in males than in females.
The values of cortical thickness were very similar at 1.5 T and 3 T field strengths.
However, the age-dependent changes in both global and regional cortical thicknesses were observed to be stronger at 3 T relative to 1.5 T.
PMID: 22354518
Neuromyelitis Optica Immunoglobulin G present in sera from neuromyelitis optica patients affects aquaporin-4 expression and water permeability of the astrocyte plasma membrane.
NMO-IgG autoantibody selectively binds to aquaporin-4 (AQP4), the most abundant water channel in the central nervous system and is now considered a useful serum biomarker of neuromyelitis optica (NMO).
A series of clinical and pathological observations suggests that NMO-IgG may play a central role in NMO physiopathology.
The current study evaluated, in well-differentiated astrocytes cultures, the consequences of NMO-IgG binding on the expression pattern of AQP4 and on plasma membrane water permeability.
To avoid or to facilitate AQP4 down-regulation, cells were exposed to inactivated sera in two different situations (1 hr at 4°C or 12 hr at 37°C).
AQP4 expression was detected by immunofluorescence studies using a polyclonal anti-AQP4 or a human anti-IgG antibody, and the water permeability coefficient was evaluated by a videomicroscopy technique.
Our results showed that, at low temperatures, cell exposure to either control or NMO-IgG sera does not affect either AQP4 expression or plasma membrane water permeability, indicating that the simple binding of NMO-IgG does not affect the water channel's activity.
However, at 37°C, long-term exposure to NMO-IgG induced a loss of human IgG signal from the plasma membrane along with M1-AQP4 isoform removal and a significant reduction of water permeability.
These results suggest that binding of NMO-IgG to cell membranes expressing AQP4 is a specific mechanism that may account for at least part of the pathogenic process.
Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22967748
Soluble thrombomodulin levels in plasma of multiple sclerosis patients and their implication.
Thrombomodulin (TM) on the cell-surface of cerebrovascular endothelial cells (CECs) is released into blood upon CEC damage.
TM promotes activation of protein C (APC), an anticoagulant, anti-inflammatory, neuroprotective molecule that protects CECs and impedes inflammatory cell migration across the blood-brain barrier (BBB).
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is associated with CEC damage and BBB dysfunction.
We evaluated soluble TM (sTM) levels as a biomarker of BBB integrity and whether glatiramer acetate (GA) influenced sTM levels in MS patients.
sTM levels quantified by 2-site ELISA from sera of healthy controls and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients (CEC-damage positive control) were compared with levels from patients with relapsing-remitting (RRMS) or secondary-progressive MS (SPMS), stratified as: RRMS/GA/no relapse, RRMS/GA/in relapse, RRMS no GA/no relapse, RRMS/no GA/in relapse; and SPMS/no GA.
Additionally, soluble endothelial protein C receptor (sEPCR) levels were assessed in the non-stratified MS group, SLE patients, and controls.
sTM levels were highest in RRMS patients taking GA with or without relapse, followed in decreasing order by SLE, RRMS/no GA/in relapse, SPMS, RRMS/no GA/no relapse, healthy controls.
sEPCR levels were highest in MS patients, then SLE, then controls.
sTM may be a useful biomarker of BBB integrity in RRMS patients.
Further evaluation of sEPCR is needed.
The finding that the highest sTM levels were in RRMS patients taking GA is interesting and warrants further investigation.
Published by Elsevier B.V.
PMID: 22796503
Immune-related GTPase Irgm1 exacerbates experimental auto-immune encephalomyelitis by promoting the disruption of blood-brain barrier and blood-cerebrospinal fluid barrier.
Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), the animal model of multiple sclerosis (MS), is a T cell-mediated autoimmune condition characterized by prominent inflammation in the CNS.
In this model, autoreactive T cells are primed in peripheral lymph nodes and migrate into uninflamed CNS across blood-cerebrospinal fluid barrier (BCSFB) and blood-brain barrier (BBB) to initiate inflammation.
However, the molecular mechanism controlling T cell migration remains to be determined.
In an in vivo EAE mouse model, we have shown that Irgm1 (also known as LRG-47), a member of the immunity-related GTPase family, promotes the disruption of both BCSFB and BBB, and exacerbates the phenotypes of MOG-induced EAE.
During EAE, Irgm1 was up-regulated in reactive astrocytes, ependymal cells and epithelial cells of the choroids plexus, which, in turn, promotes T cell infiltration into the CNS.
Electron microscopy study showed that the MOG-induced disruption of both BBB and BCSFB was protected in the Irgm1(-/-) mice.
Moreover, the expression of Claudin-5 (CLN-5), a major molecular determinant of BBB, in brain microvessel endothelial cells (BMVECs) was decreased in WT EAE mice while increased in Irgm1(-/-) mice.
In addition, the expression of CC-chemokine ligand 20 (CCL-20), an important chemokine mediating lymphocyte trafficking across BCSFB, in the epithelial cells of choroids plexus was significantly suppressed in naïve and EAE-induced Irgm1(-/-) mice.
These data suggest that Irgm1 is an important molecular regulator for the properties of both BBB and BCSFB, and a proinflammatory factor for EAE.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22253220
ID2: A negative transcription factor regulating oligodendroglia differentiation.
Remyelination of the central nervous system in multiple sclerosis patients is often incomplete.
Remyelination depends on normal oligodendrogenesis and the differentiation of oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPC) into mature oligodendrocytes (OL).
Inhibitor of DNA binding (ID), a transcription factor, is thought to inhibit oligodendrogenesis and the differentiation of OPC.
This Mini-Review aims to reveal the roles of and mechanisms used by IDs (mainly ID2) in this process.
An interaction between ID2 and retinoblastoma tumor suppressor is responsible for the cell cycle transition from G1 to S.
The translocation of ID2 between the nucleus and cytoplasm is regulated by E47 and OLIG.
An interaction between ID2 and OLIG mediates the inhibitory effects of bone morphogenic proteins and G protein-coupled receptor 17 on oligodendroglia differentiation.
ID2 expression is regulated by Wnt and histone deacetylases during the differentiation of OPC.
ID4, another member of the ID family, functions similarly to ID2 in regulating the differentiation of OPC.
The main difference is that ID4 is essential for oligodendrogenesis, whereas ID2 is nonessential.
This could have important implications for demyelinating diseases, and interfering with these pathways might represent a viable therapeutic approach for these diseases.
Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22169969
Neuroendocrine tumor of the pancreas in a patient with tuberous sclerosis: a case report and review of the literature.
A rare case of pancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasm in a patient with tuberous sclerosis complex is described.
The patient was a 31-year-old man who had multiple congenital subependymal nodules, bilateral cortical tubers, and seizures of difficult control.
A 2.3 cm × 2 cm well-delimitated solid tumor in the tail of the pancreas was discovered during a monitoring abdominal computed tomography.
A distal pancreatectomy was performed.
Histologically, the tumor was formed by uniform cells with moderated cytoplasm arranged in a combined trabecular and nested pattern.
The nuclear features were bland, and mitosis was infrequent.
There was no vascular invasion.
Immunoreactivity for cytokeratine AE1/AE3, chromogranin A, and synaptophysin confirmed the neuroendocrine nature of this neoplasia.
Pancreatic hormones were negatives.
One of the 5 lymph nodes isolated from the peripancreatic adipose tissue was positive for metastases.
Small series and case reports have documented that in tuberous sclerosis many endocrine system alterations might occur, affecting the function of the pituitary, parathyroid, and other neuroendocrine tissue, including islet cells of the pancreas.
However, the true association of these pathological conditions remains uncertain.
As far as we know, there are 10 cases reported of pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors in a setting of tuberous sclerosis complex, in which 2 cases resulted in malignant, nonfunctioning pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors.
PMID: 21763137
Central nervous system myelin: structure, synthesis and assembly.
The wrapping of multiple layers of myelin membrane sheets around an axon is of fundamental importance for the function of the nervous system.
In the central nervous system (CNS) oligodendrocytes synthesize tremendous amounts of cellular membrane to form multiple myelin internodes of highly stable membranes with a specific set of tightly packed lipids and proteins.
In recent years, mouse mutants have allowed great advances in our understanding of the functional and structural role of many of the major components of myelin.
The challenge now is to extend this knowledge to unravel the molecular machinery and mechanisms required to synthesize, assemble and wrap myelin multiple times around an axon at the appropriate developmental time.
Such insight will be essential in designing new therapeutic strategies to promote remyelination in demyelinating disorders such as multiple sclerosis.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22277432
[Researches for diagnostic neuroradiology focusing on signals and shapes].
MRI is one of essential tools for neurological diagnosis and useful for assessing contrast differences between lesions and normal tissues and for assessing morphological features of lesions.
Here, I introduce published neuroradiological researches conducted in my hospital, especially focusing on features of signals and shapes of lesions.
First, as regards signals, putaminal T(1)-hyperintensity is helpful for diagnosing multiple system atrophy, and it is more useful for discriminating multiple system atrophy from Parkinson disease and progressive supranuclear palsy than putaminal T(2)-hyperintensity rim or putaminal T(2)-hypointensity.
Linear T(2)-hyperintensity along the medial margin of the globus pallidus is helpful for diagnosis Machado-Joseph disease.
Second, as regards shapes, posterolateral putaminal linearization is a useful finding indicating putaminal atrophy which is a main feature of multiple system atrophy.
Flattened facial colliculus/fourth ventricular floor is helpful for differentiating Machado-Joseph disease from dentatorublopallidoluysian atrophy and SCA6.
A contrast enhancement pattern called cloud-like enhancement is specific for neuromyelitis optica comparing with multiple sclerosis.
In conclusion, all of these MRI features are easy to recognize and useful for diagnosing patients in daily clinical settings.
Careful but simple observation of lesions focusing on signals or shapes may lead to develop new MRI findings which improve our diagnostic abilities.
PMID: 22466233
[Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder: a case report].
Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) is a relapsing inflammatory disease of the central nervous system, usually affecting the optic nerves and the spinal cord.
It is presumed to be an antibody-mediated disorder and the target antigen is the water channel aquaporin-4 (AQP4) on astrocyte cell membranes.
NMO is a disease caused by astrocyte disorder and is distinct from multiple sclerosis (MS), which is a primarily demyelinating disease caused by oligodendrocyte disorder.
In NMO, spinal MRI shows a T2-hyperintense, longitudinally extensive (≥ 3 vertebral segments) spinal cord lesion.
The case, which has optic neuritis or transverse myelitis with the presence of AQP4 antibody, is called as NMO spectrum disorder.
A 68 year-old woman with a history of hypertension and diabetes mellitus was brought to the former hospital by ambulance with acute onset of tetraparesis.
She denied visual acuity disturbance.
MRI revealed a T2-hyperintense lesion from C5 to T2 level.
Laboratory examination showed the presence of AQP4 antibody and the absence of oligoclonal bands.
Low-dose steroid treatment was started after establishing a diagnosis of NMO.
She incompletely recovered from disability, although the T2-hyperintense lesion on MRI had almost disappeared six months after the onset.
It is important to maintain a high index of suspicion for NMO in cases with a longitudinally extensive spinal cord lesion, because untreated NMO leads to severe disability.
PMID: 23358745
[Pain management in palliative care. Current aspects of medicinal therapy].
Palliative care patients do not only suffer from cancer pain but also from painful muscle spasticity due to multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, after stroke or due to dementia if damage of the pyramidal motor system is present.
Centrally active muscle relaxants can be helpful also when used as coanalgesics for cancer pain.
In addition to opioids other coanalgesics, such as tricyclic antidepressants or serotonin/noradrenalin reuptake inhibitors as well as anticonvulsants (sodium channel and calcium channel blockers) can be helpful if neuropathic cancer pain is present.
Idiopathic Parkinsonism or multiple system atrophy leads more to a painful rigor and pain control should be supported here by optimal adjustment of L-DOPA or DOPA agonist therapy.
However, pain treatment should always address the psychological, social and spiritual demands of the patient.
PMID: 23582699
Therapies for multiple sclerosis: translational achievements and outstanding needs.
In recent years, multiple sclerosis (MS) research has progressed on several fronts, prompting numerous clinical trials, primarily for immunotherapeutics.
Although several new therapies have been disappointing and some were revealed to have devastating side effects, others have shown benefits and all have generated valuable knowledge about the progression of MS, the key contributors to pathogenesis, and on natural surveillance mechanisms for brain infections.
This makes now a useful time to take stock of recent advances in developing MS treatments and consider new approaches for adding information where the gaps are greatest - mainly in understanding the degenerative processes responsible for most of the long-term disability.
Here, we summarize currently accepted therapeutic principles and the drugs in late stages of development, as well as spotlighting potential novel openings for future research.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23509249
Cerebral hypoperfusion in multiple sclerosis is reversible and mediated by endothelin-1.
Decreased cerebral blood flow (CBF) may contribute to the pathology of multiple sclerosis (MS), but the underlying mechanism is unknown.
We investigated whether the potent vasoconstrictor endothelin-1 (ET-1) is involved.
We found that, compared with controls, plasma ET-1 levels in patients with MS were significantly elevated in blood drawn from the internal jugular vein and a peripheral vein.
The jugular vein/peripheral vein ratio was 1.4 in patients with MS vs. 1.1 in control subjects, suggesting that, in MS, ET-1 is released from the brain to the cerebral circulation.
Next, we performed ET-1 immunohistochemistry on postmortem white matter brain samples and found that the likely source of ET-1 release are reactive astrocytes in MS plaques.
We then used arterial spin-labeling MRI to noninvasively measure CBF and assess the effect of the administration of the ET-1 antagonist bosentan.
CBF was significantly lower in patients with MS than in control subjects and increased to control values after bosentan administration.
These data demonstrate that reduced CBF in MS is mediated by ET-1, which is likely released in the cerebral circulation from reactive astrocytes in plaques.
Restoring CBF by interfering with the ET-1 system warrants further investigation as a potential new therapeutic target for MS.
PMID: 21993617
Menarche, oral contraceptives, pregnancy and progression of disability in relapsing onset and progressive onset multiple sclerosis.
Female gender and hormones have been associated with disease activity in multiple sclerosis (MS).
We investigated age at menarche, use of oral contraceptives and pregnancy in relation to progression of disability in relapsing onset and progressive onset MS.
We conducted a cross-sectional survey among individuals with MS, registered by the Flemish MS Society in Belgium.
A time-to-event analysis and Cox proportional hazard regression were performed with time to Expanded Disability Status Score (EDSS) of 6 (requires a cane) as outcome measure.
Hazard ratios for the time from onset and the time from birth were adjusted for age at onset and immunomodulatory treatment.
Data on 973 women with definite MS were collected.
In the relapsing onset group, women with at least two pregnancies had a reduced risk to reach EDSS 6 compared with nulliparous women.
In the progressive onset group, later age at menarche was associated with a reduced risk to reach EDSS 6, whereas oral contraceptive use was associated with a higher risk of reaching EDSS 6.
Our study corroborates the association of pregnancies with a reduced progression of disability in relapsing onset MS.
In progressive onset MS, a slower progression was found in women with a later onset of menarche and a more rapid progression occurred when women reported the use of oral contraceptives.
PMID: 23127247
Bradykinin type 2 receptor -9/-9 genotype is associated with triceps brachii muscle hypertrophy following strength training in young healthy men.
Bradykinin type 2 receptor (B2BRK) genotype was reported to be associated with changes in the left-ventricular mass as a response to aerobic training, as well as in the regulation of the skeletal muscle performance in both athletes and non-athletes.
However, there are no reports on the effect of B2BRK 9-bp polymorphism on the response of the skeletal muscle to strength training, and our aim was to determine the relationship between the B2BRK SNP and triceps brachii functional and morphological adaptation to programmed physical activity in young adults.
In this 6-week pretest-posttest exercise intervention study, twenty nine healthy young men (21.5 ± 2.7 y, BMI 24.2 ± 3.5 kg/m(2)) were put on a 6-week exercise protocol using an isoacceleration dynamometer (5 times a week, 5 daily sets with 10 maximal elbow extensions, 1 minute rest between sets).
Triceps brachii muscle volumes were assessed by using magnetic resonance imaging before and after the strength training.
Bradykinin type 2 receptor 9 base pair polymorphism was determined for all participants.
Following the elbow extensors training, an average increase in the volume of both triceps brachii was 5.4 ± 3.4% (from 929.5 ± 146.8 cm(3) pre-training to 977.6 ± 140.9 cm(3) after training, p&lt;0.001).
Triceps brachii volume increase was significantly larger in individuals homozygous for -9 allele compared to individuals with one or two +9 alleles (-9/-9, 8.5 ± 3.8%; vs. -9/+9 and +9/+9 combined, 4.7 ± 4.5%, p &lt; 0.05).
Mean increases in endurance strength in response to training were 48.4 ± 20.2%, but the increases were not dependent on B2BRK genotype (-9/-9, 50.2 ± 19.2%; vs. -9/+9 and +9/+9 combined, 46.8 ± 20.7%, p &gt; 0.05).
We found that muscle morphological response to targeted training - hypertrophy - is related to polymorphisms of B2BRK.
However, no significant influence of different B2BRK genotypes on functional muscle properties after strength training in young healthy non athletes was found.
This finding could be relevant, not only in predicting individual muscle adaptation capacity to training or sarcopenia related to aging and inactivity, but also in determining new therapeutic strategies targeting genetic control of muscle function, especially for neuromuscular disorders that are characterized by progressive adverse changes in muscle quality, mass, strength and force production (e.g., muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease).
PMID: 22012819
[Chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency and multiple sclerosis: a review and update of the subject].
The aetiology of multiple sclerosis remains unknown at the present time, although the most likely explanation is that it has an autoimmune inflammatory origin.
During the history of this disease a vascular pathophysiology was once proposed, and it has recently re-emerged as a result of the work by Paolo Zamboni with the name of 'chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency'.
Following this hypothesis, Zamboni puts forward a curative treatment for multiple sclerosis by means of endovascular treatment of the internal jugular vein and the azygos vein.
However, several teams have attempted to replicate his findings without success.
In this review, we offer a chronological description of the studies carried out by Zamboni and the later attempts to replicate his work.
Our main conclusion is that, given the results we currently have available, we should be cautious and, for the time being, it would be advisable not to recommend the systematic use of this treatment for our patients.
PMID: 23312632
Epidemiology of neurologically disabling disorders.
Neurological disorders place a considerable burden upon individuals, their families, and society.
Some like stroke are common, while others like amyotrophic lateral sclerosis are much rarer.
Some conditions such as multiple sclerosis are reported to vary by latitude, while others such as traumatic brain injury can vary considerably by locality.
Depending upon the nature of the lesion, and factors such as time since onset, the consequences to the individual may also vary considerably, not just among different disorders, but within a given disorder.
Consequently the patterns of disease incidence, its prevalence, and its consequences are complex and may vary not just because of the condition itself, but also because, for example, case ascertainment may vary from study to study.
The cumulative annual incidence of disabling neurological disorders is likely to exceed 1000 per 100000, or 1% of the population.
The incidence is characterized by significant variation, which is mediated by genetic, geographical, demographic, and environmental factors.
While useful comparisons can be made through standardization techniques, planning for local services should be based upon local epidemiology, whenever available.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22226359
Rejuvenation of regeneration in the aging central nervous system.
Remyelination is a regenerative process in the central nervous system (CNS) that produces new myelin sheaths from adult stem cells.
The decline in remyelination that occurs with advancing age poses a significant barrier to therapy in the CNS, particularly for long-term demyelinating diseases such as multiple sclerosis (MS).
Here we show that remyelination of experimentally induced demyelination is enhanced in old mice exposed to a youthful systemic milieu through heterochronic parabiosis.
Restored remyelination in old animals involves recruitment to the repairing lesions of blood-derived monocytes from the young parabiotic partner, and preventing this recruitment partially inhibits rejuvenation of remyelination.
These data suggest that enhanced remyelinating activity requires both youthful monocytes and other factors, and that remyelination-enhancing therapies targeting endogenous cells can be effective throughout life.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23239947
Cytokine control of inflammation and repair in the pathology of multiple sclerosis.
Cytokines are secreted signaling proteins that play an essential role in propagating and regulating immune responses during experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), the mouse model of the neurodegenerative, autoimmune disease multiple sclerosis (MS).
EAE pathology is driven by a myelin-specific T cell response that is activated in the periphery and mediates the destruction of myelin upon T cell infiltration into the central nervous system (CNS).
Cytokines provide cell signals both in the immune and CNS compartment, but interestingly, some have detrimental effects in the immune compartment while having beneficial effects in the CNS compartment.
The complex nature of these signals will be reviewed.
PMID: 21927053
An introduction to trialing intrathecal baclofen in patients with hemiparetic spasticity: a description of 3 cases.
Intrathecal baclofen has been an effective therapy in the management of spasticity.
As interventional pain physicians are rapidly becoming the experts in intrathecal drug delivery, they are now frequently asked to trial and implant intrathecal baclofen therapy.
While some physicians might be very comfortable with the process of trialing and implanting, others will have next to no experience until the first consult appears on their desks.
While uncomplicated lower extremity spasticity can usually be trialed with a single-shot bolus injection, more complicated cases of upper and lower extremities or hemiparetic spasticity need a more delicate approach.
This is the first case series in the literature reporting a trial using an indwelling temporary catheter and inpatient admission.
Moreover, while the technical aspects of intrathecal therapy trialing and implantation might be familiar for the interventional physician, we review the indications and goals of therapy, about which the physician may be less familiar.
To present a technique for trialing intrathecal baclofen in patients with severe upper and lower extremities spasticity complication for which a single shot technique may be inadequate.
Case report of three patients.
Tertiary-care referral medical center.
A 30-year-old man with severe spasticity of the right upper and lower extremities with preserved left-sided function due to diffuse axonal injury.
A 45-year-old woman with traumatic brain injury and severe spasticity of the left upper extremity with minimal dysfunction in the right upper extremity.
A 34-year-old woman with Multiple Sclerosis and severe spasticity in the right upper extremity and bilateral lower extremities.
Placement of a temporary intrathecal catheter and an inpatient trial of intrathecal baclofen.
In all patients, there was significant improvement in spasticity as documented by decreased Modified Ashworth Scale scores while preserving motor strength and coordination in the unaffected extremities.
Retrospective review of 3 cases in a single center.
Trialing for baclofen is usually performed as a single shot bolus.
For patients with severe hemiparetic spasticity or in patients where weakness in the unaffected limb might significantly affect quality of life, this trialing technique may be inadequate.
In these patients, placement of a temporary intrathecal catheter and inpatient admission may be a more effective trial method.
PMID: 22021635
Systematic review of sonographic chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency findings in multiple sclerosis.
The sonographic findings of chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency (CCSVI) are used by some as selection criteria for venography.
We performed a systematic review to establish the prevalence and strength of association between sonographic CCSVI and multiple sclerosis (MS).
Two reviewers searched PubMed and EMBASE from 1948 to date using the keywords 'chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency' according to PRISMA guidelines.
Four cross-sectional studies met the criteria for inclusion.
The prevalence of CCSVI ranged from 7% to 100% in MS patients and from 2% to 36% in healthy controls.
Diagnostic odds ratios for MS varied between 2 and 26, 499 (I(2) = 94%).
Sensitivities of CCSVI for MS varied between 7% and 100% (I(2) = 98%).
Specificities varied between 64% and 100% (I(2) = 95%).
There is substantial variation in the strength of association between CCSVI and MS beyond that explained by demographic differences or sonographer training.
Reliable evidence on which to base decisions requires sonographic consensus and assessment of the reproducibility of individual criteria between trained sonographers.
PMID: 22910063
Interferon-β or azathioprine as add-on therapies in patients with active multiple sclerosis.
To evaluate safety and efficacy of add-on low-dose azathioprine or interferon (IFN)-beta in patients with active multiple sclerosis despite monotherapy.
This retrospective observational study evaluated 5-year data from 85 patients with active multiple sclerosis despite monotherapy with either IFN-beta or azathioprine, who received add-on azathioprine or IFN-beta, respectively.
In a subgroup of 23 patients, 10-year data were analysed.
Clinical (relapse frequency, disability) and laboratory effects were compared preceding and following the addition of second drug and between the two treatment regimens.
Potential serious adverse events were evaluated.
The add-on treatment triggered a drop in annualised relapse rate by approximately 1.5 points sustained over 5 and 10 years.
No effect on disability was observed.
Simultaneously, white blood cell and lymphocyte counts decreased, being below the physiological levels in 8-26% and 13-52% of patients at each time point, respectively.
The drop in relapse rate was independent from the dosage of azathioprine or changes in lymphocyte count.
Comparison between the two treatment regimens showed that, with the exception of lymphocyte count, these effects were triggered by the add-on of interferon but not azathioprine.
The combination therapy was well tolerated; however, after 5 years on treatment a moderately increased incidence of cancer was observed.
IFN-beta as add-on to azathioprine decreases relapse activity in active multiple sclerosis.
In contrast, azathioprine add-on in patients with suboptimal response to IFN-beta does not improve the control over the disease activity.
PMID: 22283602
Neuroprotective effects of progesterone in chronic experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Observations so far obtained in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) have revealed the promising neuroprotective effects exerted by progesterone (PROG).
The findings suggest that this neuroactive steroid may potentially represent a therapeutic tool for multiple sclerosis (MS).
However, up to now, the efficacy of PROG has been only tested in the acute phase of the disease, whereas it is well known that MS expresses different features depending on the phase of the disease.
Accordingly, we have evaluated the effect of PROG treatment in EAE induced in Dark Agouti rats (i.e. an experimental model showing a protracted relapsing EAE).
Data obtained 45 days after EAE induction show that PROG treatment exerts a beneficial effect on clinical score, confirming surrogate parameters of spinal cord damage in chronic EAE (i.e. reactive microglia, cytokine levels, activity of the Na(+) ,K(+) -ATPase pump and myelin basic protein expression).
An increase of the levels of dihydroprogesterone and isopregnanolone (i.e. two PROG metabolites) was also observed in the spinal cord after PROG treatment.
Taken together, these results indicate that PROG is effective in reducing the severity of chronic EAE and, consequently, may have potential with respect to MS treatment.
© 2012 The Authors.
Journal of Neuroendocrinology © 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
PMID: 23983889
Updates on clinically isolated syndrome and diagnostic criteria for multiple sclerosis.
Clinically isolated syndrome (CIS) is a central nervous system demyelinating event isolated in time that is compatible with the possible future development of multiple sclerosis (MS).
Early risk stratification for conversion to MS helps with treatment decisions.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is currently the most useful tool to evaluate risk.
Cerebrospinal fluid studies and evoked potentials may also be used to assess the likelihood of MS.
Four clinical trials evaluating the benefits of either interferon β (IFN-β) or glatiramer acetate (GA) within the first 3 months after a high-risk CIS demonstrate decreased rates of conversion to clinically definite MS (CDMS) and a lesser degree of MRI progression with early treatment.
In the 3-, 5-, and 10-year extension studies of 2 formulations of IFN-β, the decreased conversion rate to CDMS remained meaningful when comparing early treatment of CIS to treatment delayed by a median of 2 to 3 years.
Diagnostic criteria have been developed based on the clinical and MRI follow-up of large cohorts with CIS and provide guidance on how to utilize clinical activity in combination with radiographic information to diagnose MS.
The most recent 2010 McDonald criteria simplify requirements for dissemination in time and space and allow for diagnosis of MS from a baseline brain MRI if there are both silent gadolinium-enhancing lesions and nonenhancing lesions on the same imaging study.
The diagnostic criteria for MS require special consideration in children at risk for acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM), in older adults who may have small vessel ischemic disease, and in ethnic groups that more commonly develop neuromyelitis optica (NMO).
PMID: 23152401
Multiple sclerosis and glutamate excitotoxicity.
The previous understanding of multiple sclerosis was solely related to neuroinflammation and its harmful effects; however, countless data indicate the importance of some inflammation-independent, neurodegenerative mechanisms associated with mitochondria malfunction, iron deposition and oxidative stress.
Recently, it has been postulated that glutamate excitotoxicity, a phenomenon that takes place when an excessive amount of glutamate overactivates its cellular receptors and induces cell death, could be a missing link between inflammatory and neurodegenerative processes evident in multiple sclerosis.
Glutamate is the major excitatory neurotransmitter of the central nervous system, which has been proven to have a central role in a complex communication network established between all residential brain cells, including neurons, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and microglia.
Thus, the disturbance of glutamate homeostasis could affect practically all physiological functions and interactions of brain cells, leading to heterogeneity of pathological events.
The understanding of glutamate excitotoxicity as a valid mechanism of central nervous system damage in multiple sclerosis, requires the revision of the current knowledge about a source of elevated extracellular glutamate, glutamate receptor alterations, alterations of glutamate transporters and metabolizing enzymes, as well as molecular mechanism of excitotoxic damage.
PMID: 22160375
Effect of natalizumab on clinical and radiological disease activity in a French cohort of patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
Disease activity free in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) is a new concept introduced by the results of the AFFIRM study.
Our objective was to analyze the clinical and radiological efficacy of natalizumab treatment in actual clinical practice and compare it with the post hoc analysis of the AFFIRM study.
All patients with RRMS who began treatment with natalizumab at our two French MS centres between April 2007 and May 2008 were included and followed-up for at least 2 years.
No measurable disease activity (disease activity free) was defined as no activity on clinical measures (no relapses and no sustained disability progression) and radiological measures (no gadolinium-enhancing lesions and no new T2-hyperintense lesions on cerebral MRI).
A total of 193 patients were included.
Natalizumab was discontinued in 25.9% of cases before the completion of 2 years of treatment.
In our cohort, we observed patients with more severe disease than in the AFFIRM study.
The proportion of patients remaining free of clinical activity during 2 years of treatment was lower than in the AFFIRM study (37.8% vs. 64.3%).
The proportion of patients remaining free of radiological activity during 2 years of treatment was higher than in the AFFIRM study (68.9% vs. 57.7%), while the proportion of patients remaining free of disease activity during 2 years of treatment was comparable to the AFFIRM study (33.3% vs. 36.7%).
Natalizumab seems to be as effective in a real-life setting as in pivotal and post hoc studies.
The confirmation of such benefits is important because of the progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy risk.
PMID: 23076801
Simvastatin inhibits secretion of Th17-polarizing cytokines and antigen presentation by DCs in patients with relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis.
Statins, widely used cholesterol-lowering agents, have also been demonstrated to have antiinflammatory effects.
Here, we characterize the capacity of simvastatin to target DCs and modulate T-cell priming and Th17-cell differentiation, in a cohort of patients with relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS).
We report that simvastatin inhibits IL-1β, IL-23, TGF-β, IL-21, IL-12p70, and induces IL-27 secretion from DCs in RRMS patients, providing an inhibitory cytokine milieu for Th17 and Th1-cell differentiation.
The effect on DCs is mediated via induction of SOCS1, SOCS3, and SOCS7 gene expression, which are associated with the inhibition of STAT1, STAT3, and ERK1/2 phosphorylation.
A geranylgeranyl transferase inhibitor replicated simvastatin's effects on DC cytokine secretion, implicating that simvastatin-induced depletion of isoprenoids mediates this effect.
Simvastatin inhibited antigen presentation by DCs via suppression of the MHC class I expression, costimulatory molecules CD80 and CD40, and by inducing a dramatic loss of dendritic processes.
The changes in DC morphology were also mediated via inhibition of geranylgeranylation.
The therapeutic use of geranylgeranylation inhibitors may provide selective inhibition of key pathogenic cytokines that drive the autoimmune response in MS; their use represents a promising therapeutic approach that requires further clinical testing.
© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH &amp; Co.
KGaA, Weinheim.
PMID: 23154123
Long-term outcome of paediatric-onset multiple sclerosis: a population-based study.
Age of onset of multiple sclerosis (MS) peaks in the 3rd and 4th decades and is rarely less than 18.
Robust longitudinal studies in paediatric-onset MS (POMS) are limited, and a clearer understanding of outcome could optimise management strategies.
Patients with disease onset &lt;18 years were identified from a prospective population-based register.
Clinical features including presenting symptoms, time to Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) 4.0, 6.0 and 8.0 and onset of secondary progression were compared with patients with adult-onset MS (AOMS).
111 POMS patients were identified from a cohort of 2068.
No significant differences in sex ratio, familial recurrence, relapse rate, ethnicity or clinical symptoms at presentation were identified between POMS and AOMS.
However, interval to second relapse was longer (5 vs 2.6 years, p=0.04) and primary progressive disease was less common (0.9% vs 8.5%, p=0.003) in POMS than in AOMS.
POMS patients also took longer to develop secondary progressive disease (32 vs 18 years, p=0.0001) and to reach disability milestones (EDSS 4.0, 23.8 vs 15.5 years, p&lt;0.0001; EDSS 6.0, 30.8 vs 20.4 years, p&lt;0.0001; EDSS 8.0, 44.7 vs 39 years, p=0.02), but did so between 7.0 and 12 years younger than in AOMS.
5.4% of patients with MS have POMS (2.7% &lt;16 years; 0.3% &lt;10 years) and have distinct phenotypic characteristics in early disease.
Furthermore, while patients with POMS take longer to reach disability milestones, they do so at a younger age than their adult counterparts and could be considered to have a poorer prognosis.
Management strategies for these patients should take account of these data.
PMID: 23997815
Magnetic resonance monitoring of lesion evolution in multiple sclerosis.
Disease activity in multiple sclerosis (MS) is strongly linked to the formation of new lesions, which involves a complex sequence of inflammatory, degenerative, and reparative processes.
Conventional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) techniques, such as T2-weighted and gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted sequences, are highly sensitive in demonstrating the spatial and temporal dissemination of demyelinating plaques in the brain and spinal cord.
Hence, these techniques can provide quantitative assessment of disease activity in patients with MS, and they are commonly used in monitoring treatment efficacy in clinical trials and in individual cases.
However, the correlation between conventional MRI measures of disease activity and the clinical manifestations of the disease, particularly irreversible disability, is weak.
This has been explained by a process of exhaustion of both structural and functional redundancies that increasingly prevents repair and recovery, and by the fact that these imaging techniques do not suffice to explain the entire spectrum of the disease process and lesion development.
Nonconventional MRI techniques, such as magnetization transfer imaging, diffusion-weighted imaging, and proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy, which can selectively measure the more destructive aspects of MS pathology and monitor the reparative mechanisms of this disease, are increasingly being used for serial analysis of new lesion formation and provide a better approximation of the pathological substrate of MS plaques.
These nonconventional MRI-based measures better assess the serial changes in newly forming lesions and improve our understanding of the relationship between the damaging and reparative mechanisms that occur in MS.
PMID: 23997817
Targeting ion channels for the treatment of autoimmune neuroinflammation.
Pharmacological targeting of ion channels has long been recognized as an attractive strategy for the treatment of various diseases.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disorder of the central nervous system with a prominent neurodegenerative component.
A multitude of different cell types are involved in the complex pathophysiology of this disorder, including cells of the immune system (e.g. T and B lymphocytes and microglia), the neurovascular unit (e.g. endothelial cells and astrocytes) and the central nervous system (e.g. astrocytes and neurons).
The pleiotropic expression and function of ion channels gives rise to the attractive opportunity of targeting different players and pathophysiological aspects of MS by the modulation of ion channel function in a cell-type and context-specific manner.
We discuss the emerging knowledge about ion channels in the context of autoimmune neuroinflammation.
While some pharmacological targets are at the edge of clinical translation, others have only recently been discovered and are still under investigation.
Special focus is given to those candidates that could be attractive novel targets for future therapeutic approaches in neuroimmune autoinflammation.
PMID: 21900637
Genetic analysis of aquaporin-4 in neuromyelitis optica.
Autoantibodies to aquaporin-4 (AQP4) are specific and pathogenic for neuromyelitis optica (NMO).
Therefore, we evaluated whether AQP4 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are associated with susceptibility to NMO or whether mutations that potentially alter AQP4 structure or expression are present in some patients.
We genotyped 8 AQP4 SNPs chosen based on their minor allele frequency, location, and novelty in 177 NMO sporadic cases, 14 NMO familial cases, and 1,363 matched controls by TaqMan-based assay.
We performed bidirectional sequencing of the promoter (1 kb), exons 0-4, and flanking splice consensus sequences, and the 5' and 3' untranslated regions of 177 sporadic and 14 familial NMO cases.
One of 8 SNPs (minor allele frequency = 0.01) was associated with NMO (NC 18.8; chrom pos.
22695167: T&gt;A): odds ratio (95% confidence interval) = 13.1 (1.4-126.7); p = 0.026.
In 3 patients with NMO (2 related), we detected 2 different missense allelic mutations at Arg19 (R19I and R19T).
None of the 1,363 control subjects had Arg19 mutations (p = 0.001).
Except for one uncommon SNP, no tested SNP was associated with NMO, nor were 3 SNP haplotypes, providing no support for the hypothesis that genetic variation in AQP4 accounts for overall susceptibility to NMO.
Two different allelic Arg19 missense mutations are specific to NMO and segregated with the disease in one pedigree.
Although the pathobiology underlying this is not yet established, their effects on the structure of the M1 isoform N terminus or the regulatory sequence of the M23 isoform by virtue of their location support a role of AQP4 orthogonal array formation on molecular susceptibility to NMO.
PMID: 22357892
Multiple sclerosis: effects of cognitive rehabilitation on structural and functional MR imaging measures--an explorative study.
To evaluate brain changes after cognitive rehabilitation in patients with clinically stable relapsing-remitting (RR) multiple sclerosis (MS) by using neuropsychologic assessment and structural and functional magnetic resonance (MR) imaging techniques.
The study was conducted with approval of the involved institutional review boards.
Written informed consent was obtained from each participant.
Twenty patients with RR MS and cognitive deficits at baseline were randomly assigned to undergo treatment (n = 10), which entailed computer-assisted cognitive rehabilitation of attention and information processing and executive functions, or to serve as a control subjects (n = 10) without cognitive rehabilitation.
All patients underwent a standardized neuropsychologic assessment and MR imaging at baseline and after 12 weeks.
Changes in gray matter (GM) volumes on three-dimensional T1-weighted images and changes in normal-appearing white matter (NAWM) architecture on diffusion-weighted images were assessed.
Changes in functional activity at functional MR imaging during the Stroop task and at rest were also investigated by using linear models.
As compared with their performance at baseline, the patients in the treatment group improved at tests of attention and information processing and executive functions.
Neither structural modifications to GM volume nor modifications to NAWM architecture were detected at follow-up in both groups.
Functional MR imaging demonstrated modifications of the activity of the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC)/precuneus and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (PFC) during the Stroop task, as well as modifications of the activity of the anterior cingulum, PCC and/or precuneus, left dorsolateral PFC, and right inferior parietal lobule at rest in the treatment group compared with the control group.
In the treatment group, functional MR imaging changes were correlated with cognitive improvement (P &lt; .0001 to .01).
Rehabilitation of attention and information processing and executive functions in RR MS may be effected through enhanced recruitment of brain networks subserving the trained functions.
© RSNA, 2012.
PMID: 22277501
[Increased variability of membrane potentials in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis].
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is characterized by increased excitability of motor neurons and early involvement of large motor fibers that have low electrical thresholds.
Despite the advent of new techniques of threshold tracking, exploration of this abnormal excitability has not been straightforward, by tracking at the single target level as previous reported, because of the heterogeneous nature of the disease process among fibers that have variable thresholds.
We have assessed different populations of motor axons by tracking at four different target response levels (10, 20, 40 and 60% of maximum compound muscle action potentials), and conducted multiple nerve excitability tests in 27 ALS patients and 23 control subjects.
In normal controls, axons with low thresholds have the following characteristics compared to those with high thresholds: greater threshold reduction during depolarizing currents and smaller threshold increase to hyperpolarizing currents, reflecting the order of the fiber size.
In contrast, ALS patients lacked these relationships, suggesting increased variability of axonal membrane potentials.
Three ALS patients demonstrated changes in threshold electrotonus, consistent with overt membrane depolarization, as seen in ischemic nerves.
The variability of motor nerve excitability accounts for fasciculations, confirms previously reported dysfunction of potassium channels, and suggests failure of Na(+)/K(+)pumps, possibly caused by mitochondrial dysfunctions at the early stage.
PMID: 22357894
Multiple sclerosis: cerebral circulation time.
To assess cerebral circulation times (CCTs) in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) and control subjects by using contrast material-enhanced ultrasonography (US) to determine whether vascular abnormalities can be detected in this disease.
This study was approved by the local ethics committee, and informed consent was obtained from all subjects.
One hundred three patients with MS and 42 control subjects underwent extracranial and transcranial venous echo-color Doppler ultrasonography (US) and contrast-enhanced US.
CCT was defined as the difference in arrival time of the US contrast agent bolus between the carotid artery and the internal jugular vein.
The presence of chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency (CCSVI) was defined according to previously reported criteria for the extracranial and transcranial US techniques.
Nonparametric statistics, including the Mann-Whitney U test and the Kruskal-Wallis analysis of variance, were used to compare contrast-enhanced US parameters between groups.
The longest and average CCTs were substantially prolonged in patients with MS compared with those in control subjects (median longest CCT in patients with MS, 6.47 seconds [range, 3.29-29.24 seconds]; that in control subjects, 5.54 seconds [range, 2.57-7.63 seconds]; P &lt; .001; median average CCT in patients with MS, 5.76 seconds [range, 2.64-17.51 seconds]; that in control subjects, 5.01 seconds [range, 2.57-7.06 seconds]; P &lt; .002).
No correlation was found between CCTs and clinical parameters.
The prevalence of CCSVI was higher in patients with MS than in control subjects (77% vs 28%, P &lt; .0001).
CCT was not significantly different between patients with MS who had CCSVI and patients with MS who did not (P = .182).
These results suggest that contrast-enhanced US with CCT assessment may have a role in the evaluation of cerebral blood flow in patients with MS and that a vascular impairment could be associated with MS.
The finding of a prolonged CCT at contrast-enhanced US does not result from outflow impairment.
Further studies are required to verify these observations and to clarify if CCT and CCSVI have any physiologic and clinical relevance in MS.
© RSNA 2012.
PMID: 22358068
Application of autologous stem cell transplantation in various adult and pediatric rheumatic diseases.
In the past 15 years, more than 1,500 patients worldwide have received a hematopoietic stem cell transplant, mostly autologous, as treatment for a severe autoimmune disease (AD).
A recent retrospective analysis of 900 patients showed that the majority had multiple sclerosis, systemic sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA; n = 65) and idiopathic cytopenic purpura.
An overall 85% 5-year survival and 43% progression-free survival was seen, with 100-day transplant-related mortality (TRM) ranging between 1% (RA) and 11% (SLE and JIA).
Around 30% of patients in all disease subgroups had a complete response, despite full immune reconstitution.
In many patients, morphological improvement was documented beyond any predicted known effects of intense immunosuppression alone.
It is hoped that the results of three ongoing large prospective, randomized, controlled trials will allow modification of the protocols to reduce the high TRM, which relates to regimen intensity, age of patient, and comorbidity.
Multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs), including autologous MSCs, have recently been tested in various ADs, exploiting their immune-modulating properties and apparent low acute toxicity.
Despite encouraging small phase I/II studies, no positive data from randomized, prospective studies are as yet available in the peer-reviewed literature.
PMID: 23042930
Multicontrast MR imaging at 7T in multiple sclerosis: highest lesion detection in cortical gray matter with 3D-FLAIR.
7T MR imaging has led to improved detection and classification of cortical MS lesions, mainly based on T2*-weighted gradient-echo sequences.
Depiction of cortical GM by using the recommended MS imaging protocol has not yet been investigated at 7T.
We aimed to investigate prospectively which recommended sequence for clinical use has the highest value at 7T, in terms of GM and WM lesion detection.
Thirty-seven patients with MS (mean age, 43.8 years; 25 women) and 7 healthy controls (mean age, 40.4 years; 5 women) underwent multicontrast 7T MR imaging including the recommended clinical 2D-T2WI, 3D-T1WI, 3D-FLAIR, and GM-specific 3D-DIR.
Lesions were scored and categorized anatomically by 3 raters, in consensus.
The value of sequences was evaluated lesion-wise and patient-wise (Wilcoxon signed-rank test).
At 7T, 3D-FLAIR detected the highest number of total cortical GM lesions (217), 89% more than 3D-DIR and 87% and 224% more than 2D-T2WI and 3D-T1WI.
Patient-wise analysis showed that this difference between 3D-FLAIR and 3D-DIR was statistically significant (P&lt;.04), and most pronounced for the number of mixed lesions (P&lt;.03).
3D-FLAIR also detected the highest number of total WM lesions (2605), but the difference with 3D-DIR and 3D-T1WI was not significant.
When using recommended clinical sequences at 7T, the best way to detect cortical GM lesions is with 3D-FLAIR and not by GM-specific 3D-DIR or by conventional 2D-T2WI and 3D-T1WI sequences.
PMID: 23369377
Potential of urinary metabolites for diagnosing multiple sclerosis.
A definitive diagnostic test for multiple sclerosis (MS) does not exist; instead physicians use a combination of medical history, magnetic resonance imaging, and cerebrospinal fluid analysis (CSF).
Significant effort has been employed to identify biomarkers from CSF to facilitate MS diagnosis; however, none of the proposed biomarkers have been successful to date.
Urine is a proven source of metabolite biomarkers and has the potential to be a rapid, noninvasive, inexpensive, and efficient diagnostic tool for various human diseases.
Nevertheless, urinary metabolites have not been extensively explored as a source of biomarkers for MS.
We demonstrate that urinary metabolites have significant promise for monitoring disease-progression, and response to treatment in MS patients.
NMR analysis of urine permitted the identification of metabolites that differentiate experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE)-mice (prototypic disease model for MS) from healthy and MS drug-treated EAE mice.
PMID: 23059536
Discovery and initial verification of differentially abundant proteins between multiple sclerosis patients and controls using iTRAQ and SID-SRM.
In the present study, we aimed to discover cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) proteins with significant abundance difference between early multiple sclerosis patients and controls, and do an initial verification of these proteins using selected reaction monitoring (SRM). iTRAQ and Orbitrap MS were used to compare the CSF proteome of patients with clinically isolated syndrome (CIS) (n=5), patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis that had CIS at the time of lumbar puncture (n=5), and controls with other inflammatory neurological disease (n=5).
Of more than 1200 identified proteins, five proteins were identified with significant abundance difference between the patients and controls.
In the initial verification using SRM we analyzed a larger patient and control cohort (n=132) and also included proteins reported as differentially abundant in multiple sclerosis in the literature.
We found significant abundance difference for 11 proteins after verification, of which the five proteins alpha-1-antichymotrypsin, contactin-1, apolipoprotein D, clusterin, and kallikrein-6 were significantly differentially abundant in several of the group comparisons.
This initial study form the basis for further biomarker verification studies in even larger sample cohorts, to determine if these proteins have relevance as diagnostic or prognostic biomarkers for multiple sclerosis.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22760942
A mechanism-based classification of pain in multiple sclerosis.
Pharmacological treatment of pain in multiple sclerosis (MS) is challenging due to the many underlying pathophysiological mechanisms.
Few controlled trials show adequate pain control in this population.
Emerging evidence suggests that pain might be more effectively classified and treated according to symptoms and underlying mechanisms.
The new mechanism-based classification we propose here distinguishes nine types of MS-related pain: trigeminal neuralgia and Lhermitte's phenomenon (paroxysmal neuropathic pain due to ectopic impulse generation along primary afferents), ongoing extremity pain (deafferentation pain secondary to lesion in the spino-thalamo-cortical pathways), painful tonic spasms and spasticity pain (mixed pains secondary to lesions in the central motor pathways but mediated by muscle nociceptors), pain associated with optic neuritis (nerve trunk pain originating from nervi nervorum), musculoskeletal pains (nociceptive pain arising from postural abnormalities secondary to motor disorders), migraine (nociceptive pain favored by predisposing factors or secondary to midbrain lesions), and treatment-induced pains.
Identification of various types of MS-related pain will allow appropriate targeted pharmacological treatment and improve clinical practice.
PMID: 22699912
Targeted ablation of oligodendrocytes induces axonal pathology independent of overt demyelination.
The critical role of oligodendrocytes in producing and maintaining myelin that supports rapid axonal conduction in CNS neurons is well established.
More recently, additional roles for oligodendrocytes have been posited, including provision of trophic factors and metabolic support for neurons.
To investigate the functional consequences of oligodendrocyte loss, we have generated a transgenic mouse model of conditional oligodendrocyte ablation.
In this model, oligodendrocytes are rendered selectively sensitive to exogenously administered diphtheria toxin (DT) by targeted expression of the diphtheria toxin receptor in oligodendrocytes.
Administration of DT resulted in severe clinical dysfunction with an ascending spastic paralysis ultimately resulting in fatal respiratory impairment within 22 d of DT challenge.
Pathologically, at this time point, mice exhibited a loss of ∼26% of oligodendrocyte cell bodies throughout the CNS.
Oligodendrocyte cell-body loss was associated with moderate microglial activation, but no widespread myelin degradation.
These changes were accompanied with acute axonal injury as characterized by structural and biochemical alterations at nodes of Ranvier and reduced somatosensory-evoked potentials.
In summary, we have shown that a death signal initiated within oligodendrocytes results in subcellular changes and loss of key symbiotic interactions between the oligodendrocyte and the axons it ensheaths.
This produces profound functional consequences that occur before the removal of the myelin membrane, i.e., in the absence of demyelination.
These findings have clear implications for the understanding of the pathogenesis of diseases of the CNS such as multiple sclerosis in which the oligodendrocyte is potentially targeted.
PMID: 23211291
Granuloma faciale: a cutaneous lesion sharing features with IgG4-associated sclerosing diseases.
The pathogenesis of granuloma faciale (GF), framed in the group of cutaneous vasculopathic dermatitis, is poorly understood.
The present study investigated whether GF might be part of the spectrum of IgG4-related sclerosing diseases (IgG4-RD).
Erythema elevatum diutinum (EED), believed to belong to the same group of disorders as GF, was also studied for comparison.
Thirty-one biopsies of GF obtained from 25 patients (18 men, 7 women) and 5 cases of EED (4 women and 1 man) were analyzed morphologically and for the expression of IgG and IgG4 by immunohistochemistry.
The distribution of Th1, T regulatory and Th2 T-cell subsets, respectively, identified by anti-T-bet, anti-FoxP3, and anti-GATA-3 antibodies, was also evaluated.
The dermal inflammatory infiltrate in GF contained eosinophils and plasma cells in variable proportions.
Obliterative venulitis was found in 16 cases, and storiform fibrosis, a typical feature of IgG4-RD, was observed in 8 cases and was prominent in 3 of them.
On immunohistochemical analysis 7 of 31 biopsies (22.6%) from 6 GF patients fulfilled the criteria for IgG4-RD (IgG4/IgG ratio &gt;40%, and absolute number of IgG4 per high-power field &gt;50).
Interestingly, the 6 patients were male, and 4 showed recurrent and/or multiple lesions.
In an additional 5 cases, only the IgG4/IgG ratio was abnormal.
None of the 5 EED cases fulfilled the criteria for IgG4-RD.
The T-cell subsets in GF were quite variable in number, GATA-3 lymphocytes were generally more abundant, but no relationship with the number of IgG4 plasma cells was found.
The study indicates that a significant number of GF cases are associated with an abnormal content of IgG4 plasma cells; this association was particularly obvious in male patients and in cases presenting with multiple or recurrent lesions.
As morphologic changes typically found in IgG4-RD, such as obliterative vascular inflammation and storiform sclerosis, are found in GF, we suggest that GF might represent a localized form of IgG4-RD.
PMID: 21992960
Natural killer cell phenotype and clinical response to interferon-beta therapy in multiple sclerosis.
CD56(bright) NK cells, which may play a role in immunoregulation, are expanded in multiple sclerosis (MS) patients treated with immunomodulatory therapies such as daclizumab and interferon-beta (IFNβ).
Yet, whether this NK cell subset is directly involved in the therapeutic effect is unknown.
As NK receptor (NKR) expression by subsets of NK cells and CD8+ T lymphocytes is related to MS clinical course, we addressed whether CD56(bright) NK cells and NKR in IFNβ-treated MS patients differ according to the clinical response.
IFNβ was associated to lower LILRB1+ and KIR+NK cells, and higher NKG2A+NK cell proportions, an immunophenotypic pattern mainly found in responders.
After IFNβ treatment, a CD56(bright) NK cell expansion was significantly related to a positive clinical response.
Our results reveal that IFNβ may promote in responders changes in the NK cell immunophenotype, corresponding to the profile found at early maturation stages of this lymphocyte lineage.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22763625
Exploratory investigation of eight circulating plasma markers in brain tumor patients.
Several blood biomarkers have been established for the early diagnosis, screening and follow-up of non central nervous system cancers.
However, there is lack of knowledge on biochemical blood alterations in brain tumor patients.
In this study, we prospectively collected blood plasma samples of 105 adult brain tumor patients with diffuse low-grade glioma (World Health Organization (WHO) II, n = 7), anaplastic glioma (WHO III, n = 10), glioblastoma multiforme (WHO IV, glioblastoma multiforme (GBM)) (n = 34), meningioma (WHO I, n = 8), atypical meningioma (WHO II, n = 5), and intracerebral metastasis (ICM; n = 41).
In each case, we measured plasma concentrations of neuropeptide Y, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor, placental growth factor (PlGF), S100B, secretagogin, interleukin 8, and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
Plasma marker concentrations were correlated to patient parameters including neuropathological diagnosis and neuroradiological features.
Most of the markers were detectable in all diagnostic categories in variable concentrations.
GFAP plasma detectability was strongly associated with a diagnosis of GBM (p &lt; 0.001).
Plasma GFAP and plasma placental growth factor showed promising moderate potential in the differential diagnosis of unifocal GBM versus unifocal supratentorial ICM (area under the curve = 0.73, p &lt; 0.05).
To summarize, our data show that none of the investigated markers is suitable to substitute histological diagnosis.
However, measurement of circulating GFAP and PlGF may support neuroradiological differential diagnosis of GBM versus ICM.
PMID: 22629287
Medical marijuana: clearing away the smoke.
Recent advances in understanding of the mode of action of tetrahydrocannabinol and related cannabinoid in-gredients of marijuana, plus the accumulating anecdotal reports on potential medical benefits have spurred increasing re-search into possible medicinal uses of cannabis.
Recent clinical trials with smoked and vaporized marijuana, as well as other botanical extracts indicate the likelihood that the cannabinoids can be useful in the management of neuropathic pain, spasticity due to multiple sclerosis, and possibly other indications.
As with all medications, benefits and risks need to be weighed in recommending cannabis to patients.
We present an algorithm that may be useful to physicians in determining whether cannabis might be recommended as a treatment in jurisdictions where such use is permitted.
PMID: 23177721
Evaluation of Th17-related cytokines and receptors in multiple sclerosis patients under interferon β-1 therapy.
Th17-related cytokines (IL-17, IL-23, and IL-26) and receptors (IL-17R and IL-23R) were evaluated in MS patients under immunomodulatory IFN-β1 therapy during a 2year follow-up.
Before the initiation of treatment, no significant difference was found in cytokine or receptor expression between controls and MS patients.
Of the three cytokines evaluated, IL-26 was the highest in the patients' sera.
The amount of IL-17 and CD13(+)IL-17R(+) cells was steadily decreased whereas IL-23 and IL-26 levels were gradually increased with IFN-β1 therapy.
The patients in progressive phase had very high levels of IL-17.
Th17-associated parameters should be considered in the immunomodulatory IFN-β1 therapy of MS.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21996274
Neurotrophin-3 gene modified mesenchymal stem cells promote remyelination and functional recovery in the demyelinated spinal cord of rats.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a debilitating neurodegenerative disease characterized by axonal/neuronal damage that may be caused by defective remyelination.
Current therapies aim to slow the rate of degeneration, however there are no treatment options that can stop or reverse the myelin sheath damage.
Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are a potential candidate for the cell implantation-targeted therapeutic strategies, but the pro-remyelination effects of MSCs when directly injected into a demyelinated cord lesion have been questioned.
Neurotrophin-3 (NT-3) has been shown to serve a crucial role in the proliferation, differentiation and maturation of oligodendrocyte lineages.
Here, we showed that implantation of NT-3 gene-modified MSCs via a recombinant adenoviral vector (Adv) into a region of ethidium bromide (EB)-induced demyelination in the spinal cord resulted in significant improvement of locomotor function and restoration of electrophysiological properties in rats.
The morphological basis of this recovery was evidenced by robust myelin basic protein (MBP) expression and the extensive remyelination.
AdvNT-3-MSC implants promote the endogenous remyelinating cells to participate directly in myelination, which was confirmed under light and electron microscopy.
Our study suggested that genetically modified MSCs could be a potential therapeutic avenue for improving the efficacy of stem cell treatment for neurodegenerative diseases such as MS.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22146610
Consensus statement: evaluation of new and existing therapeutics for pediatric multiple sclerosis.
New therapies are being evaluated by clinical trials and, if efficacious, introduced for the treatment of adult MS.
The role of these new and existing agents in the management of pediatric MS has yet to be defined.
Pediatric investigation plans are now required by the Food and Drug Administration and European Medicines Agency for approval of new biological agents, providing an important opportunity to gather much-needed data for clinicians caring for children and adolescents with MS.
However, challenges include the small number of patients, and the need for efficient yet comprehensive study designs incorporating factors necessary to inform the clinical care of children with MS.
The elected Steering committee of the International Pediatric MS Study Group (IPMSSG) conducted a structured review of existing data on the disease-modifying therapies in pediatric MS and developed a consensus statement, which was further modified by the IPMSSG general membership, using an online survey tool.
Fifty-one IPMSSG members from 21 countries responded to the survey, and 50 approved the final statement.
Consensus recommendations regarding use of existing first- and second-line therapies, as well as a proposed definition for inadequate treatment response, are presented.
Recommendations for the use and evaluation of emerging therapies (currently in phase III clinical trials or recently approved for adult MS) are discussed.
The IPMSSG endorses the inclusion of pediatric MS patients in trials evaluating appropriate new and emerging therapies.
Mechanisms for conducting high-impact, multicenter studies, including long-term follow-up in pediatric MS, are required to ensure that all MS patients, irrespective of age, benefit from advances in MS therapeutics.
PMID: 21996270
Preimplantation factor (PIF*) reverses neuroinflammation while promoting neural repair in EAE model.
Embryo-derived PIF modulates systemic maternal immunity without suppression.
Synthetic analog (sPIF) prevents juvenile diabetes, preserves islet function, reducing oxidative stress/protein misfolding.
We investigate sPIF effectiveness in controlling neuroinflammation/MS.
Examine sPIF-induced protection against harsh, clinical-relevant murine EAE-PLP acute and chronic models.
Evaluate clinical indices: circulating cytokines, spinal cord histology, genome, canonical global proteome, cultured PLP-activated splenocytes cytokines, and immunophenotype.
Short-term, low-dose sPIF prevented paralysis development and lowered mortality (P&lt;0.05).
Episodic sPIF reversed chronic paralysis (P&lt;0.0001) completely in &gt;50%, by day 82.
Prevention model: 12days post-therapy, sPIF reduced circulating IL12 ten-fold and inflammatory cells access to spinal cord.
Regression model: sPIF blocked PLP-induced IL17 and IL6 secretions.
Long-term chronic model: sPIF reduced spinal cord pro-inflammatory cytokines/chemokines, (ALCAM, CF1, CCL8), apoptosis-promoters, inflammatory cells access (JAM3, OPA1), solute channels (ATPases), aberrant coagulation factors (Serpins), and pro-antigenic MOG.
Canonical proteomic analysis demonstrated reduced oxidative phosphorylation, vesicle traffic, cytoskeleton remodeling involved in neuro-cytoskeleton breakdown (tubulins), associated with axon re-assembly by (MTAPs)/improved synaptic transmission.
sPIF--through coordinated central and systemic multi-targeted action--reverses neuroinflammation/MS and imparts significant neuroprotective effects up to total paralysis resolution.
Clinical testing is warranted and planned.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21845450
[Fingolimod treatment for multiple sclerosis patients. Infectiological aspects and recommendations for vaccinations].
Since April 2011 fingolimod (FTY 720, Gilenya®), a new oral treatment, is available for relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (MS) in Germany.
Adverse effects in pre-marketing clinical controlled multicenter studies have led to specific precautions that have to be followed before initiating treatment.
According to the European Union prescribing information fingolimod is not to be used as a first-line treatment, but is licensed as a second-line option or escalating therapy of MS.
During treatment physical and neurological examinations as well as regular blood counts should be performed.
The immunosuppressive mode of action of fingolimod requires increased awareness of infectious complications.
Due to two fatal herpetic infections during the TRANSFORMS trial all patients without a history of chicken pox or without vaccination against varicella zoster virus (VZV) should be tested for antibodies to VZV.
Comparably to other immunosuppressive treatment strategies the immune response to vaccines may be hampered during treatment with fingolimod.
Thus, on the one hand, vaccination gaps should be closed before initiation of fingolimod treatment and, on the other hand, success of vaccinations during fingolimod therapy may have to be checked by antibody titre assessment.
PMID: 23257936
Olfactory dysfunction in multiple sclerosis: evidence of a decrease in different aspects of olfactory function.
Numerous authors have described olfactory dysfunction in multiple sclerosis (MS) in recent years.
The aim of this study was to specify the aspects of olfactory perception that are most affected and to identify any correlations with clinical, anatomical and functional data.
50 patients with remitting or secondary progressive MS were included.
Personal data were collected (medical history, characteristics of their disease, depression and disability scores and number of lesions on cerebral imaging).
An olfactory test (Sniffin Sticks®) was used to evaluate subjects' olfactory function.
The odor detection threshold is the most sensitive marker, with 40% of patients presenting hyposmia.
The ability to identify odors is affected later on, and is inversely correlated with the level of disability.
Our results confirm that several aspects of olfactory function are altered in MS, particularly those aspects requiring greater cognitive involvement, such as discrimination and identification of odors.
Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.
PMID: 22292076
In vivo evaluation of retinal neurodegeneration in patients with multiple sclerosis.
To evaluate macular morphology in the eyes of patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) with or without optic neuritis (ON) in previous history.
Optical coherence tomography (OCT) examination was performed in thirty-nine patients with MS and in thirty-three healthy subjects.
The raw macular OCT data were processed using OCTRIMA software.
The circumpapillary retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) thickness and the weighted mean thickness of the total retina and 6 intraretinal layers were obtained for each eye.
The eyes of MS patients were divided into a group of 39 ON-affected eyes, and into a group of 34 eyes with no history of ON for the statistical analyses.
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were constructed to determine which parameter can discriminate best between the non-affected group and controls.
The circumpapillary RNFL thickness was significantly decreased in the non-affected eyes compared to controls group only in the temporal quadrant (p = 0.001) while it was decreased in the affected eyes of the MS patients in all quadrants compared to the non-affected eyes (p&lt;0.05 in each comparison).
The thickness of the total retina, RNFL, ganglion cell layer and inner plexiform layer complex (GCL+IPL) and ganglion cell complex (GCC, comprising the RNFL and GCL+IPL) in the macula was significantly decreased in the non-affected eyes compared to controls (p&lt;0.05 for each comparison) and in the ON-affected eyes compared to the non-affected eyes (p&lt;0.001 for each comparison).
The largest area under the ROC curve (0.892) was obtained for the weighted mean thickness of the GCC.
The EDSS score showed the strongest correlation with the GCL+IPL and GCC thickness (p = 0.007, r = 0.43 for both variables).
Thinning of the inner retinal layers is present in eyes of MS patients regardless of previous ON.
Macular OCT image segmentation might provide a better insight into the pathology of neuronal loss and could therefore play an important role in the diagnosis and follow-up of patients with MS.
PMID: 23941788
Use of botulinum toxin in individuals with neurogenic detrusor overactivity: state of the art review.
Botulinum neurotoxin (BoNT) injection into the bladder wall has been shown to be an effective alternative to anticholinergic (antimuscarinic) medications and more invasive surgery in those with multiple sclerosis and spinal cord injury with neurogenic detrusor overactivity (NDO) and urinary incontinence who are not tolerating anticholinergic medications.
In August 2011, Botox(®) (onabotulinumtoxinA) received Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for this use.
Clinically, intradetrusor injection of BoNT has been found to decrease urinary incontinence and improve quality of life.
Its impact on urodynamic parameters is an increase in the maximum cystometric (bladder) capacity and decrease in the maximum detrusor pressures.
The most common side effects are urinary tract infections and urinary retention.
There have been rare reports and a black box warning of distant spread of BoNT.
BoNT has gained popularity because of its effectiveness and long duration of action, relative ease of administration, easy learning curve, reproducibility of results on repeated administration, and low incidence of complications.
To discuss the structure and function, mechanisms of action, clinical and urodynamic studies, injection technique, potential beneficial and adverse effects, and potential areas of research of BoNT.
Literature search focused on botulinum toxin in MEDLINE/PubMed.
Search terms included botulinum toxin, neurogenic bladder, NDO, botox bladder, botox spinal cord injury, botox, FDA, botox side effects.
All papers identified were English language, full-text papers.
In addition, English abstracts of non-English papers were noted.
The reference list of identified articles was also searched for further papers.
Botulinum toxin is an alternative treatment for individuals with NDO who fail to tolerate anticholinergic medications.
Its popularity has increased because of the literature, which has supported its effectiveness, safety, easy use and learning curve, reproducibility of results on repeated use, and recent FDA approval of Botox(®) (onabotulinumtoxinA).
PMID: 23026221
The antibody response to Epstein-Barr virions is altered in multiple sclerosis.
Infection with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is associated with multiple sclerosis (MS), and patients with MS have an increased antibody response to some EBV antigens.
The major antigens of EBV are only partly defined.
Our hypothesis is that the antibody response to EBV is altered in MS.
With ELISA, we found that antibodies to EB virions were increased in both serum and CSF of MS patients.
Western blots demonstrated that there are multiple different antigens recognized.
The antibody response was generally higher in MS to all EBV antigens, with particularly significant increases for certain antigens.
We conclude that the antibody response to EBV in MS is generally increased with altered specificity.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23256518
Cladribine  tablets for the treatment of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic immune-mediated disorder of the central nervous system leading to progressive neurodegeneration and disability.
Until 2010, all approved disease-modifying drugs for MS required parenteral administration, which is associated with suboptimal adherence.
It was anticipated that new approaches to treatment, including oral agents such as cladribine tablets, may improve adherence.
In 2011, the development of cladribine tablets was stopped following negative feedback from the EMA and FDA.
This article provides an overview of the chemistry, mechanism of action and pharmacological properties of cladribine tablets therapy, and highlights the rationale for its development as an oral treatment for MS.
Key efficacy and safety data from the pivotal Phase III CLARITY study are presented, providing context for the opinion received from the regulatory agencies.
Despite the promising efficacy data observed in the cladribine tablets clinical trial program, regulatory agencies identified a potential risk of increased malignancies, and raised concerns about the implications of sustained lymphocyte depletion.
Following the feedback received from the regulatory agencies, Merck Serono made the decision to withdraw the agent from the regulatory approval process.
The experience gained will benefit other research efforts to address the outstanding unmet treatment needs of patients with relapsing MS.
PMID: 23026222
Glatiramer Acetate administration does not reduce damage after cerebral ischemia in mice.
Inflammation plays a key role in ischemic stroke pathophysiology: microglial/macrophage cells and type-1 helper cells (Th1) seem deleterious, while type-2 helper cells (Th2) and regulatory T cells (Treg) seem protective.
CD4 Th0 differentiation is modulated by microglial cytokine secretion.
Glatiramer Acetate (GA) is an immunomodulatory drug that has been approved for the treatment of human multiple sclerosis by means of a number of mechanisms: reduced microglial activation and pro-inflammatory cytokine production, Th0 differentiation shifting from Th2 to Th2 and Treg with anti-inflammatory cytokine production and increased neurogenesis.
We induced permanent (pMCAo) or transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAo) and GA (2 mg) or vehicle was injected subcutaneously immediately after cerebral ischemia.
Mice were sacrificed at D3 to measure neurological deficit, infarct volume, microglial cell density and qPCR of TNFα and IL-1β (pro-inflammatory microglial cytokines), IFNγ (Th2 cytokine), IL-4 (Th2 cytokine), TGFβ and IL-10 (Treg cytokines), and at D7 to evaluate neurological deficit, infarct volume and neurogenesis assessment.
We showed that in GA-treated pMCAo mice, infarct volume, microglial cell density and cytokine secretion were not significantly modified at D3, while neurogenesis was enhanced at D7 without significant infarct volume reduction.
In GA-treated tMCAo mice, microglial pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1β and TNFα were significantly decreased without modification of microglial/macrophage cell density, cytokine secretion, neurological deficit or infarct volume at D3, or modification of neurological deficit, neurogenesis or infarct volume at D7.
In conclusion, Glatiramer Acetate administered after cerebral ischemia does not reduce infarct volume or improve neurological deficit in mice despite a significant increase in neurogenesis in pMCAo and a microglial pro-inflammatory cytokine reduction in tMCAo.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21504405
How does fatigue influence community-based exercise participation in people with multiple sclerosis?
Regular exercise is considered important for long-term health outcomes and fatigue management in persons with multiple sclerosis (MS); however, little is known about the experiences of individuals with MS-related fatigue, who participate in community-based exercise activities.
The aim of this study was to describe the experiences of people with MS-related fatigue, who engaged in community-based exercise activities in order to discover how fatigue influenced their exercise participation.
In this study, we used qualitative methodology based on the interpretive description approach to collect and analyse data.
Individuals with MS, who experienced fatigue and regularly participated in community-based exercise activities, were interviewed.
Interviews were audiotaped and transcribed verbatim.
Data were analysed using an inductive thematic approach with multi-step verification strategies.
We found that perceived control over MS-related fatigue influenced exercise choices in our participants.
Furthermore, perceived control over fatigue was influenced by seven factors: wellness philosophy, a related goal, belief that control was possible, feeling safe and supported, ability to manage limits, being satisfied with trade-offs and positive definition of self.
Identification of factors influencing perceived control over fatigue will assist health care providers when facilitating community exercise choices for people with MS.
PMID: 22179784
Assessing the value of spinal cord lesions in predicting development of multiple sclerosis in patients with clinically isolated syndromes.
The purpose of this study was to determine the value of spinal cord lesions as a predictive factor for conversion in clinically isolated syndrome (CIS) patients.
Patients with CIS and without immunomodulatory treatment were prospectively included.
Age at onset, sex, clinical syndrome at onset, oligoclonal bands, and presence, number and location of lesions on brain and spinal MRI were analyzed.
Conversion to multiple sclerosis (MS) was the primary endpoint.
Cox regression was used to compare outcomes between groups.
A total of 75 patients were included: 53 (71%) women, mean age at onset 32.7 years (SD ± 7.5), mean follow-up time 72.5 months (SD ± 9; range 17-104 months).
There were 11 (14.6%) patients with one focal spinal cord lesion, while 13 (17%) patients had two or more spinal cord lesions at the first scan during the onset of the disease.
Of the 23 patients (30.6%) who converted to clinically definite MS (CDMS), 2 had a normal spinal cord MRI, 8 patients had one spinal cord lesion, and 13 had more than one lesion on MRI (p &lt; 0.001).
In multivariable analyses, one focal spinal cord lesion was significantly associated with increased risk of conversion to MS (p = 0.01, HR 3.5, CI 95% 2.1-6.9), while the presence of two or more focal spinal cord lesions was independently associated with a higher risk of conversion to MS (p &lt; 0.001, HR 5.9, CI 95% 3.2-10.8).
CIS patients with an abnormal baseline spinal cord MRI have a higher risk for developing clinically definite MS, independent of brain lesions as well as the presence of cerebrospinal fluid oligoclonal banding (OSF-OB) .
PMID: 22065801
Abnormal radiological features in a multiple myeloma patient: a case report and radiological review of myelomas.
Multiple myeloma is the prototype of malignant monoclonal gammopathies.
The most common skeletal sites are pelvis, skull, spine, ribs and femoral and humeral shafts.
The classic radiographic presentation of multiple myeloma is lytic skeletal lesions.
Other types of presentation include sclerotic and porotic changes.
Primary sclerotic manifestations are rare and occur in only 3% of cases.
Although exceptional, multiple myeloma must be borne in mind in the presence of bone sclerosis.
This report presents a patient with multiple myeloma with a sunburst/hair-on-end pattern on the radiograph and sclerotic skeletal lesions.
PMID: 22200387
Pilot study assessing the impact of intrathecal baclofen administration mode on sleep-related respiratory parameters.
To assess the impact of intrathecal baclofen (ITB) mode of administration on sleep and sleep-related breathing events in severely disabled patients with severe spasticity.
Open prospective trial.
Physical medicine and rehabilitation department.
Patients (N=11) treated with ITB pump for severe spasticity.
Assessment of patients' sleep before and after ITB pump implantation, and comparison of polysomnography results after continuous or bolus mode of administration of ITB.
Polysomnography and sleep-related breathing events.
ITB reduced periodic limb movements and increased the respiratory disturbance index (RDI) and central apneas in our population of patients.
This study showed that ITB mode of administration may affect sleep-disordered breathing.
Indeed, we observed a significant increase of respiratory events in the bolus condition (RDI and central apneas).
In contrast, continuous infusion did not induce a significant modification of sleep-disordered breathing.
When a sleep apnea syndrome was preexisting, it was generally severely worsened by the bolus mode of administration.
These results indicate that sleep function and sleep-related respiratory events should be assessed before ITB pump implantation.
It is probably better to use a continuous mode of infusion if patients have preexisting sleep-disordered breathing.
Copyright © 2012 American Congress of Rehabilitation Medicine.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22709658
Plasma ubiquitin-proteasome system profile in patients with multiple sclerosis: correlation with clinical features, neuroimaging, and treatment with interferon-beta-1b.
Interferon-beta-1b (IFN-beta-1b) reduces relapses in multiple sclerosis (MS) and improves magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) outcomes.
Mechanism of action of IFN-beta-1b is only marginally understood.
The roles and plasma levels of factors within the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) and the plasma proteasome enzymatic activity of MS patients have not been explored.
We hypothesized that pharmacologic double inhibition of the UPS by IFN-beta-1b occurs in MS patients and contributes to improvement of clinical course and reduction in MRI activity.
During a 6-month prospective study, we measured plasma proteasome and ubiquitin protein levels and the proteasome enzymatic activities in patients with MS pre- (n = 35) and post-treatment (n = 26) with IFN-beta-1b and 96 normal controls.
The results were compared to clinical and brain MRI outcomes.
Plasma levels of ubiquitin and proteasome enzymatic activities were elevated in MS patients before therapy with IFN-beta-1b as compared to normals (P &lt; 0.01).
Additionally, UPS enzymatic activities were increased in MS patients before treatment with IFN-beta-1b (P &lt; 0.0001).
Six months after treatment with IFN-beta-1b, plasma levels of proteasome and ubiquitin showed further elevation as compared to the pre-treatment values and normals.
Treatment with IFN-beta-1b suppressed the enzymatic activity of plasma proteasome and such lowered level of enzymatic activity correlated with a decline in the number of post-contrast T1-weighted enhancing lesions.
Since UPS is linked to protein degradation, it may contribute to the course of immune-mediated diseases such as MS, and pharmacologic inhibition of UPS through IFN-beta-1b therapy improves the clinical course of MS.
Larger clinical trials are needed to confirm the results of this preliminary study.
PMID: 22145746
Cortical injury in multiple sclerosis; the role of the immune system.
The easily identifiable, ubiquitous demyelination and neuronal damage that occurs within the cerebral white matter of patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) has been the subject of extensive study.
Accordingly, MS has historically been described as a disease of the white matter.
Recently, the cerebral cortex (gray matter) of patients with MS has been recognized as an additional and major site of disease pathogenesis.
This acknowledgement of cortical tissue damage is due, in part, to more powerful MRI that allows detection of such injury and to focused neuropathology-based investigations.
Cortical tissue damage has been associated with inflammation that is less pronounced to that which is associated with damage in the white matter.
There is, however, emerging evidence that suggests cortical damage can be closely associated with robust inflammation not only in the parenchyma, but also in the neighboring meninges.
This manuscript will highlight the current knowledge of inflammation associated with cortical tissue injury.
Historical literature along with contemporary work that focuses on both the absence and presence of inflammation in the cerebral cortex and in the cerebral meninges will be reviewed.
PMID: 22776451
Endotoxin-induced systemic inflammation activates microglia: [¹¹C]PBR28 positron emission tomography in nonhuman primates.
Microglia play an essential role in many brain diseases.
Microglia are activated by local tissue damage or inflammation, but systemic inflammation can also activate microglia.
An important clinical question is whether the effects of systemic inflammation on microglia mediate the deleterious effects of systemic inflammation in diseases such as Alzheimer's dementia, multiple sclerosis, and stroke.
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) imaging with ligands that bind to Translocator Protein (TSPO) can be used to detect activated microglia.
The aim of this study was to evaluate whether the effect of systemic inflammation on microglia could be measured with PET imaging in nonhuman primates, using the TSPO ligand [(11)C]PBR28.
Six female baboons (Papio anubis) were scanned before and at 1h and/or 4h and/or 22 h after intravenous administration of E. coli lipopolysaccharide (LPS; 0.1mg/kg), which induces systemic inflammation.
Regional time-activity data from regions of interest (ROIs) were fitted to the two-tissue compartmental model, using the metabolite-corrected arterial plasma curve as input function.
Total volume of distribution (V(T)) of [(11)C]PBR28 was used as a measure of total ligand binding.
The primary outcome was change in V(T) from baseline.
Serum levels of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα), interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and interleukin-8 (IL-8) were used to assess correlations between systemic inflammation and microglial activation.
In one baboon, immunohistochemistry was used to identify cells expressing TSPO.
LPS administration increased [(11)C]PBR28 binding (F(3,6)=5.1, p=.043) with a 29 ± 16% increase at 1h (n=4) and a 62 ± 34% increase at 4h (n=3) post-LPS.
There was a positive correlation between serum IL-1β and IL-6 levels and the increase in [(11)C]PBR28 binding.
TSPO immunoreactivity occurred almost exclusively in microglia and rarely in astrocytes.
In the nonhuman-primate brain, LPS-induced systemic inflammation produces a robust increase in the level of TSPO that is readily detected with [(11)C]PBR28 PET.
The effect of LPS on [(11)C]PBR28 binding is likely mediated by inflammatory cytokines.
Activation of microglia may be a mechanism through which systemic inflammatory processes influence the course of diseases such as Alzheimer's, multiple sclerosis, and possibly depression.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 20924528
Large-scale performance evaluation of e-homecare architectures using the WS-NS simulator.
E-homecare creates opportunities to provide care faster, at lower cost and higher levels of convenience for patients.
As e-homecare services are time-critical, stringent requirements are imposed in terms of total response time and reliability, this way requiring a characterization of their network load and usage behavior.
However, it is usually hard to build testbeds on a realistic scale in order to evaluate large-scale e-homecare applications.
This paper describes the design and evaluation of the Network Simulator for Web Services (WS-NS), an NS2-based simulator capable of accurately modeling service-oriented architectures that can be used to evaluate the performance of e-homecare architectures.
WS-NS is applied to the Coplintho e-homecare use case, based on the results of the field trial prototype which targeted diabetes and multiple sclerosis patients.
Network-unaware and network-aware service selection algorithms are presented and their performance is tested.
Results: The results show that when selecting a service to execute the request, suboptimal decisions can be made when selection is solely based on the service's properties and status.
Taking into account the network links interconnecting the services leads to better selection strategies.
Based on the results, the e-homecare broker design is optimized from a centralized design to a hierarchical region-based design, resulting in an important decrease of average response times.
The WS-NS simulator can be used to analyze the load and response times of large-scale e-homecare architectures.
An optimization of the e-homecare architecture of the Coplintho project resulted in optimized network overhead and more than 45% lower response times.
PMID: 23413259
C9orf72 repeat expansions are a rare genetic cause of parkinsonism.
The recently identified C9orf72 gene accounts for a large proportion of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degenerations.
As several forms of these disorders are associated with parkinsonism, we hypothesized that some patients with Parkinson's disease or other forms of parkinsonism might carry pathogenic C9orf72 expansions.
Therefore, we looked for C9orf72 repeat expansions in 1446 unrelated parkinsonian patients consisting of 1225 patients clinically diagnosed with Parkinson's disease, 123 with progressive supranuclear palsy, 21 with corticobasal degeneration syndrome, 43 with Lewy body dementia and 25 with multiple system atrophy-parkinsonism.
Of the 1446 parkinsonian patients, five carried C9orf72 expansions: three patients with typical Parkinson's disease, one with corticobasal degeneration syndrome and another with progressive supranuclear palsy.
This study shows that (i) although rare, C9orf72 repeat expansions may be associated with clinically typical Parkinson's disease and also with other parkinsonism; (ii) in several patients, parkinsonism was levodopa-responsive and remained pure, without associated dementia, for &gt;10 years and (iii) interestingly, all C9orf72 repeat expansion carriers had positive family histories of parkinsonism, degenerative dementias or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
This study also provides the tools for identifying parkinsonian patients with C9orf72 expansions, with important consequences for genetic counselling.
PMID: 21447022
The relationship between normal cerebral perfusion patterns and white matter lesion distribution in 1,249 patients with multiple sclerosis.
The pathological differences underlying the clinical disease phases in multiple sclerosis (MS) are poorly characterized.
We sought to explore the relationship between the distribution of white matter (WM) lesions in relapsing-remitting (RR) and secondary progressive (SP) MS and the normal regional variability of cerebral perfusion.
WM lesions were identified and quantified on a single magnetic resonance imaging scan from 1,249 patients with MS.
The spatial distribution of lesions was compared between early RR, late RR, and SP MS in the context of normal cerebral perfusion patterns provided by a single-photon emission-computed tomography atlas of healthy individuals.
Patients with SP MS had more distinct and larger lesions than patients with RR MS.
Across all subjects, lesions were present in regions of relatively lower normal perfusion than normal appearing WM.
Further, lesions in SP MS were more common in areas of lower perfusion as compared to the lesion distribution in early and late RR MS.
Chronic plaques were more prevalent in WM regions with lower relative perfusion.
Lesions in more highly perfused regions were more commonly observed in early RR MS and therefore, may be more likely to successfully remyelinate and resolve.
Copyright © 2011 by the American Society of Neuroimaging.
PMID: 21447024
The relationships among MRI-defined spinal cord involvement, brain involvement, and disability in multiple sclerosis.
To determine the interrelationships between MRI-defined lesion and atrophy measures of spinal cord involvement and brain involvement and their relationships to disability in a small cohort of patients with multiple sclerosis (MS).
Although it is known that cervical spinal cord atrophy correlates with disability in MS, it is unknown whether it is the most important determinant when compared to other regions of the central nervous system (CNS).
Furthermore, it is not clear to what extent brain and cord lesions and atrophy are related.
3T MRI of the whole brain and whole spinal cord was obtained in 21 patients with MS, including 18 with relapsing-remitting, one with secondary progressive, one with primary progressive, and one with a clinically isolated syndrome.
Brain global gray and white matter volumes were segmented with Statistical Parametric Mapping 8.
Spinal cord contour volume was segmented in whole by a semi-automated method with bins assigned to either the cervical or thoracic regions.
All CNS volumes were normalized by the intracranial volume.
Brain and cord T2 hyperintense lesions were segmented using a semi-automated edge finding tool.
Among all MRI measures, only upper cervical spinal cord volume significantly correlated with Expanded Disability Status Scale score (r =-.515, P = .020).
The brain cord relationships between whole or regional spinal cord volume or lesions and gray matter, white matter, or whole brain volume or whole brain lesions were generally weak and all nonsignificant.
In this preliminary study of mildly disabled, treated MS patients, cervical spinal cord atrophy most strongly correlates with physical disability in MS when accounting for a wide range of other CNS measures of lesions and atrophy, including thoracic or whole spinal cord volume, and cerebral gray, white or whole brain volume.
The weak relationship between spinal cord and brain lesions and atrophy may suggest that they progress rather independently in patients with MS.
Copyright © 2011 by the American Society of Neuroimaging.
PMID: 22491253
Elevation of Sema4A implicates Th cell skewing and the efficacy of IFN-β therapy in multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a demyelinating autoimmune disease of the CNS and a leading cause of lasting neurologic disabilities in young adults.
Although the precise mechanism remains incompletely understood, Ag presentation and subsequent myelin-reactive CD4(+) T cell activation/differentiation are essential for the pathogenesis of MS.
Although semaphorins were initially identified as axon guidance cues during neural development, several semaphorins are crucially involved in various phases of immune responses.
Sema4A is one of the membrane-type class IV semaphorins, which we originally identified from the cDNA library of dendritic cell (DC).
Sema4A plays critical roles in T cell activation and Th1 differentiation during the course of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, an animal model of MS; however, its pathological involvement in human MS has not been determined.
In this study, we report that Sema4A is increased in the sera of patients with MS.
The expression of Sema4A is increased on DCs in MS patients and shed from these cells in a metalloproteinase-dependent manner.
DC-derived Sema4A is not only critical for Th1 but also for Th17 cell differentiation, and MS patients with high Sema4A levels exhibit Th17 skewing.
Furthermore, patients with high Sema4A levels have more severe disabilities and are unresponsive to IFN-β treatment.
Taken together, our results suggest that Sema4A is involved in the pathogenesis of MS by promoting Th17 skewing.
PMID: 21038310
Nerve fiber layer and macular thinning measured with different imaging methods during the course of acute optic neuritis.
To compare retinal nerve fiber layer thickness (RNFLT) and inner macula thickness changes measured with Fourier-domain optical coherence tomography (FD-OCT) and scanning laser polarimetry during the course of acute optic neuritis (ON).
Nine eyes of 7 consecutive patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) were prospectively imaged from the onset of ON for 6 to 12 months.
Nine healthy eyes were imaged for 12 to 19 months.
Retinal nerve fiber layer thickness measured with FD-OCT initially increased in all eyes with diffuse optic disc edema.
Inner macula thickness and polarimetric RNFLT decreased already in the acute phase, in all eyes.
All parameters stabilized at 2 to 5 months.
The relative structural loss was different with the different methods.
Poor image quality with polarimetry occurred in 2 eyes in the acute phase of ON.
In the control eyes all parameters were stable.
Change of RNFLT and macular thickness during the course of acute ON in MS strongly depends on the method used for the measurement.
Inner macula thickness, measured with FD-OCT, was especially useful for the follow-up, since it was not influenced by initial disc edema and had consistently high image quality.
PMID: 22402220
Supervised resistance training results in changes in postural control in patients with multiple sclerosis.
Postural disturbances are one of the first reported symptoms in patients with Multiple Sclerosis (MS).
The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of supervised resistance training on postural control in MS patients.
Postural control was assessed using amount of sway variability [Root Mean Square (RMS)] and temporal structure of sway variability [Lyapunov Exponent (LyE)] from 15 MS patients.
Posture was evaluated before and after completion of three months of resistance training.
There were significant differences between MS patients pretraining and healthy controls for both LyE (p = .000) and RMS (p = .002), but no differences between groups after training.
There was a significant decrease in RMS (p = .025) and a significant increase in LyE (p = .049) for MS patients pre- to posttraining.
The findings suggested that postural control of MS patients could be affected by a supervised resistance training intervention.
PMID: 24109185
Younger age, female sex, and high number of awakenings and arousals predict fatigue in patients with sleep disorders: a retrospective polysomnographic observational study.
The Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS) is widely used to assess fatigue, not only in the context of multiple sclerosis-related fatigue, but also in many other medical conditions.
Some polysomnographic studies have shown high FSS values in sleep-disordered patients without multiple sclerosis.
The Modified Fatigue Impact Scale (MFIS) has increasingly been used in order to assess fatigue, but polysomnographic data investigating sleep-disordered patients are thus far unavailable.
Moreover, the pathophysiological link between sleep architecture and fatigue measured with the MFIS and the FSS has not been previously investigated.
This was a retrospective observational study (n = 410) with subgroups classified according to sleep diagnosis.
The statistical analysis included nonparametric correlation between questionnaire results and polysomnographic data, age and sex, and univariate and multiple logistic regression.
The multiple logistic regression showed a significant relationship between FSS/MFIS values and younger age and female sex.
Moreover, there was a significant relationship between FSS values and number of arousals and between MFIS values and number of awakenings.
Younger age, female sex, and high number of awakenings and arousals are predictive of fatigue in sleep-disordered patients.
Further investigations are needed to find the pathophysiological explanation for these relationships.
PMID: 23752202
CD44 variant isoforms control experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by affecting the lifespan of the pathogenic T cells.
CD44 variant (CD44(v)) isoforms play important roles in the development of autoimmune disorders, including colitis and arthritis, but their role in multiple sclerosis (MS) has been explored only to a limited extent.
We determined the functional relevance of CD44(v) isoforms in MS and its animal model, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE).
Genetic ablation of CD44(v7) and CD44(v10) isoforms significantly reduced the clinical EAE burden, as well as the number of inflammatory infiltrates.
CD44(v7) and CD44(v10) expression on both memory T and antigen-presenting cells, participated in the development of adoptive transfer EAE.
Significantly reduced mRNA expression of Th1 signature genes was detected in the brains of CD44(v10-/-) mice compared with those of CD44(WT) mice.
Furthermore, forkhead transcription factor 3 (Foxp3), Bcl-2, and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) levels were reduced in CD44(v10-/-) brains, whereas active caspase-3 was elevated.
Brain-infiltrating CD4(hi)CD44(v10+) T cells preceded EAE onset and paralleled disease severity in wild-type but not in CD44(v7-/-) and CD44(v10-/-) mice.
CD44(v7) and CD44(v10) expression contributed to EAE by increasing the longevity of autoreactive CD4(hi)panCD44(hi) T cells.
Accordingly, the absence of CD44(v7) and CD44(v10) led to increased apoptosis in the inflammatory infiltrates and reduced Th1 responses, resulting in marked disease reduction.
Although absent in noninflamed human brains, we detected CD44(v3), CD44(v7), and CD44(v10) isoforms on glial cells and on perivascular infiltrating cells of MS lesions.
We conclude that CD44(v7) and CD44(v10), expressed on autoreactive CD4(hi)panCD44(hi) T cells, are critically involved in the pathogenesis of classic EAE by increasing their life span.
Targeting these short CD44(v) isoform regions may reduce inflammatory processes and clinical symptoms in MS.
PMID: 22050733
The role of dorsal root ganglia activation and brain-derived neurotrophic factor in multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is characterized by focal destruction of the white matter of the brain and spinal cord.
The exact mechanisms underlying the pathophysiology of the disease are unknown.
Many studies have shown that MS is predominantly an autoimmune disease with an inflammatory phase followed by a demyelinating phase.
Recent studies alongside current treatment strategies, including glatiramer acetate, have revealed a potential role for brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in MS.
However, the exact role of BDNF is not fully understood.
We used the experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) model of MS in adolescent female Lewis rats to identify the role of BDNF in disease progression.
Dorsal root ganglia (DRG) and spinal cords were harvested for protein and gene expression analysis every 3 days post-disease induction (pdi) up to 15 days.
We show significant increases in BDNF protein and gene expression in the DRG of EAE animals at 12 dpi, which correlates with peak neurological disability.
BDNF protein expression in the spinal cord was significantly increased at 12 dpi, and maintained at 15 dpi.
However, there was no significant change in mRNA levels.
We show evidence for the anterograde transport of BDNF protein from the DRG to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord via the dorsal roots.
Increased levels of BDNF within the DRG and spinal cord in EAE may facilitate myelin repair and neuroprotection in the CNS.
The anterograde transport of DRG-derived BDNF to the spinal cord may have potential implications in facilitating central myelin repair and neuroprotection.
© 2011 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
PMID: 23180362
Increased plasma interleukin-32 expression in patients with neuromyelitis optica.
Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) is a chronic inflammatory demyelinating disease of the central nervous system (CNS).
The pathogenesis of NMO remains unclear.
IL-32 is emerging as a critical molecule in the pathophysiology of immune-mediated chronic inflammatory diseases.
Whether IL-32 levels are elevated in NMO patients is unclear.
We aimed to determine whether IL-32 levels are elevated in NMO patients and explore its relationship with IL-6, IL-17, and Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) scores.
Plasma IL-32α, IL-6 and IL-17A were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in NMO (n = 26), MS (n = 23) and 22 healthy controls.
We found IL-32α levels were higher in NMO patients compared with MS (p = 0.020) and healthy controls (p = 0.00001).
IL-32α levels were increased in MS patients compared with controls (p = 0.009).
IL-32α positively correlated with IL-6 and IL-17A levels and EDSS scores in NMO patients.
In summary, plasma IL-32α levels are associated with inflammatory responses in NMO patients.
PMID: 22312480
CD8+ T-Cell Deficiency, Epstein-Barr Virus Infection, Vitamin D Deficiency, and Steps to Autoimmunity: A Unifying Hypothesis.
CD8+ T-cell deficiency is a feature of many chronic autoimmune diseases, including multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjögren's syndrome, systemic sclerosis, dermatomyositis, primary biliary cirrhosis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease, psoriasis, vitiligo, bullous pemphigoid, alopecia areata, idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy, type 1 diabetes mellitus, Graves' disease, Hashimoto's thyroiditis, myasthenia gravis, IgA nephropathy, membranous nephropathy, and pernicious anaemia.
It also occurs in healthy blood relatives of patients with autoimmune diseases, suggesting it is genetically determined.
Here it is proposed that this CD8+ T-cell deficiency underlies the development of chronic autoimmune diseases by impairing CD8+ T-cell control of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection, with the result that EBV-infected autoreactive B cells accumulate in the target organ where they produce pathogenic autoantibodies and provide costimulatory survival signals to autoreactive T cells which would otherwise die in the target organ by activation-induced apoptosis.
Autoimmunity is postulated to evolve in the following steps: (1) CD8+ T-cell deficiency, (2) primary EBV infection, (3) decreased CD8+ T-cell control of EBV, (4) increased EBV load and increased anti-EBV antibodies, (5) EBV infection in the target organ, (6) clonal expansion of EBV-infected autoreactive B cells in the target organ, (7) infiltration of autoreactive T cells into the target organ, and (8) development of ectopic lymphoid follicles in the target organ.
It is also proposed that deprivation of sunlight and vitamin D at higher latitudes facilitates the development of autoimmune diseases by aggravating the CD8+ T-cell deficiency and thereby further impairing control of EBV.
The hypothesis makes predictions which can be tested, including the prevention and successful treatment of chronic autoimmune diseases by controlling EBV infection.
PMID: 23137071
The association of depression with pain-related treatment utilization in patients with multiple sclerosis.
To better understand the association of depression with pain treatment utilization in a multiple sclerosis (MS) population.
Cross-sectional survey.
Community-based survey.
Convenience sample of 117 individuals with MS.
Participants provided demographic information, descriptive information on utilization of pain treatments, pain intensity ratings on a 0-10 numerical rating scale, and depressive symptoms on the Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9).
Participants reporting clinical levels of depressive symptoms (PHQ-9 ≥10) reported that they tried more pain treatments previously relative to participants with PHQ-9 &lt;10; however, the two groups did not differ in the number of treatments they were currently using.
Additionally, participants with PHQ-9 ≥10 had more visits to providers for pain treatment relative to the group with PHQ-9 &lt;10.
In subsequent analyses, results showed that these differences were no longer significant after controlling for level of pain intensity.
The results demonstrate that depression is not associated with higher pain treatment utilization.
These findings support the assertion in previous studies that the mechanism by which depression impacts medical utilization is through increased appointments for nonspecific complaints, not for specific medical problems.
While this suggests that treating depression may not be helpful in reducing pain treatment utilization specifically, it remains important to treat depression to reduce pain-related suffering and medical utilization more broadly.
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22987755
Review of MR elastography applications and recent developments.
The technique of MR elastography (MRE) has emerged as a useful modality for quantitatively imaging the mechanical properties of soft tissues in vivo.
Recently, MRE has been introduced as a clinical tool for evaluating chronic liver disease, but many other potential applications are being explored.
These applications include measuring tissue changes associated with diseases of the liver, breast, brain, heart, and skeletal muscle including both focal lesions (e.g., hepatic, breast, and brain tumors) and diffuse diseases (e.g., fibrosis and multiple sclerosis).
The purpose of this review article is to summarize some of the recent developments of MRE and to highlight some emerging applications.
Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22117117
Impact of patient suffering on caregiver well-being: the case of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients and their caregivers.
The impact of patient suffering on family caregivers is an understudied but important topic.
This study of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and their caregivers examined the associations of two components of patient suffering: patient physical symptoms, and mental distress, as well as the patient's support for the caregiver, with caregiver well-being.
The sample consisted of 52 patients with ALS and their caregivers.
Patients and caregivers each completed a structured survey assessing multiple domains including demographics, health, and well-being.
Specifically, patients rated their own physical symptoms and mental distress.
Caregivers rated their own daily affect, and the extent to which they perceived the patient as supportive.
Caregivers also reported whether or not they had found any benefit in dealing with the patient's illness.
Regression analyses yielded significant associations of patient distress with caregiver negative affect; patient support was associated with greater caregiver positive affect, and patient symptoms and support were associated with greater likelihood of caregiver benefit finding.
There was a significant two-way interaction of patient symptoms by support, namely, benefit finding was not only more likely with greater physical suffering and patient support, but it was also the case that caregivers who perceived the care recipient as unsupportive could only find benefit when this person experienced intense physical suffering.
Support interventions for ALS patients and their caregivers should devote particular attention to how caregivers may be affected by witnessing their loved one's sufferings, as well as identify and address challenges in support exchanges between caregivers and patients.
PMID: 22963651
Transgenic inhibition of astroglial NF-κB protects from optic nerve damage and retinal ganglion cell loss in experimental optic neuritis.
Optic neuritis is an acute, demyelinating neuropathy of the optic nerve often representing the first appreciable symptom of multiple sclerosis.
Wallerian degeneration of irreversibly damaged optic nerve axons leads to death of retinal ganglion cells, which is the cause of permanent visual impairment.
Although the specific mechanisms responsible for triggering these events are unknown, it has been suggested that a key pathological factor is the activation of immune-inflammatory processes secondary to leukocyte infiltration.
However, to date, there is no conclusive evidence to support such a causal role for infiltrating peripheral immune cells in the etiopathology of optic neuritis.
To dissect the contribution of the peripheral immune-inflammatory response versus the CNS-specific inflammatory response in the development of optic neuritis, we analyzed optic nerve and retinal ganglion cells pathology in wild-type and GFAP-IκBα-dn transgenic mice, where NF-κB is selectively inactivated in astrocytes, following induction of EAE.
We found that, in wild-type mice, axonal demyelination in the optic nerve occurred as early as 8 days post induction of EAE, prior to the earliest signs of leukocyte infiltration (20 days post induction).
On the contrary, GFAP-IκBα-dn mice were significantly protected and showed a nearly complete prevention of axonal demyelination, as well as a drastic attenuation in retinal ganglion cell death.
This correlated with a decrease in the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, adhesion molecules, as well as a prevention of NAD(P)H oxidase subunit upregulation.
Our results provide evidence that astrocytes, not infiltrating immune cells, play a key role in the development of optic neuritis and that astrocyte-mediated neurotoxicity is dependent on activation of a transcriptional program regulated by NF-κB.
Hence, interventions targeting the NF-κB transcription factor in astroglia may be of therapeutic value in the treatment of optic neuritis associated with multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 22361347
[Stem cell-based treatment of neurologic diseases].
Therapeutic strategies based on stem cells are being increasingly used to treat a wide range of neurological diseases.
Although these strategies were initially designed to replace dead cells in injured tissue, the potential of stem cells to migrate, secrete trophic factors, and immunomodulate allows their therapeutic use as a vehicle for gene therapy, as in Parkinson's disease, or as immunomodulators and neuroprotectors in diseases such as multiple sclerosis.
This review will focus on current clinical and experimental evidence on the treatment of neurological disorders with strategies based on stem cells.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier España, S.L.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23313929
DemTect, PANDA, EASY, and MUSIC: cognitive screening tools with age correction and weighting of subtests according to their sensitivity and specificity.
Many cognitive screening instruments have been developed during the last decades to detect mild cognitive dysfunction and dementia, and there is an ongoing discussion as to which tool should be used in which setting and which challenges have to be considered.
Among other aspects, dependence on age is a recognized problem in screening tools which still has not found its way into common scoring procedures.
Another aspect which has been handled very heterogeneously is which domain is represented in which proportion in the total score.
Furthermore, screening ethnic minority patients has been identified as an important but so far widely unresolved matter.
In this review, four cognitive screening tools that all follow a common, stringent concept and pay regard to some critical aspects are described: the DemTect, a generic tool; the PANDA for Parkinson's disease patients; the EASY, a non-verbal, culture-fair screening test for patients with migration background; and the MUSIC for patients with multiple sclerosis.
All of these screening instruments have an age-correction, provide a total score in which the different subtests are weighted according to their individual sensitivity and specificity, and include tasks that are specifically aligned to the cognitive profile of the target group, including the EASY with non-verbal, culture-fair tasks to overcome language and cultural barriers.
The development, main characteristics, data, and limitations of these tools are presented and discussed against the background of the current landscape of cognitive screening tools.
PMID: 23656992
Mediation of protection and recovery from experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by macrophages expressing the human voltage-gated sodium channel NaV1.5.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most common nontraumatic cause of neurologic disability in young adults.
Despite treatment, progressive tissue injury leads to accumulation of disability in many patients.
Here, our goal was to develop an immune-mediated strategy to promote tissue repair and clinical recovery in an MS animal model.
We previously demonstrated that a variant of the voltage-gated sodium channel NaV1.5 is expressed intracellularly in human macrophages, and that it regulates cellular signaling.
This channel is not expressed in mouse macrophages, which has limited the study of its functions.
To overcome this obstacle, we developed a novel transgenic mouse model (C57BL6), in which the human macrophage NaV1.5 splice variant is expressed in vivo in mouse macrophages.
These mice were protected from experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, the mouse model of MS.
During active inflammatory disease, NaV1.5-positive macrophages were found in spinal cord lesions where they formed phagocytic cell clusters; they expressed markers of alternative activation during recovery.
NaV1.5-positive macrophages that were adoptively transferred into wild-type recipients with established experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis homed to lesions and promoted recovery.
These results suggest that NaV1.5-positive macrophages enhance recovery from CNS inflammatory disease and could potentially be developed as a cell-based therapy for the treatment of MS.
PMID: 23580196
Heterozygous inactivation of tsc2 enhances tumorigenesis in p53 mutant zebrafish.
Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is a multi-organ disorder caused by mutations of the TSC1 or TSC2 genes.
A key function of these genes is to inhibit mTORC1 (mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1) kinase signaling.
Cells deficient for TSC1 or TSC2 have increased mTORC1 signaling and give rise to benign tumors, although, as a rule, true malignancies are rarely seen.
In contrast, other disorders with increased mTOR signaling typically have overt malignancies.
A better understanding of genetic mechanisms that govern the transformation of benign cells to malignant ones is crucial to understand cancer pathogenesis.
We generated a zebrafish model of TSC and cancer progression by placing a heterozygous mutation of the tsc2 gene in a p53 mutant background.
Unlike tsc2 heterozygous mutant zebrafish, which never exhibited cancers, compound tsc2;p53 mutants had malignant tumors in multiple organs.
Tumorigenesis was enhanced compared with p53 mutant zebrafish.
p53 mutants also had increased mTORC1 signaling that was further enhanced in tsc2;p53 compound mutants.
We found increased expression of Hif1-α, Hif2-α and Vegf-c in tsc2;p53 compound mutant zebrafish compared with p53 mutant zebrafish.
Expression of these proteins probably underlies the increased angiogenesis seen in compound mutant zebrafish compared with p53 mutants and might further drive cancer progression.
Treatment of p53 and compound mutant zebrafish with the mTORC1 inhibitor rapamycin caused rapid shrinkage of tumor size and decreased caliber of tumor-associated blood vessels.
This is the first report using an animal model to show interactions between tsc2, mTORC1 and p53 during tumorigenesis.
These results might explain why individuals with TSC rarely have malignant tumors, but also suggest that cancer arising in individuals without TSC might be influenced by the status of TSC1 and/or TSC2 mutations and be potentially treatable with mTORC1 inhibitors.
PMID: 21968984
The demographic, clinical, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) features of transverse myelitis in children.
The authors collected demographic, clinical, and neuroimaging data prospectively on 38 children with transverse myelitis.
One child died during the illness.
The female:male ratio was 1.2:1 for children under age 10 years and 2.6:1 over age 10 years.
Twenty-eight (74%) reported a prodromal event.
Twenty-two patients (58%) had longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis, 9 (24%) had focal lesions, and 5 (13%) had both.
Twenty of 33 with brain imaging (61%) had brain lesions; 7 fulfilled McDonald criteria for dissemination in space.
Seven of 22 (36%) tested had cerebrospinal fluid oligoclonal banding, 6 of whom had brain lesions.
Serum neuromyelitis optica IgG antibodies were absent in all 20 of the children for whom this test was available.
At follow-up (mean 3.2 ± 2.0 years), 16% are wheelchair-dependent, 22% have persisting bladder dysfunction, and 13% have been diagnosed with multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 22284561
[Hyperintense punctiform images in the white matter: a diagnostic approach].
The presence of hyperintense punctiform images in the white matter in T2 weighted magnetic resonance (MR) sequences is a very common finding and is occasionally a diagnostic challenge for the radiologist.
The present article attempts, using an anatomical approach to the brain circulation, as well as from histopathology correlation studies, to simplify the task of interpreting these images from the description of the three main patterns of hyperintense punctiform images in the white matter: vascular pattern, which corresponds to microvascular lesions; perivascular pattern, which represents inflammatory disease of which the paradigm is multiple sclerosis; and a non-specific pattern, which has to be a microvascular disease.
From the various semiological elements in the MR images, a predominant pattern can be determined in each case and, in this way, helps in the differential diagnosis.
Copyright © 2011 SERAM.
Published by Elsevier Espana.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22696123
Shifting imaging targets in multiple sclerosis: from inflammation to neurodegeneration.
Classically multiple sclerosis (MS) has been regarded as an auto-immune disease of the white matter in the central nervous system leading to severe disability over the course of several decades.
Current therapeutic strategies in MS are mostly based on either immune suppression or immune modulation.
Although effective in decreasing relapse frequency and severity as well as delaying disease progression, MS pathology ensues nonetheless.
In the last decade it became evident that gray matter pathology plays an important role in disease progression and helps explaining certain aspects of MS-related disability such as cognitive decline.
Conventional MRI outcome measures commonly used in clinical trials are sufficient to demonstrate an anti-inflammatory drug-effect but lack pathological specificity and are poor to moderate predictors of disability.
In this article, we review new insights in gray matter pathology and functional reorganization in MS and how these novel fields in MS research may validate and establish new MRI outcome measures, aid in the development of new therapeutic strategies for neuroprotection and neurorepair, and may lead to development of novel predictive measures of disability and disease progression in MS.
Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22836148
TNF-α-mediated anxiety in a mouse model of multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) causes a variety of motor and sensory deficits and it is also associated with mood disturbances.
It is unclear if anxiety and depression in MS entirely reflect a subjective reaction to a chronic disease causing motor disability or rather depend on specific effects of neuroinflammation in neuronal circuits.
To answer this question, behavioral, electrophysiological, and immunofluorescence experiments were performed in mice with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), which models MS in mice.
First, we observed high anxiety indexes in EAE mice, preceding the appearance of motor defects.
Then, we demonstrated that tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) has a crucial role in anxiety associated with neuroinflammation.
In fact, intracerebroventricular (icv) administration of etanercept, an inhibitor of TNF-α signaling, resulted in anxiolytic-like effects in EAE-mice.
Accordingly, icv injection of TNF-α induced per se overt anxious behavior in control mice.
Moreover, we propose the striatum as one of the brain regions potentially involved in EAE anxious behavior.
We observed that before disease onset EAE striatum presents elevated TNF-α levels and strong activated microglia, early signs of inflammation associated with alterations of striatal excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs).
Interestingly, etanercept corrected the synaptic defects of pre-symptomatic EAE mice while icv injection of TNF-α in non-EAE mice altered EPSCs, thus mimicking the synaptic effects of EAE.
In conclusion, anxiety characterizes EAE course since the very early phases of the disease.
TNF-α released from activated microglia mediates this effect likely through the modulation of striatal excitatory synaptic transmission.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23301877
Treatment patterns in multiple sclerosis: administrative claims analysis over 10 years.
Treatment patterns for the MS disease-modifying therapies (DMT) have changed over time.
The objective of this study was to examine and describe treatment patterns in MS over a 10-year period.
MS patients who filled a DMT prescription between January 1, 2001 and December 31, 2010 were identified from Clinformatics for DataMart affiliated with OptumInsight.
Two cohorts were identified: those with a DMT prescription in 2003 and those with a DMT prescription in 2008.
Treatment patterns were examined 2 years before and after the anchor prescriptions for each cohort.
Comparing treatment patterns prior to the two anchor prescriptions, interferon-beta (IFNβ)-1a IM (Avonex) and IFNβ-1b (Betaseron) gained the most users in 2001-2003, while IFNβ-1a IM and IFNβ-1a SC (Rebif) gained the most users from 2006-2008.
In the 2 years following the two anchor prescriptions, treatment patterns changed.
From 2003-2005, 21.2% of IFNβ-1a SC users and more than 15.0% of IFNβ-1a IM and IFNβ-1b users changed to another interferon or glatiramer acetate (GA; Copaxone), while 12.5% of GA users changed to an interferon, most often IFNβ-1a SC.
From 2008-2010 the largest proportion of changes from each of the interferons and natalizumab (NZ; Tysabri) were to GA, while those switching from GA were most often changed to IFNβ-1a SC.
Those with a 2008 anchor prescription for NZ were most often changed (57%) to GA.
In retrospective database analyses the presence of a claim for a filled prescription does not indicate that the drug was consumed, and reasons for changes in therapy are not available.
The study design looking forward and backward from the anchor prescriptions may have contributed to differences in the proportion of patients seen with no observable change in DMT.
Claims-based data are also constrained by coverage limitations that determine the data available and limit the generalizability of results to managed care patients.
Changes in treatment patterns in the first half of the observation period were reflective of the addition of IFNβ-1a SC to the market in 2002.
Following the 2003 and 2008 anchor prescriptions there were differences in treatment patterns, with more IFNβ-1a IM users being changed to IFNβ-1a SC after the 2003 anchor DMT, and more of each of the interferons and NZ being changed to GA following the 2008 anchor DMT.
With the introduction of oral therapies for MS, treatment patterns will again be impacted.
PMID: 22224107
Spiritual well-being of patients with multiple sclerosis.
Spiritual well-being is one of the fundamental concepts in chronic diseases which create meaning and purpose in life and is an important approach in promoting general health and quality of life.
This study performed to determine the level of spiritual health and its dimensions in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS).
236 members of Iranian MS Society were volunteered to participate in a descriptive co-relational study.
Spiritual well-being was evaluated by The Spiritual Well-Being Scale (SWBS) questionnaires in two religious and Existential dimensions.
Descriptive statistics, ANOVA, t-test and Pearson correlation coefficient were used to analyse the data.
The majority of patients (% 97.9) showed moderate spiritual well-being (mean score = 74.3, SD= 8.90).
Although Existential well-being (mean score = 40.3, SD= 5.51) was higher than religious well- being (mean score = 33.9, SD= 4.88).
A significant relationship was seen between economic status and the spiritual well-being.
The results emphasize on the necessity of spiritual well-being as an effective factor on different aspects of these patients' life.
This key point is useful and even necessary to be considered to design programs of care and cure for these patients in a country (like Iran) with cultural and religious beliefs.
On the other hand, patients' economic status should be considered.
PMID: 23783198
The histaminergic network in the brain: basic organization and role in disease.
Histamine acts as a modulatory neurotransmitter in the mammalian brain.
It has an important role in the maintenance of wakefulness, and dysfunction in the histaminergic system has been linked to narcolepsy.
Recent evidence suggests that aberrant histamine signalling in the brain may also be a key factor in Gilles de la Tourette syndrome, Parkinson's disease and addictive behaviours.
Furthermore, multiple sclerosis (MS) and experimental autoimmune encephalitis, which is an often-used model for MS, are associated with changes in the histaminergic system.
This Review explores the possible roles of brain histamine in the mechanisms underlying these diseases.
PMID: 22155618
Adult CNP::EGFP transgenic mouse shows pronounced hypomyelination and an increased vulnerability to cuprizone-induced demyelination.
CNP::EGFP transgenic mice, genetically engineered to express the enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) under the control of the 2-3-cyclic nucleotide 3-phosphodiesterase (CNPase) promoter in oligodendroglial and Schwann cells, constitute a very important and widely used tool for the study of oligodendrocyte (OLG) development and function in young mice.
Our results showed that CNP::EGFP mice were significantly more susceptible to CPZ-induced demyelination, as evaluated by MBP immunostaining, oligodendroglial progenitor cell (OPC) recruitment and astroglial, microglial and nestin response.
This enhanced vulnerability was a consequence of their hypomyelination.
CNP::EGFP control mice also displayed a significant decrease in corpus callosum (CC) thickness and MBP immunoreactivity.
Morphometric analysis further showed a significant decrease in the frequency of myelinated axons, myelin turns (lamellae) and g-ratio carried out in the optic nerve (ON) and CC of CNP::EGFP, as compared to WT mice.
Moreover, our results showed a decrease in the number of axons of small caliber, concomitantly with an increase in the number of axons of bigger size with more and enlarged mitochondria, which suggests a high energy demand.
These findings and those displaying that MBP+ cells and NF200 staining in the CNP::EGFP cortex were more sparsely distributed provide evidence of axonal loss, which was supported by a decreased number of NeuN+ cells in the CA3 fields of the hippocampus.
Transgenic mice also showed an increase in microglial and astroglial activation, accompanied by enhanced lipid peroxidation and recruitment of morphologically altered OPC.
Finally, CNPase protein levels proved to be lower than MBP in the CC, which might indicate an altered pattern in myelin proteins with a CNPase deficiency.
Behavioral analysis of adult CNP::EGFP transgenic mice supported our results, as it revealed a decrease in locomotion, exploratory activity and motor impairment, as compared to their WT littermates.
Our data highlight the relevance of confronting results obtained in adult CNP::EGFP mice with those observed in WT mice.
According to our findings, CNP::EGFP hypomyelination might be triggered by the cellular stress induced by the high level of EGFP expression in mature OLG.
Adult CNP::EGFP mice could be considered a useful tool to evaluate future therapies for demyelinating diseases such as multiple sclerosis (MS), since these animals present chronic demyelination with axonal degeneration, a characteristic of such pathologies.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22261716
The role of deimination in ATP5b mRNA transport in a transgenic mouse model of multiple sclerosis.
Deimination refers to conversion of protein-bound arginine into citrulline.
An mRNA carrier, RNA binding export factor (REF), present on mitochondria undergoes loss of deimination with impaired ATP5b mRNA transport in ND4 mice (model of multiple sclerosis) compared with the controls.
We present evidence of (1) reduced ATP5b mRNA binding strength of non-deiminated REF compared with deiminated REF, (2) impaired ATP5b mRNA transport in ND4 mice and (3) reduced mitochondrial ATP synthase activity on inhibition of deimination in PC12 cells.
Impaired deimination of REF and defect in mitochondrial mRNA transport are critical factors in mitochondrial dysfunction in ND4 mice.
PMID: 22012025
Self-report fatigue questionnaires in multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease and stroke: a systematic review of measurement properties.
To critically appraise, compare and summarize the measurement properties of self-report fatigue questionnaires validated in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS), Parkinson's disease (PD) or stroke.
MEDLINE, EMBASE, PsycINFO, CINAHL and SPORTdiscus were searched.
The COnsensus-based Standards for the selection of health Measurement INstruments (COSMIN) checklist was used to assess the methodological quality of studies.
A qualitative data synthesis was performed to rate the measurement properties for each questionnaire.
Thirty-eight studies out of 5,336 records met the inclusion criteria, evaluating 31 questionnaires.
Moderate evidence was found for adequate internal consistency and structural validity of the Fatigue Scale for Motor and Cognitive functions (FSMC) and for adequate reliability and structural validity of the Unidimensional Fatigue Impact Scale (U-FIS) in MS.
We recommend the FSMC and U-FIS in MS.
The Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy Fatigue subscale (FACIT-F) and Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS) show promise in PD, and the Profile of Mood States Fatigue subscale (POMS-F) for stroke.
Future studies should focus on measurement error, responsiveness and interpretability.
Studies should also put emphasis on providing input for the theoretical construct of fatigue, allowing the development of questionnaires that reflect generic and disease-specific symptoms of fatigue.
PMID: 22566594
Motor axonal excitability properties are strong predictors for survival in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The aim of this study was to investigate whether axonal excitability indices are associated with survival in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Previous nerve excitability studies suggested increased persistent sodium currents in motor axons of patients with ALS, which lead to axonal hyperexcitability and potentially enhance neuronal death.
112 patients with sporadic ALS were followed up until endpoint (death or tracheostomy).
Multivariate analyses were performed using the Cox proportional hazard model.
Threshold tracking was used to measure multiple axonal excitability indices in median motor axons, such as strength-duration time constant (SDTC; a measure of nodal persistent sodium current).
Latent addition was also used to estimate the magnitude of persistent sodium currents.
The overall median tracheostomy-free survival from onset was 37 months.
Prolonged SDTC was strongly associated with shorter survival (adjusted HR 4.07; 95% CI 1.7 to 9.8; p=0.0018) compared with older onset age (&gt;60 years; HR=1.80) and bulbar onset (HR=1.80).
Estimated median survival was 34 months in the longer SDTC group and 51 months in the shorter SDTC group.
This index was highly statistically significant even after multiple testing adjustments with age and site of onset (bulbar or limb).
Latent addition study results were consistent with these findings.
Axonal persistent sodium currents, estimated by SDTC and latent addition, are strong and independent predictors for shorter survival in patients with ALS.
Membrane hyperexcitability is possibly associated with motor neuronal death, and modulation of excessive sodium currents could be a novel therapeutic option for ALS.
PMID: 22397318
Meningeal and cortical grey matter pathology in multiple sclerosis.
Although historically considered a disease primarily affecting the white matter of the central nervous system, recent pathological and imaging studies have established that cortical demyelination is common in multiple sclerosis and more extensive than previously appreciated.
Subpial, intracortical and leukocortical lesions are the three cortical lesion types described in the cerebral and cerebellar cortices of patients with multiple sclerosis.
Cortical demyelination may be the pathological substrate of progression, and an important pathologic correlate of irreversible disability, epilepsy and cognitive impairment.
Cortical lesions of chronic progressive multiple sclerosis patients are characterized by a dominant effector cell population of microglia, by the absence of macrophagic and leukocytic inflammatory infiltrates, and may be driven in part by organized meningeal inflammatory infiltrates.
Cortical demyelination is also present and common in early MS, is topographically associated with prominent meningeal inflammation and may even precede the appearance of classic white matter plaques in some MS patients.
However, the pathology of early cortical lesions is different than that of chronic MS in the sense that early cortical lesions are highly inflammatory, suggesting that neurodegeneration in MS occurs on an inflammatory background and raising interesting questions regarding the role of cortical demyelination and meningeal inflammation in initiating and perpetuating the disease process in early MS.
PMID: 22570069
[Basic science and clinical aspects of familial brain tumors].
Familial brain tumor syndromes include neurofibromatosis 1, neurofibromatosis 2, tuberous sclerosis, von Hippel-Lindau disease, and multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1, which are hereditary diseases.
In these diseases, various tumors develop because of alterations in tumor suppressor genes.
Familial brain tumors are mostly benign, but some are malignant.
Familial brain tumor syndromes are diagnosed on the basis of guidelines for clinical diagnosis and by DNA test.
Unlike sporadic brain tumors, familial brain tumors occur at multiple sites; therefore, a single operation is often not sufficient for treating familial brain tumors, and it is often necessary to treat lesions in other organs.
Surgical indications should be considered more prudently for familial brain tumors than for sporadic brain tumors.
PMID: 21927869
TCRBV20S1 polymorphism does not influence the susceptibility to type 1 diabetes and multiple sclerosis in the Sardinian population.
Among the different T-cell receptor (TCR) BV20S1 polymorphisms, nucleotide substitution at position 524 results in the introduction of a stop codon, whose potential functional relevance is still unknown.
We have recently showed in Sardinian subjects the most elevated allele frequency ever reported worldwide for this null allele (0.44).
As this variant generates a gap in the TCR repertoire, this preliminary finding prompted us to further analyze the role of this polymorphism in the susceptibility to type 1 diabetes (T1D) and multiple sclerosis (MS), which are extremely common in this population.
With this aim, we evaluated the influence of the TCRBV20S1 polymorphism by assessing it with the transmission disequilibirum test (TDT) in 652 T1D and 616 MS families, without detecting any significant difference.
We conclude that the high frequency of this null allele in Sardinia is not directly related to the high incidence of these autoimmune diseases observed in this founder population.
PMID: 22108845
S1P1 receptor subtype inhibits demyelination and regulates chemokine release in cerebellar slice cultures.
Sphingosine-1-phosphate receptors (S1PRs) are drug targets for the compound FTY720, which is the first oral therapy developed for treatment of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
S1PRs play a variety of functional roles in the differentiation, proliferation, survival and/or migration of neurons and glia.
In this study, rat organotypic cerebellar slice cultures were used to assess whether S1PRs play a role in demyelination induced by lysolecithin (LPC).
The data demonstrated that FTY720 and SEW2871 (a S1P1R-specific agonist) inhibited LPC-induced demyelination as assessed by myelin basic protein (MBP) immunofluorescence.
Treatment with both drugs for 48 h also induced an increase in S1P1R expression in astrocytes.
Moreover, FTY720 and SEW2871 inhibited the release of several chemokines in conditions of LPC-induced demyelination, including LIX (CXCL5), MIP-1alpha, and MIP-3alpha.
Taken together, the data suggest that activation of S1P1Rs prevents LPC-induced demyelination via a mechanism involving a reduction of chemotactic chemokine release.
The study supports the concept that FTY720 attenuates demyelination by not only preventing S1PR-mediated T cell migration into the CNS but also by limiting cytokine communication between cells of the immune system and the CNS.
Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 21958956
Axonal damage in the making: neurofilament phosphorylation, proton mobility and magnetisation transfer in multiple sclerosis normal appearing white matter.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) leaves a signature on the phosphorylation and thus proton binding capacity of axonal neurofilament (Nf) proteins.
The proton binding capacity in a tissue is the major determinant for exchange between bound and free protons and thus the magnetisation transfer ratio (MTR).
This study investigated whether the MTR of non-lesional white matter (NLWM) was related to the brain tissue concentration of neurofilament phosphoforms.
Unfixed post-mortem brain slices of 12 MS patients were analysed using MTR, T1 at 1.5 T.
Blocks containing NLWM were processed for embedding in paraffin and inspected microscopically.
Adjacent tissue was microdissected, homogenised and specific protein levels were quantified by ELISA for the Nf heavy chain (NfH) phosphoforms, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), S100B and ferritin.
Averaged hyperphosphorylated NfH (SMI34) but not phosphorylated NfH (SMI35) levels were different between individual patients NLWM.
The concentration of hyperphosphorylated NfH-SMI34 correlated with T1 (R=0.70, p=0.0114) and - inversely - with MTR (R=-0.73, p=0.0065).
NfH-SMI35 was not correlated to any of the MR indices.
Post-translational modifications of axonal proteins such as phosphorylation of neurofilaments occur in NLWM and may precede demyelination.
The resulting change of proton mobility influences MTR and T1.
This permits the in vivo detection of these subtle tissue changes on a proteomic level in patients with MS.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22257426
Diffusion abnormality maps in demyelinating disease: correlations with clinical scores.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has been explored as a noninvasive tool to assess pathology in multiple sclerosis (MS) patients.
However, the correlation between classical MRI measures and physical disability is modest in MS.
The diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) MRI technique holds particular promise in this regard.
The present study shows brain regions where FA and individual diffusivities abnormalities are present and check their correlations with physical disability clinical scores.
Eight patients and 12 matched healthy controls were recruited.
The Multiple Sclerosis Functional Composite was administered.
For MR-DTI acquisitions, a Genesis Signa 1.5 T MR system, an EP/SE scanning sequence, 25 gradient directions were used.
Tract Based Spatial Statistics (TBSS) group comparisons showed reduced FA and increased individual diffusivities in several brain regions in patients.
Significant correlations were found between FA and: EDSS, 9-HPT(NON)DOM and 25 FW score; between λ2 and: P100 (r&amp;l), 9-HPT(NON)DOM and 25 FW; between λ3 and: 9-HPT(NON)DOM and 25 FW score.
Fractional anisotropy and individual radial diffusivities proved to be important markers of motor disabilities in MS patients when the disease duration mean and the disability scores values range are relatively high.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23607206
[Morphologic and immunohistochemical features of Fallopian tubes and ovaries in women with genetic predisposition to ovarian cancer].
The fallopian tubes and ovaries samples from 5 breast cancer patients and 12 practically healthy women considered to be at high risk for developing ovarian cancer underwent evaluation for morphological features and immunohistochemical expression of Ki-67 and p53.
In high-risk patients the multiple follicular, serous, epithelial inclusion cysts (often with epithelial hyperplasia), surface papillomatosis, fibromatosis, cortical stromal hyperplasia in ovaries and fibres' sclerosis, paratubal cysts in fallopian tubes were discovered.
Immunohistochemical study revealed strong expression of Ki-67 (LI 16-53,6%) in epithelial cells of follicular and inclusion cysts in 25% (3/12) of practically healthy women of reproductive age.
P53 expression was determined in epithelium of inclusion cysts with high proliferative activity in 16,6% (2/12) of practically healthy women with BRCAI/2 mutation.
The current results suggest histological evidence for the existent of pre-neoplastic phenotype defined by above-described histologic features in the high-risk ovaries, especially in carriers of BRCA1/2 mutations.
P53 and Ki-67 expression in epithelium of inclusion cysts in women with BRCA1/2 mutations indicates the early genetic alterations in these cells and high risk of malignant transformation.
PMID: 23540404
The protective effect of berberine against neuronal damage by inhibiting matrix metalloproteinase-9 and laminin degradation in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
This study aims to assess the protective effect of berberine against neuronal damage in the brain parenchyma of mice with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE).
EAE was induced in female C57 BL/6 mice with myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein 35-55 amino acid peptide.
The berberine treatment was initiated on the day of disease onset and administered daily until the mice were sacrificed.
Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay, gelatin gel, and gelatin in situ zymography were analysed in this study.
Berberine reduced the TUNEL-positive neuronal cells of EAE mice.
Gelatin gel and gelatin in situ zymography showed up-regulation of gelatinase activity, which was mainly located in neurons and colocalized with remarkable laminin degradation in EAE mice.
Berberine significantly inhibited gelatinase activity and reduced the laminin degradation in EAE mice.
Our data suggest that berberine could provide protection against neuronal damage in EAE by inhibiting gelatinase activity and reducing laminin degradation.
These findings provide further support that berberine can be a potential therapeutic agent for multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 23592888
Exposure to UV Wavelengths in Sunlight Suppresses Immunity. To What Extent is UV-induced Vitamin D3 the Mediator Responsible?
Reduced immunity following exposure of skin to UV radiation (UVR) may explain the positive latitude gradient measured for a number of autoimmune diseases (greater incidence of disease with residence at higher latitudes), including multiple sclerosis, allergic asthma and diabetes.
Humans obtain &gt;80% of their vitamin D3 by exposure of skin to UVR in sunlight.
In experimental models, both vitamin D3-dependent and vitamin D3-independent pathways have been implicated in the mechanisms of UVR-induced systemic suppression of immunity.
However, where does the balance of control lie? How important is vitamin D3 other than providing a biomarker of sun exposure? Are other molecules/pathways activated by UVR more important? Murine and human studies suggest many molecules may play a role and their participation may vary with different diseases and the time of UVR exposure or vitamin D3 sufficiency/deficiency.
Although low vitamin D3 levels have been associated with increased prevalence and progression of human autoimmune diseases, the benefits of supplementation with vitamin D3 have not been definitive.
Vitamin D3 levels are a measure of past sun exposure but vitamin D3-dependent and vitamin D3-independent immunosuppressive effects of UVR may play a role in control of autoimmune diseases.
PMID: 22072381
Identification of a microglia phenotype supportive of remyelination.
In multiple sclerosis, endogenous oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) attempt to remyelinate areas of myelin damage.
During disease progression, however, these attempts fail.
It has been suggested that modulating the inflammatory environment of the lesion might provide a promising therapeutic approach to promote endogenous remyelination.
Microglia are known to play a central role in neuroinflammatory processes.
To investigate the microglia phenotype that supports remyelination, we performed genome-wide gene expression analysis of microglia from the corpus callosum during demyelination and remyelination in the mouse cuprizone model, in which remyelination spontaneously occurs after an episode of toxin-induced primary demyelination.
We provide evidence for the existence of a microglia phenotype that supports remyelination already at the onset of demyelination and persists throughout the remyelination process.
Our data show that microglia are involved in the phagocytosis of myelin debris and apoptotic cells during demyelination.
Furthermore, they express a cytokine and chemokine repertoire enabling them to activate and recruit endogenous OPCs to the lesion site and deliver trophic support during remyelination.
This study not only provides a detailed transcriptomic analysis of the remyelination-supportive microglia phenotype but also reinforces the notion that the primary function of microglia is the maintenance of tissue homeostasis and the support of regeneration already at the earliest stages in the development of demyelinating lesions.
Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22050952
CD49d expression as a promising biomarker to monitor natalizumab efficacy.
Natalizumab (Tysabri™), a monoclonal antibody against the α4-integrin of VLA-4 (CD49d) antigen of leukocytes, is highly effective in multiple sclerosis (MS).
The most common reason for treatment failure is the development of neutralizing antibodies (NAbs).
According to health authorities Nabs testing is recommended in case of relapse or repeated infusion reactions.
However NAbs may develop in clinically asymptomatic patients.
In this study we investigated if CD49d expression could serve as a biomarker of natalizumab bioavailability and treatment response.
In a cohort of 49 natalizumab treated relapsing-remitting MS, followed over 2 years, CD49d expression was determined on peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) before each infusion and compared to NAbs and serum natalizumab levels.
In a majority of patients (41/49) the CD49d expression in PBMCs was strongly inhibited (&gt;50%) after the first infusion and maintained at low levels throughout the treatment period.
In contrast, in eight patients (16%) there was an early recovery of CD49d expression to pre-treatment levels related to NABs development.
While three cases experienced hypersensitivity reactions, three others were identified solely on the basis of an undiminished level of CD49d, with neither infusion reaction nor clinical worsening.
These 3 patients had very high levels of NAbs and no detectable serum natalizumab.
Two additional patients had early but transient recovery of CD49d expression.
These patients had low levels of transient Nabs and returned to significant CD49d inhibition after few natalizumab infusions.
We suggest that monitoring of CD49d expression can be used as a surrogate biomarker of natalizumab efficiency.
If the CD49d expression is sustained at pre-treatment levels, patients should be tested for persistent NAbs and considered for treatment interruption.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23167788
Systematic review and meta-analysis of the efficacy of sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) receptor agonist FTY720 (fingolimod) in animal models of stroke.
FTY720 (fingolimod) is a known sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) receptor agonist, which has been used in clinical trials for treating multiple sclerosis, renal transplantation, and decreasing reperfusion injury in heart, liver, and kidney.
Most of these clinical trials have showed a positive effect.
Especially, the trials of MS showed a reduction of relapse rate in FTY720-treated patients.
Now, some animal experiments indicated that FTY720 could be a new compound available treatment for stroke patients by exerting neuroprotection via S1P1 mediated antiapoptotic mechanisms.
Whether it could be effective in animals is unclear, so we conducted a systematic review to make it clear.
We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of the efficacy of FTY720 in animal models of focal cerebral ischemia by electronic and manual searches of the literature.
Data on study quality, FTY720 dose, time of administration, and outcome measured as infarct volume or functional deficit were extracted.
Data from all studies were analyzed by means of a standardized mean difference meta-analysis.
Of the 19 identified studies, 9 were included.
Among all the included studies, 178 animals were calculated for infarct size and 194 animals were assessed of neurological deficits.
The methodological quality of the studies ranged from 2 to 10 according to a published 11-item quality scale.
Of the nine studies selected, only one reported a negative result of FTY720.
The result indicated that FTY720 reduced the infarct volume (SMD = -1.31, 95% CI -1.99 to -0.63) and improve the functional outcome (SMD = -1.61, 95% CI -2.17 to -1.05).
The data we included supporting FTY720 was a candidate drug for stroke, but it should be considered with caution.
More good quality experimental studies should be performed to evaluate the safety of FTY720 in the future.
Whether FTY720 is effective in aged animals that mimicked human with comorbidities like diabetes and hypertension should also be deliberated.
PMID: 22551731
Myasthenia gravis and neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder: a multicenter study of 16 patients.
To describe 16 patients with a coincidence of 2 rare diseases: aquaporin-4 antibody (AQP4-Ab)-mediated neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (AQP4-NMOSD) and acetylcholine receptor antibody (AChR-Ab)-mediated myasthenia gravis (AChR-MG).
The clinical details and antibody results of 16 patients with AChR-MG and AQP4-NMOSD were analyzed retrospectively.
All had early-onset AChR-MG, the majority with mild generalized disease, and a high proportion achieved remission.
Fifteen were female; 11 were Caucasian.
In 14/16, the MG preceded NMOSD (median interval: 16 years) and 11 of these had had a thymectomy although 1 only after NMOSD onset.
In 4/5 patients tested, AQP4-Abs were detectable between 4 and 16 years prior to disease onset, including 2 patients with detectable AQP4-Abs prior to thymectomy.
AChR-Abs decreased and the AQP4-Ab levels increased over time in concordance with the relevant disease.
AChR-Abs were detectable at NMOSD onset in the one sample available from 1 of the 2 patients with NMOSD before MG.
Although both conditions are rare, the association of MG and NMOSD occurs much more frequently than by chance and the MG appears to follow a benign course.
AChR-Abs or AQP4-Abs may be present years before onset of the relevant disease and the antibody titers against AQP4 and AChR tend to change in opposite directions.
Although most cases had MG prior to NMOSD onset, and had undergone thymectomy, NMOSD can occur first and in patients who have not had their thymus removed.
PMID: 22359923
[State of antioxidant system in patients with multiple sclerosis during therapy].
Activity of erytrocyte glutationperoxidase (GP), glutationreductase (GR), glutationtransferase (GT), glucose-6-phosphatdehydrogenase (G6PDH), catalase and superoxiddysmutase (SOD), and also, the level of malonic dialdehyde (MDA) and total antioxidant activity of blood serum were studied in patients with different types of multiple sclerosis.
Investigation of peripherical blood was carried out on first day of treatment and after standard therapy of copaxone.
All MS patients had high level of MDA and activity of GP in erythrocytes in comparison with a control group.
Other antioxidant enzymes of erythrocytes and total antioxidant activity of blood serum exhibited weak positive dynamics in patients with a relapsing remittance of multiple sclerosis (RRMS).
Decrease of activity of antioxidant system in patients with secondary progression multiple sclerosis (SPMS) was more pronounced and remained unchanged after the treatment.
This is consistent with the more severe clinical course of thise disease.
PMID: 22829325
Distinct features between longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis presenting with and without anti-aquaporin 4 antibodies.
Longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis (LETM) with spinal cord lesions spanning three or more vertebral segments is a key feature of neuromyelitis optica (NMO).
However, the role of anti-aquaporin 4 (anti-AQP4) antibody, a sensitive biomarker of NMO, in the conversion of LETM to NMO remains uncertain.
Thirty first-ever LETM patients were retrospectively analysed and divided into two groups according to the presence of anti-AQP4 antibodies.
Eighteen (60%) patients presented with anti-AQP4 antibodies.
Fifteen (83.33%) anti-AQP4 (+) LETM patients converted to NMO, while only three of 12 (25%, p = 0.002) anti-AQP4 (-) LETM patients progressed to NMO, over a mean follow-up period of 5.63 years.
Seven (38.89%) anti-AQP4 (+) and one (8.33%) anti-AQP4 (-) LETM patients received interferon-β1a treatment, respectively.
Anti-AQP4 (+) LETM patients demonstrated a higher immunogamma globulin (IgG) index (0.68 ± 0.43 versus 0.47 ± 0.19, p = 0.018), annual relapse rate (0.72 ± 0.31 versus 0.42 ± 0.17, p = 0.01) and Kurtzke Expanded Disability Status Scale (4.28 ± 2.22 versus 2.67 ± 2.26, p = 0.031), than anti-AQP4 (-) LETM patients.
In spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRIs), more than half (58.33%) of the anti-AQP4 (+) LETM patients were observed to have central grey matter-predominant involvement in the axial view, while peripheral white matter-predominant involvement (51.85%) was the most common pattern observed in the anti-AQP4 (-) LETM patients.
Anti-AQP4 (+) LETM demonstrated a high conversion rate to NMO (83.33%), suggesting that anti-AQP4 (+) LETM may represent an early, isolated syndrome of NMO spectrum disorder.
The greater number of patients receiving interferon-β treatment in anti-AQP4 (+) LETM may contribute to its high annual relapse rate.
PMID: 22826186
[Ophthalmological findings in paediatric and adolescent multiple sclerosis].
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic demyelinating disorder of the central nervous system of unknown aetiology.
The onset of MS in childhood poses diagnostic and therapeutic challenges.
Differential diagnoses include acute disseminated encephalomyelitis and neurometabolic leukoencephalopathies.
In this article the ophthalmological findings of paediatric and adolescent MS patients are described and discussed in the light of earlier studies.
In a retrospective study we evaluated the ophthalmological and neuro-ophthalmological findings of 44 paediatric/adolescent MS patients (aged 8-18 years).
In 18/44 patients optic neuritis was found.
Abnormalities of ocular motility were seen in 9/44 patients, 5/44 had abduction limitation, 3/44 internuclear ophthalmoplegia and 1/44 horizontal gaze palsy.
Furthermore, 13/44 children showed nystagmus, mostly gaze-induced nystagmus.
Uveitis was present in 4/44 patients.
The ophthalmological and neuroophthalmological findings may lead to the diagnosis of MS.
Children presenting with these symptoms should be examined by a paediatric neurologist.
Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.
PMID: 23223539
Fingolimod treatment in multiple sclerosis leads to increased macular volume.
To determine whether fingolimod, an oral sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor modulator approved for treatment of multiple sclerosis (MS), generally leads to increased retinal tissue volume.
In this longitudinal observational study, we compared changes in macular volume on spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (OCT) between consecutive patients with MS who initiated fingolimod and a matched reference cohort of patients with MS never exposed to the drug.
The primary reference cohort was matched based on time interval between OCT examinations.
A secondary reference cohort was matched based on age and disease duration.
Change in macular volume within each group was analyzed using the paired t test.
Change in macular volume between groups was examined using multiple linear regression.
Macular volume increased by a mean of 0.025 mm3 (95% confidence interval [CI] +0.017 to +0.033, p &lt; 0.001) in the 30 patients with MS who initiated fingolimod over a mean follow-up time of 5 months (SD 3).
Macular volume did not significantly change over a mean follow-up time of 6 months (SD 4) in a comparison group of 30 patients with MS never treated with fingolimod (mean change of -0.003 mm3, 95% CI -0.009 to +0.004, p = 0.47).
Overall, 74% of eyes in the fingolimod-treated group exhibited an increase in macular volume vs. 37% of eyes in the comparison group.
Initiation of fingolimod in MS is associated with a modest, relatively rapid increase in macular volume.
PMID: 23223533
Location of brain lesions predicts conversion of clinically isolated syndromes to multiple sclerosis.
To assess in a large population of patients with clinically isolated syndrome (CIS) the relevance of brain lesion location and frequency in predicting 1-year conversion to multiple sclerosis (MS).
In this multicenter, retrospective study, clinical and MRI data at onset and clinical follow-up at 1 year were collected for 1,165 patients with CIS.
On T2-weighted MRI, we generated lesion probability maps of white matter (WM) lesion location and frequency.
Voxelwise analyses were performed with a nonparametric permutation-based approach (p &lt; 0.05, cluster-corrected).
In CIS patients with hemispheric, multifocal, and brainstem/cerebellar onset, lesion probability map clusters were seen in clinically eloquent brain regions.
Significant lesion clusters were not found in CIS patients with optic nerve and spinal cord onset.
At 1 year, clinically definite MS developed in 26% of patients.
The converting group, despite a greater baseline lesion load compared with the nonconverting group (7 ± 8.1 cm3 vs. 4.6 ± 6.7 cm3, p &lt; 0.001), showed less widespread lesion distribution (18% vs. 25% of brain voxels occupied by lesions).
High lesion frequency was found in the converting group in projection, association, and commissural WM tracts, with larger clusters being in the corpus callosum, corona radiata, and cingulum.
Higher frequency of lesion occurrence in clinically eloquent WM tracts can characterize CIS subjects with different types of onset.
The involvement of specific WM tracts, in particular those traversed by fibers involved in motor function and near the corpus callosum, seems to be associated with a higher risk of clinical conversion to MS in the short term.
PMID: 23223537
Higher macular volume in patients with MS receiving fingolimod: positive outcome or side effect?
In the evaluation of patients with multiple sclerosis (MS), optical coherence tomography (OCT) is gaining traction as a tool to assess thinning of the retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) and, more recently, for looking at total macular volume (TMV) thickness, with both measures used as potential biomarkers for progression of disease.
In medicine, it is not uncommon for structural changes to be presumed to reflect a certain physiologic process, when in fact, an alternative mechanism is at play.
Fingolimod (FTY-720) is a sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor modulator that is an approved oral treatment for MS and leads to reduced cortical volume loss in patients with MS.(1) Similar to other disease-modifying agents, it is likely to be judged in part by its ability to slow loss of the RNFL and TMV.
But would such a judgment be valid?
PMID: 22388887
Properties of 7ND-CCL2 are modulated upon fusion to Fc.
7ND, a truncated version of the chemokine MCP-1/CCL2 lacking amino acids 2-8, is a potent antagonist of CCR2.
In contrast to CCL2, 7ND is an obligate monomer.
Similar to other chemokines, the in vivo half-life of 7ND is very short and its use as an antagonist in disease models is thus limited.
We therefore constructed a 7ND-Fc fusion protein to extend the half-life of 7ND and overcome its limitations as a potential therapeutic antagonist.
When we tested the properties of the fusion molecule in vitro, we found to our surprise that 7ND-Fc, in contrast to 7ND, produced a distinct, albeit small, chemotactic response in THP-1 cells, and a robust chemotactic response in L1.2 cells stably transfected with CCR2.
To test whether this unexpected observation might be due to the bivalency of 7ND-Fc stemming from the dimeric nature of Fc fusions, we produced a heterodimeric Fc fusion which displays only one 7ND moiety, using a technology called strand exchange of engineered CH3 domains (SEED).
The monovalent construct had properties equivalent to the parent 7ND.
Furthermore, partial agonist activity appears to depend on receptor density as well as the signaling pathway examined.
However, we were able to show that 7ND-Fc, but not 7ND alone, has antagonistic activity in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, a murine model of multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 22475104
Corticosteroids provoke acute endothelial injury -- an ideal ground for thrombosis in multiple sclerosis.
Despite the effect corticosteroids exert on blood clotting and the irrefutable impact of intracranial sure decreasing shortly after lumbar puncture, a certain number of intracranial thromboses remain unexplained.
Corticosteroids are useful in reducing the severity and duration of relapses of multiple sclerosis.
Several questions emerge concerning the reasons behind thrombosis occurring so sporadically, not pertaining to any rule, the most important of which regard the location and timing.
We developed this hypothesis as an obverse to chronic endothelial injury theory which, only partially explains atherosclerosis development.
We followed Virchows classical triad of conditions which are believed to be connected to the development of thrombosis.
Although corticosteroids affect more than vessel wall injury, component of Virchows triad that has been our narrowest interest is exactly vessel wall injury.
PMID: 23246200
Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome associated with multiple sclerosis.
The aim of this study was to determine if there is a difference in the frequency of postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) compared to patients with symptoms of orthostatic intolerance and with no evidence of MS or other neurological illness.
We analyzed data gathered from 293 patients who underwent the head-up tilt table test protocol.
Group 1 included prospectively analyzed 112 with MS and group 2 included retrospectively analyzed 181 patients who were evaluated because of symptoms of orthostatic intolerance, and with no evidence of MS or other neurological illness.
If POTS was identified the head-up tilt table test was repeated and supine as well as standing serum epinephrine and norepinephrine were determined.
POTS was identified in 39 patients: 21 (19%) in the MS group comparing to 18 (10%) in the non MS group (p=0.035).
There was no difference between groups in the occurrence of POTS associated syncope (p=0.52).
There was no difference between groups in the epinephrine or norepinephrine in supine and standing positions.
While both standing epinephrine and norepinephrine levels were significantly higher compared to levels in the supine position in the non MS group, only standing norepinephrine levels were significantly higher in the MS group.
The results of this study suggest that POTS is associated with MS.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23807832
Visual field characteristics in neuromyelitis optica in absence of and after one episode of optic neuritis.
Optic neuritis (ON) observed during neuromyelitis optica (NMO) is in most cases very severe and with poor prognosis.
This study's objective was to analyze visual field (VF) abnormalities observed in the absence of ON and post-ON episode.
Twenty-seven cases of both NMO and multiple sclerosis (MS) were selected.
Thorough ophthalmologic exam was performed at least 6 months post-ON attack.
The VF was collected using the Humphrey 750 perimeter.
We used the central threshold tests 24-2 with FASTPAC strategy.
The abnormalities were categorized based on the Optic Neuritis Treatment Trial classification.
After one ON, 40% of the NMO group's eyes showed total VF loss (P = 0.01), 21% showed abnormalities of neurologic aspect, and 27% showed fascicular abnormalities of which 12% were altitudinal.
Given the total VF loss, the positive predictive value in favor of an NMO was 92.8% and the negative predictive value was 47.3%.
Alterations of the VF during the NMO differ from those observed in the course of the MS.
One ON, blinding from the first attack, must call to mind an NMO.
The altitudinal deficits point to a vascular mechanism.
PMID: 23807836
PEGylated interferon beta-1a in the treatment of multiple sclerosis - an update.
Current standard immunomodulatory therapy with interferons (IFNs) for relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (MS) exhibits proven, but limited, efficacy and increased side effects due to the need of frequent application of the drug.
Therefore, there is a need for more effective and tolerable drugs.
Due to their small size, optimization of therapy with IFNs in MS by PEGylation is feasible.
PEGylation of an IFN means that at least one molecule of polyethylene glycol (PEG) is covalently added.
This modification is a standard procedure to increase the stability, solubility, half-life, and efficacy of a drug, and is applied in several drugs and diseases.
Currently, a therapy regimen applying PEG-IFN beta-1a in MS is being developed to achieve an optimized relationship between therapy-related side effects and pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic efficacy.
Phase I studies demonstrated that subcutaneous PEG-IFN beta-1a at a dose of 125 μg every 2 or 4 weeks might be at least as efficient and safe as the current standard therapy with IFN beta-1a.
A global Phase III clinical study is investigating the efficacy of PEG-IFN beta-1a in terms of reduction of the relapse rate in relapsing-remitting MS patients.
The latest primary safety and efficacy analysis after 1 year has revealed a favorable risk-benefit profile with no significant difference between dosing regimens.
Compared to placebo, the annualized relapse rate was reduced by about one-third and new or newly enlarging T2 brain lesions were reduced by about one-third when dosing every 4 weeks or by two-thirds when dosing every 2 weeks.
This presents a significant effect of the dosing interval, favoring administration every 2 weeks.
Chronic administration of PEGylated proteins mostly at toxic concentrations causes vacuolation of renal epithelium in animals, which - along with the issue of occurrence of anti-PEG antibodies - has to be addressed by Phase IV studies.
PMID: 21584740
Cognitive impairment and event-related potentials in paediatric multiple sclerosis: 2-year study.
Approximately, 3-10% of patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) present a disease onset before the age of 18 years.
Although growing attention is dedicated to cognitive impairment and its functional consequences in paediatric MS, so far no study has explored possible neurophysiologic correlates.
The study's aim was to describe event-related potentials in relationship with cognitive performance in children and adolescents with MS compared with demographically matched healthy controls (HC), providing two-year follow-up data.
Six MS subjects aged between 9 and 17 years were assessed through an extensive neuropsychological battery at two time points.
Event-related potentials with an odd-ball acoustic paradigm were also recorded in the patients and in nine HC.
At baseline, four out of six patients failed three or more cognitive tasks and were classified as cognitively impaired.
In all the cognitively impaired patients, we found abnormal latencies and amplitudes of the P300.
After 2 years, five patients exhibited a deteriorating cognitive performance and a corresponding deterioration of the P300 parameters.
In our group of children and adolescents with MS, changes in P300 parameters proceeded in parallel with deteriorating cognitive performance.
P300 might represent an objective parameter to monitor cognitive changes in paediatric MS.
PMID: 23061676
Immunomodulatory effects of histone deacetylase inhibitors.
Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) have emerged as a new generation of anticancer therapeutics.
The classical broad-spectrum HDACi typically alter the cell cycle distribution and induce cell death, apoptosis and differentiation in malignant and transformed cells.
This provides the basis for the clinical potential of HDACi in cancer therapy.
Currently two compounds, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA, Vorinostat, Zolinza™) and depsipeptide (Romidepsin, Istodax™) have been approved for by the US Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of refractory cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.
Apart from clinical application in oncology, HDACi have also been investigated as potential therapeutics for various pathologies including those of the central nervous system (such as Huntington's disease and multiple sclerosis), cardiac conditions (particularly hypertrophy), arthritis and malaria.
Further, evidence is accumulating for potent immunomodulatory effects of classical HDACi which is the focus of this review.
We review the antiinflammatory effects of HDACi and in particular findings implicating regulation of the innate and adaptive immune systems by HDAC enzymes.
The recent findings highlighting the immunomodulatory function of HDAC11 which relates to balancing immune activation versus tolerance are also discussed.
PMID: 23113417
Antenarratives to inform health care research: exploring workplace illness disclosure for people with multiple sclerosis (MS).
I share Boje's (2001) concept of antenarratives as a useful means of presenting qualitative health care research, especially their capacity to share illness-related stories which may be fragmented, non-linear, sometimes incoherent, and often speculative.
I do this to offer insights to health care professionals that might maximize the health care outcomes for those they serve.
An Australian based qualitative research project explored the lived experience of what life is really like for a person with Multiple Sclerosis (MS).
Rather than presenting a traditional, narrative based, coherent and saturated theme, I present antenarratives that vivify the lived experience of illness disclosure.
Antenarratives have the capacity to share key elements of experience in ways that can edify health care practitioners concerned with offering support that consists of more than prescriptive solutions and certain advice.
PMID: 21467209
Diffusion tensor tractography reveals disrupted topological efficiency in white matter structural networks in multiple sclerosis.
Little is currently known about the alterations in the topological organization of the white matter (WM) structural networks in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS).
In the present study, we used diffusion tensor imaging and deterministic tractography to map the WM structural networks in 39 MS patients and 39 age- and gender-matched healthy controls.
Graph theoretical methods were applied to investigate alterations in the network efficiency in these patients.
The MS patients and the controls exhibited efficient small-world properties in their WM structural networks.
However, the global and local network efficiencies were significantly decreased in the MS patients compared with the controls, with the most pronounced changes observed in the sensorimotor, visual, default-mode, and language areas.
Furthermore, the decreased network efficiencies were significantly correlated with the expanded disability status scale scores, the disease durations, and the total WM lesion loads.
Together, the results suggest a disrupted integrity in the large-scale brain systems in MS, thus providing new insights into the understanding of MS connectome.
Our data also suggest that a topology-based brain network analysis can provide potential biomarkers for disease diagnosis and for monitoring the progression and treatment effects for patients with MS.
PMID: 22990724
Difficulties in HAM/TSP diagnosis.
The World Health Organization recommends the use of Osame's criterion (1990) for the diagnosis of HTLV-I-associated myelopathy (HAM/TSP).
In 2006, a group of neurologists developed a Brazilian criterion that can diagnose HAM/TSP from its onset.
It was to test the agreement between both criteria.
The study included evaluation of clinical and laboratory findings of 35 patients.
The ELISA, Western blot and/or polymerase chain reaction was used to search for anti-HTLV-I antibodies.
The analysis of agreement was based on the calculation of Kappa.
Concordance of 100% (Kappa=1) occurred in cases of defined HAM/TSP, but not in patients with probable diagnosis.
The Brazilian criteria was as effective as Osame's criteria for the diagnosis of defined HAM/TSP.
However, both require more specific biological markers in cerebrospinal fluid for the laboratory diagnosis of probable cases.
PMID: 22924505
Small-molecule Klotho enhancers as novel treatment of neurodegeneration.
The majority of neurodegenerative diseases have an important age component, and thus, understanding the molecular changes that occur during normal aging of the brain is of utmost relevance.
In search for the basis of the age-related cognitive decline found in humans, monkeys and rodents, we study the rhesus monkey.
Surprisingly, there is no loss of neurons in aged monkey brains.
However, we reported white matter and myelin abnormalities in aged monkeys, similar to those observed in Alzheimer's disease and multiple sclerosis patients.
In a microarray analysis comparing young and old monkey white matter, we discovered that Klotho is downregulated in the aged brain.
We then asked whether there is a connection between the age-related cognitive decline, myelin abnormalities and Klotho downregulation.
If such a connection is found, compounds that upregulate Klotho expression could become of therapeutic interest for the treatment of multiple sclerosis, and perhaps even Alzheimer's disease.
PMID: 23415570
Controversies and priorities in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Two decades after the discovery that 20% of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) cases were linked to mutations in the superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1) gene, a substantial proportion of the remainder of cases of familial ALS have now been traced to an expansion of the intronic hexanucleotide repeat sequence in C9orf72.
This breakthrough provides an opportunity to re-evaluate longstanding concepts regarding the cause and natural history of ALS, coming soon after the pathological unification of ALS with frontotemporal dementia through a shared pathological signature of cytoplasmic inclusions of the ubiquitinated protein TDP-43.
However, with profound clinical, prognostic, neuropathological, and now genetic heterogeneity, the concept of ALS as one disease appears increasingly untenable.
This background calls for the development of a more sophisticated taxonomy, and an appreciation of ALS as the breakdown of a wider network rather than a discrete vulnerable population of specialised motor neurons.
Identification of C9orf72 repeat expansions in patients without a family history of ALS challenges the traditional division between familial and sporadic disease.
By contrast, the 90% of apparently sporadic cases and incomplete penetrance of several genes linked to familial cases suggest that at least some forms of ALS arise from the interplay of multiple genes, poorly understood developmental, environmental, and age-related factors, as well as stochastic events.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21992208
Bilateral subdural hematoma following implantation of intrathecal drug delivery device.
To report a case of bilateral subacute subdural hematoma following implantation of intrathecal drug delivery device.
We present here the case of a 41-year-old woman with multiple sclerosis and intractable spasticity who developed a bilateral subacute subdural hematoma after the placement of an intrathecal catheter connected to a programmable pump for baclofen infusion.
Surgical drainage of the hematoma resulted in full neurologic recovery.
This complication due to intracranial hypotension following lumbar puncture has been previously reported only once in patients with implanted intrathecal drug delivery device.
Medical and nursing staff dealing with intrathecal therapy should be aware of this potentially severe complication.
© 2011 International Neuromodulation Society.
PMID: 23475517
[Personal genome analysis in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis].
In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 5% of cases are familial, and most of the remaining cases are sporadic.
In familial ALS, many causative genes have been identified during the last 20 years of the golden age of genetics.
In particular, the recent discovery of a hexanucleotide repeat expansion in chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 (C9orf72) has had a large impact on ALS research, as this mutation is the most frequent cause of familial ALS in Europe and the US.
However, the relative rarity of this mutation in Japan and Asia suggests the need to identify further other causative genes of familial ALS.
In this regard, the advent of next-generation sequencing technology is expected to accelerate the identification of novel genes.
In addition, next-generation sequencing will supersede Sanger sequencing in the molecular diagnosis of familial ALS.
A number of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have been conducted to identify the disease-susceptibility genes of sporadic ALS.
In 1,305 Japanese ALS samples, the ZNF512B gene was associated with susceptibility to ALS.
This gene has been shown to be one of the prognostic factors in sporadic ALS.
Although GWAS that are based on the 'common disease-common variants hypothesis' have successfully revealed many disease-susceptibility genes, including ZNF512B, in sporadic ALS, the odds ratios associated with these risk alleles are generally low.
The next challenge in ALS research is to use next-generation sequencing techniques to identify disease-relevant alleles with large effect sizes based on the 'common disease-multiple rare variants hypothesis'.
PMID: 22377454
Luteolin downregulates TLR4, TLR5, NF-κB and p-p38MAPK expression, upregulates the p-ERK expression, and protects rat brains against focal ischemia.
Inflammatory damage is known to be involved in ischemic stroke.
Luteolin has been proved to elicit a series of biologic effects through its anti-inflammatory property in multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis.
Whether this protective effect applies to ischemic injury in brain is still unknown, we therefore investigate the potential neuroprotective role of luteolin in ischemic stroke and the underlying mechanisms.
Male Sprague-Dawley rats were subjected to pMCAO and luteolin was administered intraperitoneally immediately after surgery, then once daily thereafter.
Neurological deficit, infarct volume, and brain water content were measured at 24 h and 72 h after stroke.
The expression of TLR4, TLR5, and NF-κB were measured by real-time PCR, immunohistochemical staining (IHC), and Western blot.
P38MAPK and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) were detected by IHC, and Western blot.
Compared with pMCAO group, luteolin significantly alleviated neurological deficit, decreased infarct volume and suppressed edema after ischemic stroke, which were accompanied with decreased expression of TLR4, TLR5, NF-κB and p-p38MAPK.
Meanwhile, luteolin activated the expression of p-ERK1/2 (P&lt;0.05).
Luteolin protected the brain from the damage caused by pMCAO, and this effect may be through downregulation of TLR4, TLR5, NF-κB, p38MAPK and upregulation of ERK expression.
Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23300835
Recombinant expression of margatoxin and agitoxin-2 in Pichia pastoris: an efficient method for production of KV1.3 channel blockers.
The K(v)1.3 voltage-gated potassium channel regulates membrane potential and calcium signaling in human effector memory T cells that are key mediators of autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis, type 1 diabetes, and rheumatoid arthritis.
Thus, subtype-specific K(v)1.3 blockers have potential for treatment of autoimmune diseases.
Several K(v)1.3 channel blockers have been characterized from scorpion venom, all of which have an α/β scaffold stabilized by 3-4 intramolecular disulfide bridges.
Chemical synthesis is commonly used for producing these disulfide-rich peptides but this approach is time consuming and not cost effective for production of mutants, fusion proteins, fluorescently tagged toxins, or isotopically labelled peptides for NMR studies.
Recombinant production of K(v)1.3 blockers in the cytoplasm of E. coli generally necessitates oxidative refolding of the peptides in order to form their native disulfide architecture.
An alternative approach that avoids the need for refolding is expression of peptides in the periplasm of E. coli but this often produces low yields.
Thus, we developed an efficient Pichia pastoris expression system for production of K(v)1.3 blockers using margatoxin (MgTx) and agitoxin-2 (AgTx2) as prototypic examples.
The Pichia system enabled these toxins to be obtained in high yield (12-18 mg/L).
NMR experiments revealed that the recombinant toxins adopt their native fold without the need for refolding, and electrophysiological recordings demonstrated that they are almost equipotent with the native toxins in blocking K(V)1.3 (IC(50) values of 201±39 pM and 97 ± 3 pM for recombinant AgTx2 and MgTx, respectively).
Furthermore, both recombinant toxins inhibited T-lymphocyte proliferation.
A MgTx mutant in which the key pharmacophore residue K28 was mutated to alanine was ineffective at blocking K(V)1.3 and it failed to inhibit T-lymphocyte proliferation.
Thus, the approach described here provides an efficient method of producing toxin mutants with a view to engineering K(v)1.3 blockers with therapeutic potential.
PMID: 23439547
Expression and Genetic Analysis of MicroRNAs Involved in Multiple Sclerosis.
Evidence underlines the importance of microRNAs (miRNAs) in the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis (MS).
Based on the fact that miRNAs are present in human biological fluids, we previously showed that miR-223, miR-23a and miR-15b levels were downregulated in the sera of MS patients versus controls.
Here, the expression levels of these candidate miRNAs were determined in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and the serum of MS patients, in addition to three genotyped single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs).
Mapping in the genomic regions of miR-223, miR-23a and  miR-15b genes, 399 cases and 420 controls were tested.
Expression levels of miR-223 and miR-23a were altered in PBMCs from MS patients versus controls.
Conversely, there were no differences in the expression levels of miR-15b.
A significantly decreased genotypic frequency of miR-223 rs1044165 T/T genotype was observed in MS patients.
Moreover, the allelic frequency of miR-23a rs3745453 C allele was significantly increased in patients versus controls.
In contrast, there were no differences in the distribution of miR-15b SNP.
In conclusion, our results suggest that miR-223 and miR-23a could play a role in the pathogenesis of MS.
Moreover, miR-223 rs1044165 polymorphism likely acts as a protective factor, while miR-23a rs3745453 variant seems to act as a risk factor for MS.
PMID: 21920559
Effect of disease-modifying therapies on brain volume in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: results of a five-year brain MRI study.
To compare the long-term effect of disease-modifying therapies (DMT) on brain volume loss in relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) patients.
We conducted a study to examine the effect of daily glatiramer acetate (GA), weekly low dose interferon beta (LD-IFNB), and high-dose high-frequency interferon beta disease (HD-IFNB) on brain volume loss over 5 years in RRMS patients.
All patients were previously treatment naïve, had disease duration ≤5 years at the time of initiating DMT, and subsequently received the same DMT for 5 years continuously.
The percentage change in brain volume (PCBV) was measured using fully automated software.
MRI analysis was performed blinded to treatment allocation.
The adjusted PCBV from baseline to year 5 was -2.27% in GA, -2.62% in LD-IFNB, and -3.21% in the HD-IFNB groups (-2.27 vs -2.62, p=0.0036; -2.27 vs -3.21, p&lt;0.0001; -2.62 vs -3.21, p&lt;0.0001).
These data remained unchanged from year 1 to year 5, after adjusting for pseudoatrophy in the first year.
A group of RRMS patients that remained untreated for a period ranging from 8 to 24 months, served as controls.
All treatment groups were significantly better than the rate of projected brain volume loss in the untreated group over 5 years (p&lt;0.0001).
Global brain volume loss is a dynamic process even in relatively early RRMS patients that occurs despite intervention with therapy.
However, all DMT significantly reduced the loss of brain volume compared to no treatment.
The GA-treated group experienced the least reduction in brain volume over 5 years, compared to the LD-IFNB and HD-IFNB treated groups.
These differences could be partly related to the immunologic consequences of GA therapy in RRMS.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 24187513
Assessing the long-term clinical benefit of prolonged-release fampridine tablets in a real-world setting: a review of 67 cases.
To assess the long-term effects of prolonged-release (PR) fampridine tablets (dalfampridine extended release) in clinical practice in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) with walking impairment.
MS patients with walking impairment deemed candidates for treatment with PR-fampridine tablets were included in this case series.
Clinical assessments included the Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS), Timed 25-Foot Walk (T25FW), 12-item Multiple Sclerosis Walking Scale (MSWS-12), EuroQoL-5D, and the Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS).
The T25FW was videotaped at each visit.
Assessments were performed at baseline and after 4 weeks of treatment with PR-fampridine tablets 10 mg twice daily.
Clinical benefit of treatment was defined as any improvement in T25FW or MSWS-12 score at 4 weeks.
Patients who demonstrated clinical benefit continued treatment and were assessed at 3 and 6 months.
Among all patients (N = 67; mean MS duration, 16.5 years; mean EDSS score, 4.8; mean T25FW, 13.9 seconds), 65, 52, and 48 completed the 4-week, 3-month, and 6-month visits, respectively.
After 4 weeks, 50.7% and 32.8% of patients walked ≥10% and ≥20% faster, respectively; and in 65.7% of patients, MSWS-12 scores improved.
Three patients experienced adverse events (nausea, n = 2, insomnia, n = 1) that resulted in discontinuation of treatment.
After 6 months, 38.8% and 16.4% of patients walked ≥10% and ≥20% faster versus baseline, respectively; and in 59.7% of patients, MSWS-12 scores improved.
Among patients who demonstrated clinical benefit of treatment at 6 months, FSS scores improved on average by 1 point and MSWS-12 scores by 10 points.
Three case studies showing different outcomes of PR-fampridine treatment are detailed with a visual depiction of the changes observed.
In this case series, a proportion of patients demonstrated a clinical benefit of PR-fampridine treatment on walking.
Determining which patients derive benefit from PR-fampridine is an important aspect of treatment.
A range of clinical and patient-reported factors should be considered when assessing the clinical benefit of PR-fampridine treatment in MS patients.
PMID: 21781056
Intrathecal levels of vitamin D and IgG in multiple sclerosis.
Intrathecal synthesis of IgG is a hallmark of multiple sclerosis (MS).
Vitamin D may modulate B-cell function and dampen the synthesis of IgG.
To investigate the relation between vitamin D levels in cerebrospinal fluid and serum and intrathecal synthesis of IgG.
25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D) and IgG were assessed in cerebrospinal fluid and serum in 40 patients with MS.
There was no significant correlation between the IgG index and 25(OH)D levels in cerebrospinal fluid or serum.
The levels of 25(OH)D in cerebrospinal fluid and serum did not differ between patients with and without intrathecal synthesis of IgG.
There was a non-significant trend towards a positive correlation between the concentrations of 25(OH)D and IgG in the cerebrospinal fluid, but not in serum.
Physiological variation in vitamin D does not exert a major impact on intrathecal synthesis of IgG in MS.
© 2011 John Wiley &amp; Sons A/S.
PMID: 23796873
TRPM4 mRNA expression levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from multiple sclerosis patients.
Recent studies have suggested a role of the cation channel TRPM4 in mediating neurodegeneration in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis and multiple sclerosis (MS).
We aimed to extrapolate central nervous system findings to the blood compartment by determining TRPM4 expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 12 healthy controls (HC) and 64 untreated MS patients.
TRPM4 mRNA expression levels were comparable between HC and MS patients with primary progressive MS (n=17), secondary progressive MS (n=19), and relapsing-remitting MS during clinical remission (n=21) and relapses (n=7).
These findings do not support a role of TRPM4 in the peripheral blood compartment of MS patients.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23086313
Diffusional kurtosis imaging of normal-appearing white matter in multiple sclerosis: preliminary clinical experience.
We evaluated diffusional changes in normal-appearing white matter (NAWM) regions remote from multiple sclerosis (MS) plaques by using diffusional kurtosis imaging (DKI) to investigate the non-Gaussian behavior of water diffusion.
Participants were 11 MS patients and 6 age-matched healthy volunteers.
DKI was performed on a 3-T MR imager.
Fractional anisotropy (FA), apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC), and diffusional kurtosis (DK) maps were computed.
Regions of interest (ROIs) were compared in 24 cerebral regions, including the frontal, parietal, and temporal lobe white matter (WM) in controls and NAWM in MS patients.
The mean FA of all ROIs was 0.468 ± 0.014 (SD) (controls) or 0.431 ± 0.029 (MS group) (P = 0.016).
Mean ADC was 0.785 ± 0.034 × 10(-3) mm(2)/s (controls) or 0.805 ± 0.041 × 10(-3) mm(2)/s (MS group).
The mean DK of all ROIs was 0.878 ± 0.020 (controls) or 0.823 ± 0.032 (MS group) (P = 0.002).
Analysis of individual ROIs revealed significant differences in DK in 3 ROIs between normal WM and NAWM, but significant differences in ADC and FA in only one ROI each.
DKI may be a new sensitive indicator for detecting tissue damage in MS patients in addition to conventional diffusional evaluations, for example diffusion tensor imaging.
PMID: 23445258
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis progression and stability of brain-computer interface communication.
Our objective was to investigate the relationship between brain-computer interface (BCI) communication skill and disease progression in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
We sought also to assess stability of BCI communication performance over time and whether it is related to the progression of neurological impairment before entering the locked-in state.
A three years follow-up, BCI evaluation in a group of ALS patients (n = 24) was conducted.
For a variety of reasons only three patients completed the three years follow-up.
BCI communication skill and disability level, using the Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Functional Rating Scale-Revised, were assessed at admission and at each of the three follow-ups.
Multiple non-parametric statistical methods were used to ensure reliability of the dependent variables: correlations, paired test and factor analysis of variance.
Results demonstrated no significant relationship between BCI communication skill (BCI-CS) and disease evolution.
The patients who performed the follow-up evaluations preserved their BCI-CS over time.
Patients' age at admission correlated positively with the ability to achieve control over a BCI.
In conclusion, disease evolution in ALS does not affect the ability to control a BCI for communication.
BCI performance can be maintained in the different stages of the illness.
PMID: 21875613
The challenges of UV-induced immunomodulation for children's health.
Exposure to solar ultraviolet radiation (UVR) is recognised to have both beneficial and harmful effects on human health.
With regard to immune responses, it can lead to suppression of immunity and to the synthesis of vitamin D, a hormone that can alter both innate and adaptive immunity.
The consequences in children of such UV-induced changes are considerable: first there are positive outcomes including protection against some photoallergic (for example polymorphic light eruption) and T cell-mediated autoimmune diseases (for example multiple sclerosis) and asthma, and secondly there are negative outcomes including an increased risk of skin cancer (squamous cell carcinoma, basal cell carcinoma and cutaneous malignant melanoma) and less effective control of several infectious diseases.
Many uncertainties remain regarding the amount of sun exposure that would provide children with the most effective responses against the variety of immunological challenges that they are likely to experience.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21310238
Mitochondria, oligodendrocytes and inflammation in bipolar disorder: evidence from transcriptome studies points to intriguing parallels with multiple sclerosis.
Gene expression studies of bipolar disorder (BPD) have shown changes in transcriptome profiles in multiple brain regions.
Here we summarize the most consistent findings in the scientific literature, and compare them to data from schizophrenia (SZ) and major depressive disorder (MDD).
The transcriptome profiles of all three disorders overlap, making the existence of a BPD-specific profile unlikely.
Three groups of functionally related genes are consistently expressed at altered levels in BPD, SZ and MDD.
Genes involved in energy metabolism and mitochondrial function are downregulated, genes involved in immune response and inflammation are upregulated, and genes expressed in oligodendrocytes are downregulated.
Experimental paradigms for multiple sclerosis demonstrate a tight link between energy metabolism, inflammation and demyelination.
These studies also show variabilities in the extent of oligodendrocyte stress, which can vary from a downregulation of oligodendrocyte genes, such as observed in psychiatric disorders, to cell death and brain lesions seen in multiple sclerosis.
We conclude that experimental models of multiple sclerosis could be of interest for the research of BPD, SZ and MDD.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22741530
Effect of glatiramer acetate on disease reactivation in MS patients discontinuing natalizumab.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) patients discontinuing natalizumab are at risk of rebound of disease activity.
In the present multi-center, open-label, non-randomized, prospective, pilot study, we tested whether treatment with glatiramer acetate (GA) is safe and effective after natalizumab in MS patients.
The study was performed at academic tertiary medical centers.
Forty active relapsing-remitting MS patients who never failed GA therapy and who discontinued natalizumab after 12-18 months of therapy were enrolled.
GA was initiated 4 weeks after the last dose of natalizumab.
62.5% of patients were relapse-free 12 months after GA initiation.
Annualized relapse rate and time to relapse were significantly lower than before natalizumab.
Notably, the frequency of relapses was significantly lower amongst those patients who had experienced ≤2 relapses the year before initiation of natalizumab therapy, compared with patients who had had three or more relapses.
No evidence of rebound was observed in magnetic resonance imaging scans.
Furthermore, Expanded Disability Status Scale and Multiple Sclerosis Functional Composite were stable in our patients, again suggesting that 12 months of post-natalizumab-GA therapy is not associated with clinical deterioration.
Following discontinuation of natalizumab, 12 months of therapy with GA is safe and well tolerated in MS patients.
GA can reduce the risk of early reactivation/rebound of disease activity in this setting.
© 2012 The Author(s) European Journal of Neurology © 2012 EFNS.
PMID: 22619481
Mast cell-mediated inhibition of abdominal neutrophil inflammation by a PEGylated TLR7 ligand.
Although the mechanisms for sustained chemokine gradients and recurring cell infiltration in sterile peritonitis have not been elucidated, toll-like receptors (TLRs) have been implicated.
To abate the deleterious recruitment of neutrophils in sterile inflammation, we repeatedly administered a TLR7 ligand that hyposensitized to TLR7 and receptors that converged on the MyD88-signaling intermediary and reduced cellular infiltration in murine autoimmune models of multiple sclerosis and arthritis.
To reduce potential adverse effects, a polyethylene glycol polymer was covalently attached to the parent compound (Tolerimod1).
The proinflammatory potency of Tolerimod1 was 10-fold less than the unconjugated TLR7 ligand, and Tolerimod1 reduced neutrophil recruitment in chemically induced peritonitis and colitis.
The effects of Tolerimod1 were mediated by the radioresistant cells in radiation chimeric mice and by mast cells in reconstituted mast cell-deficient mice (Kit(W-sh)).
Although the Tolerimod1 had weak proinflammatory agonist activity, it effectively reduced neutrophil recruitment in sterile peritoneal inflammation.
PMID: 22069320
Evidence against cellular internalization in vivo of NMO-IgG, aquaporin-4, and excitatory amino acid transporter 2 in neuromyelitis optica.
Autoantibodies against astrocyte water channel aquaporin-4 (AQP4) are thought to be pathogenic in neuromyelitis optica (NMO).
Prior work has suggested that a key component of NMO autoantibody (NMO-IgG) pathogenesis is internalization of AQP4 and the associated glutamate transporter EAAT2, leading to glutamate excitotoxicity.
Here, we show selective endocytosis of NMO-IgG and AQP4 in transfected cell cultures, but little internalization in brain in vivo.
AQP4-dependent endocytosis of NMO-IgG occurred rapidly in various AQP4-transfected cell lines, with efficient transport from early endosomes to lysosomes.
Cell surface AQP4 was also reduced following NMO-IgG exposure.
However, little or no internalization of NMO-IgG, AQP4, or EAAT2 was found in primary astrocyte cultures, nor was glutamate uptake affected by NMO-IgG exposure.
Following injection of NMO-IgG into mouse brain, NMO-IgG binding and AQP4 expression showed a perivascular astrocyte distribution, without detectable cellular internalization over 24 h.
We conclude that astrocyte endocytosis of NMO-IgG, AQP4, and EAAT2 is not a significant consequence of AQP4 autoantibody in vivo, challenging generally accepted views about NMO pathogenesis.
PMID: 21846799
GH, but not GHRH, plays a role in the development of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
GH has been suggested to influence the function of the immune system in several species.
Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) (an animal model for multiple sclerosis) has been reported not to occur in GH-deficient (GHD) mice.
The aim of this study was to elucidate the effects of GH and GHRH replacement on development of EAE in a mouse model of isolated GHD due to removal of the GHRH gene [GHRH knockout (GHRHKO)].
We studied two groups of adult female mice: 12 GH-sufficient animals (control) and 36 GHRHKO animals.
All mice were immunized with myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein peptide, a peptide known to induce EAE.
GHRHKO mice were left untreated or were treated for 4 wk with daily sc injections of recombinant GH or of a GHRH super agonist JI-38 (JI38-GHD).
Evaluation of EAE symptoms was carried out daily, and T-proliferative assay and histopathological analysis of the spinal cord were performed.
GHRHKO mice were less prone to develop EAE when compared with control mice.
GH (but not JI-38) restored the original susceptibility of mice to the disease, despite lack of complete serum IGF-I normalization.
GH treatment was also associated with a markedly increase in spleen size and T-cell proliferation specific to myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein peptide.
GH (but not GHRH) plays an important role in the development of EAE.
PMID: 23516103
[White matter lesions, young age, female--differential diagnosis of multiple sclerosis and juvenile stroke].
Fabry's disease is an X-chromosomal linked recessive lysosomal storage disease caused by a deficiency of α-galactosidase A.
Accumulation of toxic levels of sphingolipids leads to metabolic dysfunction in various cell types (endothelial cells, myocytes, fibroblasts) and organs thus causing a variety of symptoms.
Neurological manifestations include recurrent strokes and polyneuropathy, many patients complain of pain or vertigo.
The presentation of these polymorphic symptoms mostly at young age often leads to incorrect diagnosis and mistreatment.
Here we report two cases of female patients who both were misdiagnosed and thus mistreated for many years.
These case-reports aim in increasing the awareness for Fabry's disease as a differential diagnosis, especially in young women presenting with white matter lesions.
© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.
PMID: 22898371
Heligmosomoides polygyrus: EAE remission is correlated with different systemic cytokine profiles provoked by L4 and adult nematodes.
Primary exposure of mice to gastrointestinal nematode infection with Heligmosomoides polygyrus reduces inflammation in an experimental model of multiple sclerosis.
In this study, we aimed to evaluate the ability of H. polygyrus L4 larvae and adults infection to reduce the symptoms of ongoing experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) in female C57Bl/6 mice.
EAE was induced by myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein MOG(p35-55) and after 21 days mice were orally infected with 200 infective larvae (L3) of H. polygyrus.
Reduction in EAE symptoms was observed from 2 days post infection and the symptoms were almost completely inhibited at 6 days post infection.
This effect was associated with limited total protein content in the cerebrospinal fluid; CSF, and significant decreased pro-inflammatory IL-12p40 concentration and increased concentration of the regulatory cytokines IL-10, TGF-β and IL-6 in the CSF and in the serum.
The reduction of EAE symptoms in the enteral phase was associated with higher IL-12p40 concentration in the CSF and very low concentrations of IL-17A and IL-2 in the serum.
The fourth stage of gastrointestinal nematode can reverse systemic inflammation in animal models of multiple sclerosis by reducing IL-12 and promoting regulatory cytokines production.
The mechanism induced by adult nematodes which sustained EAE inhibition can be provoked by regulatory mechanism connected with reduce IL-17A concentration.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23269203
The innate immune adaptor MyD88 is dispensable for spontaneous autoimmune demyelination in a mouse model of multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease that is mediated by myelin-reactive T cells resulting in CNS demyelination, however the mechanisms that control their activation are unclear.
Mice that are transgenic for a myelin proteolipid protein (PLP)-specific TCR spontaneously develop experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), the animal model of MS.
They mimic the spontaneous onset of MS and thus offer the unique opportunity to investigate the mechanisms that may contribute to the development of spontaneous CNS autoimmunity.
MyD88 is an adaptor protein that mediates signal transduction by TLRs, IL-1R and IL-18R, resulting in the activation of innate immune cells, including DCs.
We investigated the requirement of MyD88 in the pathogenesis of spontaneous EAE in PLP TCR transgenic SJL mice.
We show that genetic loss of MyD88 does not intrinsically preclude development of spontaneous EAE and autoimmune demyelination in these mice.
EAE was associated with functionally mature peripheral DCs that promoted superior PLP-specific Th1 and Th17 responses compared to those from disease-free mice.
Together, our data suggest that MyD88-independent innate immune signaling critically contributes to priming of myelin-reactive T cells and development of spontaneous EAE in MyD88-deficient PLP TCR transgenic mice.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22098646
[Sudden onset vertigo: imaging work-up].
Vertigo and dysequilibrium are a frequent cause of medical consultation.
Clinical evaluation is essential.
Some cases of vertigo are diagnosed clinically while others require imaging, sometimes emergently (suspected stroke).
MRI is the imaging modality of choice to assess the labyrinth (labyrinthitis? labyrinthine hemorrhage?), internal auditory canal (vestibular schwannoma? other tumor?…) and brain parenchyma including all structures of the auditory pathways: vestibular nuclei, vestibulocerebellar tract, tracts involved with ocular motricity, vestibular cortex… Multiple central etiologies exist: stroke, multiple sclerosis, tumor… However, some etiologies are best depicted with CT, especially lesions of the labyrinth: cholesteatoma, trauma, suspected dehiscence of the superior semicircular canal, suspected labyrinthine fistula… Finally, imaging may be negative (Benign Paroxysmal Positional Vertigo, Meniere's disease, vestibular neuritis, migraine…), merely reducing the differential diagnosis.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS and Éditions françaises de radiologie.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23342227
Resistance training and vibration improve muscle strength and functional capacity in female patients with multiple sclerosis.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of an eight-week progressive resistance training and vibration program on strength and ambulatory function in multiple sclerosis (MS) patients.
Twenty-Four female MS patients with the following demographics: age 27-45 years, and expanded disability status scale (EDSS) 2-4, participated in this study.
The subjects were randomly allocated to one of two groups.
The exercise group (n = 12) trained according to a progressive program, mainly consisting of resistance training and vibration, three times a week for eight weeks and compared with subjects in the control group (n = 12) that received no intervention.
Subjects completed one set of 5-12 reps at%50-70 maximal voluntary contraction (MVC).
After 5-10 minutes rest, six postures on plate vibration were done.
Isotonic MVC of knee extensors, abduction of the scapula and downward rotation of the scapular girdle muscle groups were predicted by using the Brzycki formula.
Right leg balance (RLB), left leg balance (LLB), and walking speed (10-Meter Walk Test) were assessed before and after the training program.
Descriptive statistics and Co-variance were used for analyzing data.
After eight weeks of training the exercise group showed significant increase in MVC of Knee extensors (32.3%), Abduction of the scapula (24.7%) and Downward Rotation Scapular (39.1%) muscle groups, RLB (33.5%), LLB (9.5%), and decrease in 10-Meter Walk Test (10MWT) (9.3%), (P&lt;0.05).
The results of this study indicated this type of training can cause improvements in muscle strength and functional capacity in patients with multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 22443542
Motor neuron apoptosis and neuromuscular junction perturbation are prominent features in a Drosophila model of Fus-mediated ALS.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is progressive neurodegenerative disease characterized by the loss of motor function.
Several ALS genes have been identified as their mutations can lead to familial ALS, including the recently reported RNA-binding protein fused in sarcoma (Fus).
However, it is not clear how mutations of Fus lead to motor neuron degeneration in ALS.
In this study, we present a Drosophila model to examine the toxicity of Fus, its Drosophila orthologue Cabeza (Caz), and the ALS-related Fus mutants.
Our results show that the expression of wild-type Fus/Caz or FusR521G induced progressive toxicity in multiple tissues of the transgenic flies in a dose- and age-dependent manner.
The expression of Fus, Caz, or FusR521G in motor neurons significantly impaired the locomotive ability of fly larvae and adults.
The presynaptic structures in neuromuscular junctions were disrupted and motor neurons in the ventral nerve cord (VNC) were disorganized and underwent apoptosis.
Surprisingly, the interruption of Fus nuclear localization by either deleting its nuclear localization sequence (NLS) or adding a nuclear export signal (NES) blocked Fus toxicity.
Moreover, we discovered that the loss of caz in Drosophila led to severe growth defects in the eyes and VNCs, caused locomotive disability and NMJ disruption, but did not induce apoptotic cell death.
These data demonstrate that the overexpression of Fus/Caz causes in vivo toxicity by disrupting neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) and inducing apoptosis in motor neurons.
In addition, the nuclear localization of Fus is essential for Fus to induce toxicity.
Our findings also suggest that Fus overexpression and gene deletion can cause similar degenerative phenotypes but the underlying mechanisms are likely different.
PMID: 22184268
MICB gene expression on peripheral blood mononuclear cells and susceptibility to multiple sclerosis in north of Iran.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune multifactorial degenerative disease with detrimental affliction on central nervous system.
MHC class I chain- related geneA,B(MICA and MICB) are nonclassical human leukocyte antigens that can affect on some diseases and also on transplantation.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the MICA and MICB MRNA expression in multiple sclerosis patients.
In this study, we evaluated MICA and MICB MRNA expression in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells by reverse transcryptase-polymerase chain reaction(RT-PCR) in MS patients and normal controls.
The results of this study showed that 32.6% of patients with progressive clinical outcome over expressed MICB genes in comparison with controls ( p=0.002).
It is concluded that the high expression of MICB gene in MS patients is an important criterion of MS disease that it may be due to the interaction between MICB and its receptor on CD8+T or NK cells.
PMID: 22680341
Novel Δ(9) -tetrahydrocannabinol formulation Namisol® has beneficial pharmacokinetics and promising pharmacodynamic effects.
• Cannabis based medicines are registered as a treatment for various indications, such as pain and spasms in multiple sclerosis (MS) patients, and anorexia and nausea in patients with HIV or receiving cancer treatment.
• the pharmacokinetics of the various administration routes of cannabis and cannabis based medicines are variable and dosing is hard to regulate.
• Namisol is a new tablet containing pure THC (&gt;98%) that has a beneficial pharmacokinetic profile after oral administration.
• Namisol gives a quick onset of pharmacodynamic effects in healthy volunteers, which implies a rapid initiation of therapeutic effects in patients.
Among the main disadvantages of currently available Δ(9) -tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) formulations are dosing difficulties due to poor pharmacokinetic characteristics.
Namisol® is a novel THC formulation, designed to improve THC absorption.
The study objectives were to investigate the optimal administration route, pharmacokinetics (PK), pharmacodynamics (PD) and tolerability of Namisol®.
This first in human study consisted of two parts.
Panel I included healthy males and females (n = 6/6) in a double-blind, double-dummy, randomized, crossover study with sublingual (crushed tablet) and oral administration of Namisol® (5 mg THC).
Based on these results, male and female (n = 4/5) participants from panel I received oral THC 6.5 and 8.0 mg or matching placebo in a randomized, crossover, rising dose study during panel II.
PD measurements were body sway; visual analogue scales (VAS) mood, psychedelic and heart rate.
THC and 11-OH-THC population PK analysis was performed.
Sublingual administration showed a flat concentration profile compared with oral administration.
Oral THC apparent t(1/2) was 72-80 min, t(max) was 39-56 min and C(max) 2.92-4.69 ng ml(-1) .
THC affected body sway (60.8%, 95% CI 29.5, 99.8), external perception (0.078 log mm, 95% CI 0.019, 0.137), alertness (-2.7 mm, 95% CI -4.5, -0.9) feeling high (0.256 log mm, 95% CI 0.093, 0.418) and heart rate (5.6 beats min(-1) , 95% CI 2.7, 6.5).
Namisol® was well tolerated.
Oral Namisol® showed promising PK and PD characteristics.
Variability and t(max) of THC plasma concentrations were smaller for Namisol® than reported for studies using oral dronabinol and nabilone.
This study was performed in a limited number of healthy volunteers.
Therefore, future research on Namisol® should study clinical effects in patient populations.
© 2011 The Authors.
British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology © 2011 The British Pharmacological Society.
PMID: 22344579
T2 prep three-dimensional spiral imaging with efficient whole brain coverage for myelin water quantification at 1.5 tesla.
Quantitative assessment of myelination is important for characterizing tissue damage and evaluating response to therapy in white matter diseases such as multiple sclerosis.
Conventional multicomponent T(2) relaxometry based on the two-dimensional (2D) multiecho spin echo sequence is a promising method to measure myelin water fraction, but its clinical utility is impeded by the prohibitively long data acquisition and limited brain coverage.
The objective of this study was to develop a signal-to-noise ratio efficient 3D T(2) prep spiral gradient echo (3D SPIRAL) sequence for full brain T(2) relaxometry and to validate this sequence using 3D multiecho spin echo as reference standard in healthy brains at 1.5 T.
3D SPIRAL was found to provide similar myelin water fraction in six selected white and gray matter areas using region-of-interest signal averaging analysis (N = 7, P &gt; 0.05).
While 3D multiecho spin echo only provided partial brain coverage, 3D SPIRAL enabled whole brain coverage with a fivefold higher acquisition speed per imaging slice and similar signal-to-noise ratio efficiency.
Both 3D sequences provided superior signal-to-noise ratio efficiency when compared to the conventional 2D multiecho spin echo approach.
Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22300137
The PD-1/PD-L1 pathway in human pathology.
T-cell activation is dependent on signals delivered through the antigen-specific T-cell receptor and accessory receptors on T-cells.
Integration of signals through this family of costimulatory and inhibitory receptors and their ligands regulates the balance between T-cell activation, tolerance, and immunopathology.
Programmed death 1 (PD-1) and its ligands, PD-L1 and PD-L2, deliver inhibitory signals and exert a vital and diverse range of immunoregulatory roles in T-cell activation, tolerance, and immune-mediated tissue damage.
In this review, we revisit current understanding of the immunoregulatory functions of PD-1 and its ligands and their involvement in immune-mediated diseases.
PMID: 22407571
Iron deposition in multiple sclerosis lesions measured by susceptibility-weighted imaging filtered phase: a case control study.
To investigate phase lesions identified on susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI)-filtered phase images in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS), clinically isolated syndrome (CIS) and healthy controls (HC).
To relate phase lesion characteristics to other clinical and MRI outcomes.
95 relapsing-remitting (RR), 40 secondary-progressive (SP) MS patients, as well as 19 CIS patients and 49 age- and sex-matched HC, were scanned on a 3T scanner.
Phase-, T1-, and T2-lesion characteristics were determined.
Overlap of T1- and T2-weighted imaging (WI) lesions with phase lesions (T1P and T2P), as well as brain atrophy outcomes, was assessed.
MS patients showed significantly greater numbers and larger volume of phase lesions, compared with HC (P &lt; 0.001).
23.6% of T2 lesions overlapped with phase lesions, whereas the same figure for T1 lesions was 37.3%.
Conversely, 33.4% and 69.7% of phase lesions were not visible on T2- or T1-WI, respectively.
Phase, T1P and T2P lesions were not related to clinical outcomes, but phase lesions were related to ventricular enlargement.
Phase lesions were present in both MS and CIS patients, and showed partial overlap with lesions observed using conventional MRI.
The role of phase lesions in clinical progression remains unclear and should be further explored.
Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22029427
Objective assessment of motor fatigue in Multiple Sclerosis using kinematic gait analysis: a pilot study.
Fatigue is a frequent and serious symptom in patients with Multiple Sclerosis (MS).
However, to date there are only few methods for the objective assessment of fatigue.
The aim of this study was to develop a method for the objective assessment of motor fatigue using kinematic gait analysis based on treadmill walking and an infrared-guided system.
Fourteen patients with clinically definite MS participated in this study.
Fatigue was defined according to the Fatigue Scale for Motor and Cognition (FSMC).
Patients underwent a physical exertion test involving walking at their pre-determined patient-specific preferred walking speed until they reached complete exhaustion.
Gait was recorded using a video camera, a three line-scanning camera system with 11 infrared sensors.
Step length, width and height, maximum circumduction with the right and left leg, maximum knee flexion angle of the right and left leg, and trunk sway were measured and compared using paired t-tests (α = 0.005).
In addition, variability in these parameters during one-minute intervals was examined.
The fatigue index was defined as the number of significant mean and SD changes from the beginning to the end of the exertion test relative to the total number of gait kinematic parameters.
Clearly, for some patients the mean gait parameters were more affected than the variability of their movements while other patients had smaller differences in mean gait parameters with greater increases in variability.
Finally, for other patients gait changes with physical exertion manifested both in changes in mean gait parameters and in altered variability.
The variability and fatigue indices correlated significantly with the motoric but not with the cognitive dimension of the FSMC score (R = -0.602 and R = -0.592, respectively; P &lt; 0.026).
Changes in gait patterns following a physical exertion test in patients with MS suffering from motor fatigue can be measured objectively.
These changes in gait patterns can be described using the motor fatigue index and represent an objective measure to assess motor fatigue in MS patients.
The results of this study have important implications for the assessments and treatment evaluations of fatigue in MS.
PMID: 22538071
Decreased frontal lobe gray matter perfusion in cognitively impaired patients with secondary-progressive multiple sclerosis detected by the bookend technique.
There is increasing evidence implicating microvascular impairment in MS pathogenesis.
Perfusion imaging offers a unique opportunity to investigate the functional impact of GM pathology.
We sought to quantify differences in MR imaging-based bookend-derived cerebral perfusion between cognitively impaired and nonimpaired patients with SPMS.
Patients were prospectively recruited and assessed using MR imaging and the standard cognitive battery called the Minimal Assessment of Cognitive Function in MS.
Patients exhibiting impairment on ≥ 2 individual tests were classified as cognitively impaired.
Healthy controls were prospectively recruited and assessed using MR imaging to validate bookend assumptions.
Structural and perfusion scans were coregistered and partitioned into anatomic brain regions and tissue compartments.
Clinical and radiologic characteristics were compared between patients with and without impairment to identify potential confounders.
A Bonferroni adjusted P value threshold (P &lt; .005) was used for lobar and sublobar level analyses to correct for multiple comparisons.
Thirty-seven patients with SPMS (age 56 ± 9 years; 23 women, 14 men) and 10 age- and sex-matched healthy controls were recruited.
Bookend assumptions were found to be valid in MS.
GM and WM qCBV were all globally reduced in impaired patients.
After adjusting for potential confounders while examining sublobar level perfusion, only GM qCBV was significantly different between cognitive groups, and this hypoperfusion localized to the bilateral medial superior frontal regions and left inferior, middle, and superior frontal regions (P &lt; .005) of impaired patients compared with nonimpaired patients.
GM qCBV accounted for 22.5% of the model variance compared with a model including only confounders (P = .0007).
Bookend-derived GM qCBV was significantly reduced in cognitively impaired patients with SPMS in functionally relevant brain regions.
PMID: 22056384
Inflammation-induced subventricular zone dysfunction leads to olfactory deficits in a targeted mouse model of multiple sclerosis.
Neural stem cells (NSCs) persist in defined brain niches, including the subventricular zone (SVZ), throughout adulthood and generate new neurons destined to support specific neurological functions.
Whether brain diseases such as multiple sclerosis (MS) are associated with changes in adult NSCs and whether this might contribute to the development and/or persistence of neurological deficits remains poorly investigated.
We examined SVZ function in mice in which we targeted an MS-like pathology to the forebrain.
In these mice, which we refer to herein as targeted EAE (tEAE) mice, there was a reduction in the number of neuroblasts compared with control mice.
Altered expression of the transcription factors Olig2 and Dlx2 in the tEAE SVZ niche was associated with amplification of pro-oligodendrogenic transit-amplifying cells and decreased neuroblast generation, which resulted in persistent reduction in olfactory bulb neurogenesis.
Altered SVZ neurogenesis led to impaired long-term olfactory memory, mimicking the olfactory dysfunction observed in MS patients.
Importantly, we also found that neurogenesis was reduced in the SVZ of MS patients compared with controls.
Thus, our findings suggest that neuroinflammation induces functional alteration of adult NSCs that may contribute to olfactory dysfunction in MS patients.
PMID: 22084490
Effects of 3 weeks' whole body vibration training on muscle strength and functional mobility in hospitalized persons with multiple sclerosis.
Exercise therapy in persons with multiple sclerosis (MS) is effective for improving muscle strength and functional mobility.
To investigate, in MS patients attending an in-patient rehabilitation program, the additional effects of a 3-week exercise program, performed on a whole body vibration platform, on muscle strength and functionality.
Median Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) of participating patients was 5.5.
This randomized controlled trial differentiated a MS control group (n = 17) and two exercise groups performing exercises on a vibration platform (WBV-full group, n = 20) and on the platform additionally covered by a damping mat (WBV-light group, n = 18).
Exercise groups performed, during 10 training sessions, six static and dynamic exercises standing on a platform vibrating at high frequency and low amplitude.
Isometric muscle strength of quadriceps, hamstrings, tibialis anterior and gluteus medius was measured with a hand-held dynamometer.
Functional mobility was measured with Berg Balance Scale (BBS), 3-minute walk test and Timed Get up and Go test.
Eight drop-outs occurred in the exercise groups (WBV-full = 4, WBV-light = 4), but were unrelated to WBV as type of intervention.
Across groups, significant time effects were found for all muscle groups.
For maximal quadriceps and hamstrings muscle strength, interaction effects were found with post-hoc tests indicating exercise group-significant improvements in the WBV-full group only.
Significant time effects were found for all functional tests.
Improvements on the BBS and 3-minute walk test were larger in training than in control groups, but no significant interactions were found.
A 3-week exercise program on a vibration plate significantly improved muscle strength, but not functionality, in persons with MS.
PMID: 23466062
Missing links in multiple sclerosis etiology. A working connecting hypothesis.
The etiology of multiple sclerosis is still elusive despite an extended patchwork of mechanistic events has been accumulated.
In this article, are tentatively identified from scattered literature sources new factors that may link well known characteristic of MS such as the central alteration of BBR selectivity, its association with EBV status and its biased distribution of the globe more comprehensively.
The hypothesis proposes that the concomitant important rise in some heterophilic antibodies (anti Neu5Gc) which activate BBB endothelial cells and in the frequency of anti EBV committed T cells and of memory B infected cells with EBV contemporary to EBV infection play a major role in MS etiology.
In addition, the hypothesis proposes new possible explanations for the elevated risk of MS in specific geographical area.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22468304
[The image diagnosis of dysbaric osteonecrosis].
To investigate the imaging features of dysbaric osteonecrosis.
The imaging appearances of four patients with dysbaric osteonecrosis caused by diving, were analyzed retrospectively.
In four cases with dysbaric osteonecrosis including case 1 with stage I, case 2 with stage II, case 3 and case 4 with stage III, there were a case with the lesion in a bone and other 3 cases with lesions in multiple bones,and a case with the lesion in unilateral bone and 3 cases with the lesions in lateral bones.
(1) The juxta-articular lesions: there were 10 long bones with the head lesions, including 6 humerus with the head lesions and 4 femurs with the head lesions in 4 cases.
In four cases, 10 sclerosis lesions appeared in the heads of long bones, each case had a snow-capped sclerosis lesion for case 2, case 3 and case 4.
There were 7 small radiolucent lesions and a large radiolucent lesion involved in femur neck.
The ringlike, linear, bending and punctuate calcification lesions were found on CT films of case 2.
The osseous collapse in one femur head and the fragmentations in three femur heads could be seen in case 3 and case 4; 2 crescent signs can be seen in the bilateral femur heads of case 4 with secondary osteoarthritis in left hip joint.
(2) The diaphyseal and metaphyseal lesions: the X ray film of case 4 showed the streak and irregular calcifications in the shaft of right humerus; there are strip calcifications in diaphyseal and metaphyseal of the left humerus on MPR coronal view in case 2.
The diagnosis of dysbaric osteonecrosis suggested that the increased bone density or sclerosis lesions appeared in the heads of long bones, and osteonecrosis lesions were found in multiple bones or lateral bones.
PMID: 22980027
Familial ALS with FUS P525L mutation: two Japanese sisters with multiple systems involvement.
We evaluated the clinicopathological features of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) with the fused in sarcoma (FUS) P525L mutation.
Two sisters and their mother had a similar clinical course, which was characterized by the development of limb weakness at a young age with rapid disease progression.
An elder sister, patient 1, progressed into a totally locked-in state requiring mechanical ventilation and died 26 years after the onset of the disease.
In contrast, the younger sister, patient 2, died in the early stages of the disease.
The patients had neuropathological findings that indicated a very active degeneration of motor neurons and multiple system degeneration, which led to marked brain and spinal cord atrophy in the long term clinical outcome.
The multiple system degeneration included the frontal lobe, the basal ganglia and substantia nigra, cerebellum and related area.
Compared with previously reported ALS cases, the severe degeneration of the frontal lobe and the striatum were the characteristic features in the patient 1 in this case study.
The degeneration spread over multiple systems might be caused not only by the appearance of the FUS immunoreactive neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions but also by the degeneration of neuronal connections from the primary motor cortex and related areas.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22231873
Temporal trend of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis incidence in southern Europe: a population study in the health district of Ferrara, Italy.
Data about the temporal trend of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) incidence in southern Europe are scarce.
Incidence studies on ALS have been carried out in the health district of Ferrara, Italy, since 1960s.
We expanded the previous studies from 1964 to 2009.
The study was prospective with a subsequent retrospective intensive survey of multiple sources of case ascertainment.
All patients with a definite and probable ALS according to the original El Escorial criteria were selected.
There were 130 incident cases in the years 1964-2009 giving an average annual crude incidence of 1.82 per 100,000 population (95% CI 1.53-2.17).
An incidence increase during the study period was estimated in women (χ(2) test for trend = 7.19, p &lt; 0.01) and in the elderly (χ(2) test for trend = 7.803, p &lt; 0.01).
The age-adjusted incidence was stable over time in both women (1.19 per 100,000, 95% CI 0.90-1.52) and men (1.45 per 100,000, 95% CI 0.12-1.84).
The annual number of new ALS cases in the study population followed the Poisson distribution in both sexes as well as in the elderly group of the population.
The present findings suggest that ALS incidence is nearly stable over time.
The crude incidence increase we estimated over time among women is mainly explained by population ageing.
The increasing incidence in the elderly population was likely the consequence of an increasing precision in ALS diagnosis in the elderly since the increasing attention and care over time of neurologic elderly patients that likely concern elderly women more than previous time periods rather than better case ascertainment of diagnosed patients.
The present findings do not support the role of specific environmental factors in ALS pathogenesis.
PMID: 23920002
Doppler ultrasound examination of multiple sclerosis patients and control participants: inter-observer agreement and association with disease.
Chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency (CCSVI) has been proposed as a major risk factor for multiple sclerosis (MS).
The aim of this study was to assess inter-observer agreement between two ultrasound examiners and to compare findings in MS patients and control participants.
A prospective, blinded, controlled study of MS patients diagnosed within 2 years (MS ≤ 2, n = 39), patients diagnosed more than 10 years ago (MS &gt; 10, n = 43) and age- and sex-matched control participants (n = 40).
Ultrasound examinations were performed by two independent examiners.
CCSVI criteria 1, 3, 4 and 5 as proposed by Zamboni were explored: (1) reflux in the internal jugular (IJV) and vertebral veins (VV), (3) IJV cross-sectional area (CSA) ≤0.3 cm(2), (4) absence of flow in IJV and VV, and (5) reverted postural control of venous outflow.
Criteria 1, 4 and 5 were met in less than 10% of the MS patients and control participants as studied by both examiners.
The level of inter-observer agreement was poor for all parameters except assessment of the CSA of IJV at the thyroid level.
Findings meeting CCSVI criterion 3 (CSA ≤ 0.3 cm(2)) were observed in 18/40 (45%) of the control participants, in 24/37 (65%) of MS ≤ 2 patients (p = 0.09 vs. control participants) and in 30/43 (70%) of the MS &gt; 10 patients (p = 0.022 vs. control participants).
The feasibility of the CCSVI criteria for common use is questionable because of low inter-observer agreement.
Small-calibre IJVs meeting the CCSVI criterion 3 appear common in both Finnish control participants and MS patients, but the clinical significance of this finding is questionable.
Copyright © 2013 European Society for Vascular Surgery.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22596228
Natalizumab-associated reversible encephalopathy syndrome mimicking progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy.
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy is a rare but potentially lethal adverse event in natalizumab treated multiple sclerosis patients.
We report on a 40-year old Caucasian man with typical relapsing progressive multiple sclerosis, who developed a reversible leukoencephalopathy syndrome after 43 natalizumab infusions mimicking progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy.
To our knowledge, this is the first case of its kind.
Our case suggests that awareness ought to be sharpened for reversible leukoencephalopathy syndrome in the follow-up of natalizumab treated multiple sclerosis patients.
PMID: 22938097
Potential role of glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) in neuroprotection.
The current understanding of neurodegenerative processes in sporadic diseases such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD) or multiple sclerosis is very limited.
Several risk factors have been identified that may shed light on the underlying mechanisms that initiate the neurodegeneration.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus has been identified as a risk factor for AD and PD.
In AD patients, desensitization of insulin receptors in the brain has been shown, even in non-diabetic patients.
Insulin acts as a growth factor in the brain and supports neuronal repair, dendritic sprouting and synaptogenesis, and protection from oxidative stress.
Importantly, several drugs have been developed to treat type 2 diabetes that re-sensitize insulin receptors and may be of use to prevent neurodegenerative processes.
Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) is a hormone that facilitates insulin release under high blood sugar conditions.
Interestingly, GLP-1 also has very similar growth factor-like properties to insulin, and has been shown to reduce a range of degenerative processes.
In pre-clinical studies, GLP-1 and longer-lasting protease-resistant analogues cross the blood-brain barrier, protect memory formation (AD) or motor activity (PD), protect synapses and synaptic functions, enhance neurogenesis, reduce apoptosis, protect neurons from oxidative stress, and reduce plaque formation and the chronic inflammation response in the brains of mouse models of AD, PD, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, stroke and other degenerative diseases.
GLP-1 signalling does not affect blood sugar levels in non-diabetic people and therapies that affect GLP-1 signalling have a good safety profile as shown by the chronic application of drugs currently on the market (liraglutide, Victoza(®); NovoNordisk, Copenhagen, Denmark, and exendin-4, Byetta(®); Amylin, San Diego, CA, USA).
Based on the extensive evidence, several clinical trials are currently underway, testing liraglutide and exendin-4 in AD and PD patients.
Therefore, GLP-1 analogues show great promise as a novel treatment for AD or other neurodegenerative conditions.
PMID: 22591945
Interleukin-10 expression during the acute phase is a putative prerequisite for delayed viral elimination in a murine model for multiple sclerosis.
Reduced protective immunity leads to viral persistence and demyelination in Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis.
The aim of the present study was to compare the phenotype of brain-infiltrating leukocytes and cytokine expression in susceptible SJL and resistant C57BL/6 mice during Theilervirus-induced acute polioencephalitis.
In contrast to C57/BL6 mice, SJL mice show an increased number of Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells and CD45R(+) B cells associated with delayed viral elimination and elevated IL-10 mRNA transcripts in the brain.
Results substantiate the hypothesis that an imbalanced cytokine milieu during the early infection phase contributes to ineffective antiviral immunity in animals with a susceptible genetic background.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23457343
Two-photon imaging of immune cells in neural tissue.
To develop new therapeutic strategies for many central nervous system (CNS) diseases, it is essential to observe the motility and function of immune cells within neural tissue.
Two-photon laser-scanning microscopy is an outstanding technique for imaging these phenomena under in vivo-like conditions.
To gain deeper insight into the pathological phenomena that occur during chronic neuroinflammation of the CNS, we use it to view acute murine hippocampal slices cocultured with different subpopulations of immune cells and to view in vivo the brain stem of anesthetized transgenic mice affected by experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), a murine model of multiple sclerosis.
This protocol describes the preparation of cocultures of acute hippocampal slices with antigen-specific T helper 17 (Th17) cells migrating into the parenchyma, and the preparation of anesthetized mice for imaging the brain stem.
We also discuss technical aspects of dual-color, two-photon laser-scanning microscopy that is used to image these samples and that allows for greater flexibility in the choice of fluorophores.
PMID: 22156707
White matter abnormalities in primary Sjögren syndrome.
Objective: To describe the main characteristics of patients with primary Sjögren syndrome (SS) and white matter abnormalities (WMA) seen by a specialist SS unit.
The study cohort included 321 consecutive patients fulfilling the 2002 classification criteria for primary SS.
We retrospectively analyzed the results of neuroimaging studies performed in patients who presented with neurological symptoms.
Patients were further evaluated by three neurologists to determine fulfillment of the McDonald criteria for the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis (MS).
Fifty-one (16%) patients had at least one neuroimaging study, and 25 of these had WMA.
WMA were classified as vascular pathological changes in 21 patients: 10 had multiple small focal lesions, 7 had beginning confluence of lesions and 4 had diffuse involvement of the entire region.
WMA were classified as inflammatory/demyelinating lesions (MS-like) in 4 patients who fulfilled the MRI Barkhof criteria.
Patients with inflammatory/demyelinating lesions were younger (53.7 vs. 73.5 years, P = 0.001) and had a lower frequency of hypertension (25% vs. 86%, P = 0.031) and altered glomerular filtration rate (0% vs. 70%, P = 0.047) in comparison with patients with vascular lesions.
The multivariate age-sex adjusted model including the seven variables which were statistically significant in the univariate analysis (antimalarial therapy, leukopenia, anti-La/SSB antibodies, diabetes, hypertension, metabolic syndrome and HDL-c levels) identified hypertension (P = 0.019) and HDL-c levels (P = 0.032) as independent predictors of WMA in primary SS patients.
Neuroimaging studies disclosed WMA in 49% of patients with primary SS and suspected neurological involvement.
WMA were identified as vascular pathological changes in 80% of the patients, and hypertension and HDL-c levels as predictive factors for this association.
PMID: 23365098
Hyaluronan accumulation and arrested oligodendrocyte progenitor maturation in vanishing white matter disease.
Vanishing white matter disease is a genetic leukoencephalopathy caused by mutations in eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2B.
Patients experience a slowly progressive neurological deterioration with episodes of rapid clinical worsening triggered by stress.
The disease may occur at any age and leads to early death.
Characteristic neuropathological findings include cystic degeneration of the white matter with feeble, if any, reactive gliosis, dysmorphic astrocytes and paucity of myelin despite an increase in oligodendrocytic density.
These features have been linked to a maturation defect of astrocytes and oligodendrocytes.
However, the nature of the link between glial immaturity and the observed neuropathological features is unclear.
We hypothesized that the defects in maturation and function of astrocytes and oligodendrocytes are related.
Brain tissue of seven patients with genetically proven vanishing white matter disease was investigated using immunohistochemistry, western blotting, quantitative polymerase chain reaction and size exclusion chromatography.
The results were compared with those obtained from normal brain tissue of age-matched controls, from chronic demyelinated multiple sclerosis lesions and from other genetic and acquired white matter disorders.
We found that the white matter of patients with vanishing white matter disease is enriched in CD44-expressing astrocyte precursor cells and accumulates the glycosaminoglycan hyaluronan.
Hyaluronan is a major component of the extracellular matrix, and CD44 is a hyaluronan receptor.
We found that a high molecular weight form of hyaluronan is overabundant, especially in the most severely affected areas.
Comparison between the more severely affected frontal white matter and the relatively spared cerebellum confirms that high molecular weight hyaluronan accumulation is more pronounced in the frontal white matter than in the cerebellum.
High molecular weight hyaluronan is known to inhibit astrocyte and oligodendrocyte precursor maturation and can explain the arrested glial progenitor maturation observed in vanishing white matter disease.
In conclusion, high molecular weight species of hyaluronan accumulate in the white matter of patients with vanishing white matter disease, and by inhibiting glial maturation and proper function, they may be a major determinant of the white matter pathology and lack of repair.
PMID: 23365094
Fibronectin aggregation in multiple sclerosis lesions impairs remyelination.
Remyelination following central nervous system demyelination is essential to prevent axon degeneration.
However, remyelination ultimately fails in demyelinating diseases such as multiple sclerosis.
This failure of remyelination is likely mediated by many factors, including changes in the extracellular signalling environment.
Here, we examined the expression of the extracellular matrix molecule fibronectin on demyelinating injury and how this affects remyelination by oligodendrocytes progenitors.
In toxin-induced lesions undergoing efficient remyelination, fibronectin expression was transiently increased within demyelinated areas and declined as remyelination proceeded.
Fibronectin levels increased both by leakage from the blood circulation and by production from central nervous system resident cells.
In chronically demyelinated multiple sclerosis lesions, fibronectin expression persisted in the form of aggregates, which may render fibronectin resistant to degradation.
Aggregation of fibronectin was similarly observed at the relapse phase of chronic experimental autoimmune encephalitis, but not on toxin-induced demyelination, suggesting that fibronectin aggregation is mediated by inflammation-induced demyelination.
Indeed, the inflammatory mediator lipopolysaccharide induced fibronectin aggregation by astrocytes.
Most intriguingly, injection of astrocyte-derived fibronectin aggregates in toxin-induced demyelinated lesions inhibited oligodendrocyte differentiation and remyelination, and fibronectin aggregates are barely expressed in remyelinated multiple sclerosis lesions.
Therefore, these findings suggest that fibronectin aggregates within multiple sclerosis lesions contribute to remyelination failure.
Hence, the inhibitory signals induced by fibronectin aggregates or factors that affect fibronectin aggregation could be potential therapeutic targets for promoting remyelination.
PMID: 23365095
The neural androgen receptor: a therapeutic target for myelin repair in chronic demyelination.
Myelin regeneration is a major therapeutic goal in demyelinating diseases, and the failure to remyelinate rapidly has profound consequences for the health of axons and for brain function.
However, there is no efficient treatment for stimulating myelin repair, and current therapies are limited to anti-inflammatory agents.
Males are less likely to develop multiple sclerosis than females, but often have a more severe disease course and reach disability milestones at an earlier age than females, and these observations have spurred interest in the potential protective effects of androgens.
Here, we demonstrate that testosterone treatment efficiently stimulates the formation of new myelin and reverses myelin damage in chronic demyelinated brain lesions, resulting from the long-term administration of cuprizone, which is toxic for oligodendrocytes.
In addition to the strong effect of testosterone on myelin repair, the number of activated astrocytes and microglial cells returned to low control levels, indicating a reduction of neuroinflammatory responses.
We also identify the neural androgen receptor as a novel therapeutic target for myelin recovery.
After the acute demyelination of cerebellar slices in organotypic culture, the remyelinating actions of testosterone could be mimicked by 5α-dihydrotestosterone, a metabolite that is not converted to oestrogens, and blocked by the androgen receptor antagonist flutamide.
Testosterone treatment also failed to promote remyelination after chronic cuprizone-induced demyelination in mice with a non-functional androgen receptor.
Importantly, testosterone did not stimulate the formation of new myelin sheaths after specific knockout of the androgen receptor in neurons and macroglial cells.
Thus, the neural brain androgen receptor is required for the remyelination effect of testosterone, whereas the presence of the receptor in microglia and in peripheral tissues is not sufficient to enhance remyelination.
The potent synthetic testosterone analogue 7α-methyl-19-nortestosterone, which has been developed for long-term male contraception and androgen replacement therapy in hypogonadal males and does not stimulate prostate growth, also efficiently promoted myelin repair.
These data establish the efficacy of androgens as remyelinating agents and qualify the brain androgen receptor as a promising drug target for remyelination therapy, thus providing the preclinical rationale for a novel therapeutic use of androgens in males with multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 23365093
Targeting ASIC1 in primary progressive multiple sclerosis: evidence of neuroprotection with amiloride.
Neurodegeneration is the main cause for permanent disability in multiple sclerosis.
The effect of current immunomodulatory treatments on neurodegeneration is insufficient.
Therefore, direct neuroprotection and myeloprotection remain an important therapeutic goal.
Targeting acid-sensing ion channel 1 (encoded by the ASIC1 gene), which contributes to the excessive intracellular accumulation of injurious Na(+) and Ca(2+) and is over-expressed in acute multiple sclerosis lesions, appears to be a viable strategy to limit cellular injury that is the substrate of neurodegeneration.
While blockade of ASIC1 through amiloride, a potassium sparing diuretic that is currently licensed for hypertension and congestive cardiac failure, showed neuroprotective and myeloprotective effects in experimental models of multiple sclerosis, this strategy remains untested in patients with multiple sclerosis.
In this translational study, we tested the neuroprotective effects of amiloride in patients with primary progressive multiple sclerosis.
First, we assessed ASIC1 expression in chronic brain lesions from post-mortem of patients with progressive multiple sclerosis to identify the target process for neuroprotection.
Second, we tested the neuroprotective effect of amiloride in a cohort of 14 patients with primary progressive multiple sclerosis using magnetic resonance imaging markers of neurodegeneration as outcome measures of neuroprotection.
Patients with primary progressive multiple sclerosis underwent serial magnetic resonance imaging scans before (pretreatment phase) and during (treatment phase) amiloride treatment for a period of 3 years.
Whole-brain volume and tissue integrity were measured with high-resolution T(1)-weighted and diffusion tensor imaging.
In chronic brain lesions of patients with progressive multiple sclerosis, we demonstrate an increased expression of ASIC1 in axons and an association with injury markers within chronic inactive lesions.
In patients with primary progressive multiple sclerosis, we observed a significant reduction in normalized annual rate of whole-brain volume during the treatment phase, compared with the pretreatment phase (P = 0.018, corrected).
Consistent with this reduction, we showed that changes in diffusion indices of tissue damage within major clinically relevant white matter (corpus callosum and corticospinal tract) and deep grey matter (thalamus) structures were significantly reduced during the treatment phase (P = 0.02, corrected).
Our results extend evidence of the contribution of ASIC1 to neurodegeneration in multiple sclerosis and suggest that amiloride may exert neuroprotective effects in patients with progressive multiple sclerosis.
This pilot study is the first translational study on neuroprotection targeting ASIC1 and supports future randomized controlled trials measuring neuroprotection with amiloride in patients with multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 23801231
[Registries for neurological drugs landscape].
In Italy we can mention two experiences related to the use of registries for neurological drugs.
The first one involved the use of cholinesterase inhibitors (donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine) in the treatment of probable Alzheimer's dementia of mild-moderate level; the second, currently in progress, concerned the use of natalizumab for the treatment of multiple sclerosis.
The registry of the use of cholinesterase inhibitors in Alzheimer's dementia produced an observational study, whereas the registry on the use of natalizumab in multiple sclerosis, a rare experience in the international, can be regarded as an opportunity not fully appreciated in terms of public health.
Natalizumab is prescribed in current clinical practice in patients other than those included in registration studies.
In this paper the two Italian experiences will be presented with the understanding that registries cannot make up for the lack of proper registration studies, but can provide, especially when they are conducted and planned as observational studies, new scientific evidence on the risk/benefit profile of the drugs in the real world.
PMID: 23051633
The mechanism of action of glatiramer acetate in multiple sclerosis and beyond.
In multiple sclerosis (MS) and its animal model experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), the immune system reacts again self myelin constitutes in the central nervous system (CNS), initiating a detrimental inflammatory cascade that leads to demyelination as well as axonal and neuronal pathology.
The amino acid copolymer glatiramer acetate (GA, Copaxone) is an approved first-line treatment for MS that has a unique mode of action.
Accumulated evidence from EAE-induced animals and from MS patients indicates that GA affects various levels of the innate and the adaptive immune response, generating deviation from the pro-inflammatory to the anti-inflammatory pathway.
This review aims to provide a comprehensive perspective on the diverse mechanism of action of GA in EAE/MS, in particular on the in situ immunomodulatory effect of GA and its ability to generate neuroprotective repair consequences in the CNS.
In view of its immunomodulatory activity, the beneficial effect of GA in various models of other autoimmune related pathologies, such as immune rejection and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is noteworthy.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22500954
Discovery of novel 1,2,4-thiadiazole derivatives as potent, orally active agonists of sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor subtype 1 (S1P(1)).
A novel series of 1,2,4-thiadiazole compounds was discovered as selective S1P(1) agonists.
The extensive structure-activity relationship studies for these analogues were reported.
Among them, 17g was identified to show high in vitro potency with reasonable free unbound fraction in plasma (F(u) &gt; 0.5%), good brain penetration (BBR &gt; 0.5), and desirable pharmacokinetic properties in mouse and rat.
Oral administration of 1 mg/kg 17g resulted in significant peripheral lymphocytes reduction at 4 h after dose and rapid lymphocytes recovery at 24 h.
17g showed a transient lymphopenia profile in the repeated dose study in mouse.
In addition, 17g also demonstrated efficacy comparable to that of FTY720 (1) in the mouse EAE model of MS.
PMID: 21839580
Endermology: a treatment for injection-induced lipoatrophy in multiple sclerosis patients treated with sub cutaneous glatiramer acetate.
To evaluate sessions of endermology (LPG) on patients with lipoatrophy, due to GA injections in an open-labelled study.
Glatiramer acetate (GA) is an immunomodulatory drug, with an excellent safety profile, that is currently used for treatment of multiple sclerosis and is administered as daily subcutaneous injections of 20 mg.
The most common adverse effects, which occur in approximately 20-60% of the patients, include pain, inflammation and induration at the injection sites.
Another adverse effect is frank panniculitis followed by localized lipoatrophy at the injection sites, which has been described in half of the patients receiving treatment with glatiramer acetate injections.
No treatment has been found for established lipoatrophy.
All patients underwent LPG twice a week during 30 min.
A cycle of two months was initially proposed.
If the patient was satisfied with the result, sessions were continued with one session per week until the 4th month.
Eight Patients treated with GA and presenting with lipoatrophy were prospectively recruited.
None of them complained of any adverse events.
After 8 weeks of treatment, all had a visible reduction of lipoatrophic area.
MRI showed no major subcutaneous changes except for a reduction in and repartition of fatty tissues.
The LPG cellu M6 keymodule is a mechanotransduction machine that stimulates the skin's surface in triggering cells to activate lipolysis and collagen production.
It has never been used for treatment of lipoatrophy due to drug treatment or in specific diseases associated with lipoatrophy (diabetes, HIV).
The prevention and management of lipoatrophy includes patient education, regular examination and manual palpation of all injection sites.
LPG endermology can help patients to resolve this side effect and to continue immunomodulatory treatment.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22336858
Whole-body vibration training for patients with neurodegenerative disease.
Whole-body vibration (WBV) may be a complementary training to standard physical rehabilitation programmes and appears to have potential benefits in the sensorimotor system performance of patients with neurodegenerative diseases.
The aim of this review was to examine the efficacy of WBV to improve functional performance according to basic activities of daily living (ADL) in neurodegenerative diseases.
Additionally, we wanted to assess the possible effect on signs and symptoms of the disease, body balance, gait, muscle performance, quality of life and adverse events.
We searched the following electronic databases: the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) (The Cochrane Library, 2011 Issue 4), MEDLINE (1964 to 6 May 2011; via PubMed), EMBASE (1980 to 6 May 2011; via Ovid), PeDro (1929 to May 2011; via website), CINAHL (to September 2011; via Ovid) and PsycINFO (1806 to 6 May 2011; via Ovid).
We included randomised controlled trials comparing single or multiple sessions of WBV to a passive intervention, any other active physical therapy or WBV with different vibration parameters.
Two review authors independently selected trials for inclusion, assessed trial quality and extracted data.
Disagreement was resolved by discussion or, if necessary, referred to a third review author.
We included 10 trials, of which six focused on Parkinson's disease and four on multiple sclerosis.
None of the studies reported data on the primary outcome (functional performance).
In Parkinson's disease, after pooling two studies, a single session of WBV caused a significant improvement of gait measured using the Timed Up and Go test (TUG) in comparison to standing exercises (mean difference -3.09, 95% confidence interval -5.60 to -0.59; P = 0.02; I(2) = 0%).
Nevertheless, longer duration of WBV did not show significant results in comparison with physical therapy in body balance or signs and symptoms measured with the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS).
In multiple sclerosis there was no evidence of a short-term or long-term effect of WBV on body balance, gait, muscle performance or quality of life.Adverse events were reported in few trials.
In those trials that reported them, the intervention appeared to be safe.
There is insufficient evidence of the effect of WBV training on functional performance of neurodegenerative disease patients.
Also, there is insufficient evidence regarding its beneficial effects on signs and symptoms of the disease, body balance, gait, muscle strength and quality of life compared to other active physical therapy or passive interventions in Parkinson's disease or multiple sclerosis.
More studies assessing other functional tests and accurately assessing safety are needed before a definitive recommendation is established.
PMID: 22503020
Phase 3 efficacy and tolerability study of onabotulinumtoxinA for urinary incontinence from neurogenic detrusor overactivity.
We assessed the efficacy, safety and effects on quality of life of onabotulinumtoxinA in patients with neurogenic detrusor overactivity.
In this 52-week, international, multicenter, double-blind, randomized, placebo controlled trial 416 patients with neurogenic detrusor overactivity and urinary incontinence (14 or more episodes per week) resulting from multiple sclerosis (227) and spinal cord injury (189) were treated with intradetrusor injections of onabotulinumtoxinA (200 or 300 U) or placebo.
The primary end point was the change from baseline in the mean number of urinary incontinence episodes per week at week 6.
Maximum cystometric capacity, maximum detrusor pressure during the first involuntary detrusor contraction and Incontinence Quality of Life total score were secondary end points.
Adverse events were monitored.
OnabotulinumtoxinA at a dose of 200 U in 135 patients and 300 U in 132 decreased mean urinary incontinence at week 6 by 21 and 23 episodes per week, respectively, vs 9 episodes per week in 149 on placebo (each dose p&lt;0.001).
Also, maximum cystometric capacity, maximum detrusor pressure during the first involuntary detrusor contraction and Incontinence Quality of Life score were significantly improved over values in the placebo group (each dose p&lt;0.001).
Median time to patient re-treatment request was greater for onabotulinumtoxinA 200 and 300 U than for placebo (256 and 254 days, respectively, vs 92).
The most common adverse events were urinary tract infection and urinary retention.
Of patients who did not catheterize at baseline 10% on placebo, 35% on 200 U and 42% on 300 U initiated catheterization due to urinary retention.
OnabotulinumtoxinA significantly improved neurogenic detrusor overactivity symptoms vs placebo.
Clean intermittent catheterization initiation due to urinary retention appeared to increase in a dose dependent fashion.
No clinically relevant benefit in efficacy or duration was identified for the 300 U dose over the 200 U dose.
Copyright © 2012 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22113264
Novel whole brain segmentation and volume estimation using quantitative MRI.
Brain segmentation and volume estimation of grey matter (GM), white matter (WM) and cerebro-spinal fluid (CSF) are important for many neurological applications.
Volumetric changes are observed in multiple sclerosis (MS), Alzheimer's disease and dementia, and in normal aging.
A novel method is presented to segment brain tissue based on quantitative magnetic resonance imaging (qMRI) of the longitudinal relaxation rate R(1), the transverse relaxation rate R(2) and the proton density, PD.
Previously reported qMRI values for WM, GM and CSF were used to define tissues and a Bloch simulation performed to investigate R(1), R(2) and PD for tissue mixtures in the presence of noise.
Based on the simulations a lookup grid was constructed to relate tissue partial volume to the R(1)-R(2)-PD space.
The method was validated in 10 healthy subjects.
MRI data were acquired using six resolutions and three geometries.
Repeatability for different resolutions was 3.2% for WM, 3.2% for GM, 1.0% for CSF and 2.2% for total brain volume.
Repeatability for different geometries was 8.5% for WM, 9.4% for GM, 2.4% for CSF and 2.4% for total brain volume.
We propose a new robust qMRI-based approach which we demonstrate in a patient with MS.
• A method for segmenting the brain and estimating tissue volume is presented • This method measures white matter, grey matter, cerebrospinal fluid and remaining tissue • The method calculates tissue fractions in voxel, thus accounting for partial volume • Repeatability was 2.2% for total brain volume with imaging resolution &lt;2.0 mm.
PMID: 22641302
7 Tesla MRI demonstrates vascular pathology in Balo's concentric sclerosis.
Baló's concentric sclerosis (BCS) is an inflammatory demyelinating disease related to multiple sclerosis; its underlying pathology remains unclear.
At 7 T MRI in a 19-year-old female BCS patient, microhaemorrhages and ectatic veins were found in T2 hyperintense regions, features which have not been previously reported in conjunction with BCS, and these findings may support the view that vascular pathology plays a role in BCS.
MRS data suggest that neuron loss and lipid turnover still took place months after a remission.
Plasma exchange was effective in treating a relapse with severe motor deficits, and the off-label use of natalizumab was successful in maintaining remission in this patient.
PMID: 22641303
Caffeine and alcohol intakes have no association with risk of multiple sclerosis.
The association between alcohol and caffeine intakes and risk of multiple sclerosis (MS) is unclear; no prospective studies have examined this relationship.
We examined intakes of alcohol and caffeine in relation to risk of multiple sclerosis.
Intakes of alcohol and caffeine were examined in relation to the risk of MS in two large cohorts of women, the Nurses' Health Study (NHS; 92,275 women followed from 1980 to 2004) and Nurses' Health Study II (NHS II; 95,051 women followed from 1991 to 2005).
Their diet was assessed at baseline and every four years thereafter.
During the follow-up, 282 cases of MS were confirmed with onset of symptoms after baseline.
Twenty-four cases were missing information on alcohol intake, leaving a total of 258 cases for the alcohol analyses.
Neither total alcohol consumption, nor consumption of beer, wine, or liquor was related to MS risk.
The multivariable-adjusted pooled relative risk (RR) found by comparing categories of alcohol intake to 0 gm/day was 1.07 (95% CI: 0.32-1.99) for 0.1-4.9 gm/day, 1.01 (0.32-1.99) for 5.0-14.9 gm/day, 1.21 (0.69-2.15) for 15.0-29.9 gm/day, and 0.80 (0.32-1.99) for 30+ gm/day; (p for trend=0.89).
Caffeine intake was also not significantly associated with MS risk.
The multivariable adjusted pooled RR comparing highest to lowest quintile of caffeine intake was 1.14; 95% CI: 0.79-1.66; p for trend=0.71.
Consideration of caffeinated and decaffeinated coffee separately also yielded null results.
These results do not support an association between alcohol and caffeine intakes and MS risk.
PMID: 22641300
Evaluation of pattern-reversal visual evoked potential in patients with neuromyelitis optica.
The visual evoked potential (VEP) is used in the evaluation of multiple sclerosis (MS) patients, showing a delay in P100 wave latency with no changes in amplitude in 60-100% of cases.
In the last decade, the recurrent form of neuromyelitis optica (NMO) has been recognized, and clinically characterized by acute events of transverse myelitis (TM) and optic neuritis (ON), differing from MS in clinical and laboratory criteria.
Despite these differences, so far, the VEP parameters described in MS have been used in the evaluation of patients with NMO.
The objective of this study was to investigate VEP responses in NMO.
Patients with NMO underwent pattern-reversal visual stimulation.
Nineteen patients were selected for the study.
Among the 38 eyes examined, 18 (47.4%) had no visual evoked responses and 13 (34.2%) had a reduction of P100 wave amplitude with normal latency.
Only two (5.3%) had the pattern described in MS and five (13.2%) were normal.
Evaluation of VEP in patients with definite NMO revealed a pattern that is different from that of MS in 81.6% of eyes examined, characterized by the absence of responses, or decreased amplitude with normal latency.
PMID: 22641301
A serial in vivo 7T magnetic resonance phase imaging study of white matter lesions in multiple sclerosis.
Magnetic resonance (MR) phase imaging using high field MR scanners has demonstrated excellent contrast in multiple sclerosis (MS) lesions that is thought to be closely correlated to the local iron content.
This pilot study acquired serial in vivo MR scans at 7T to track the evolution of phase contrast as MS lesions progress.
Five MS patients with relapsing-remitting MS were serially scanned for about 2.5 years at 7T using a high resolution T2*-weighted gradient-echo sequence.
Magnitude and phase images were reconstructed for each scan and co-registered to their baseline study.
Five non-enhancing ring and 70 nodular phase lesions were found in the five patients at baseline.
None of the baseline phase lesions (including all five ring phase lesions) showed obvious qualitative variation on phase images during the study.
Of note, we observed that three magnitude lesions, not initially read as abnormal signal, were either better appreciated using phase contrast imaging (two lesions) or preceded (one lesion) by phase changes.
The observation that ring phase lesions remained unchanged over 2.5 years of follow-up challenges the notion that such lesions reveal the presence of acute activated iron-rich macrophages.
It suggests that either different phenotypes of macrophages persist longer than previously expected or other mechanisms related to tissue injury contribute to the phase contrast.
PMID: 21762372
Tight junction proteins expression and modulation in immune cells and multiple sclerosis.
The tight junction proteins (TJPs) are major determinants of endothelial cells comprising physiological vascular barriers such as the blood-brain barrier, but little is known about their expression and role in immune cells.
In this study we assessed TJP expression in human leukocyte subsets, their induction by immune activation and modulation associated with autoimmune disease states and therapies.
A consistent expression of TJP complexes was detected in peripheral blood leukocytes (PBLs), predominantly in B and T lymphocytes and monocytes, whereas the in vitro application of various immune cell activators led to an increase of claudin 1 levels, yet not of claudin 5.
Claudins 1 and 5 levels were elevated in PBLs of multiple sclerosis (MS) patients in relapse, relative to patients in remission, healthy controls and patients with other neurological disorders.
Interestingly, claudin 1 protein levels were elevated also in PBLs of patients with type 1 diabetes (T1D).
Following glucocorticoid treatment of MS patients in relapse, RNA levels of JAM3 and CLDN5 and claudin 5 protein levels in PBLs decreased.
Furthermore, a correlation between CLDN5 pre-treatment levels and clinical response phenotype to interferon-β therapy was detected.
Our findings indicate that higher levels of leukocyte claudins are associated with immune activation and specifically, increased levels of claudin 5 are associated with MS disease activity.
This study highlights a potential role of leukocyte TJPs in physiological states, and autoimmunity and suggests they should be further evaluated as biomarkers for aberrant immune activity and response to therapy in immune-mediated diseases such as MS.
© 2011 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
PMID: 22013975
Validation of the spanish version of the Multiple Sclerosis International Quality of Life (Musiqol) questionnaire.
The Multiple Sclerosis International Quality Of Life (MusiQoL) questionnaire, a 31-item, multidimensional, self-administrated questionnaire that is available in 14 languages including Spanish, has been validated using a large international sample.
We investigated the validity and reliability of the Spanish version of MusiQoL in Spain.
Consecutive patients with different types and severities of multiple sclerosis (MS) were recruited from 22 centres across Spain.
All patients completed the MusiQoL questionnaire, the 36-Item Short Form (SF-36) health survey, and a symptoms checklist at baseline and 21 days later.
External validity, internal consistency, reliability and reproducibility were tested.
A total of 224 Spanish patients were evaluated.
Dimensions of MusiQoL generally demonstrated a high internal consistency (Cronbach's alpha: 0.70-0.92 for all but two MusiQoL domain scores).
External validity testing revealed that the MusiQoL index score correlated significantly with all SF-36 dimension scores (Pearson's correlation: 0.46-0.76), reproducibility was satisfactory (intraclass correlation coefficient: 0.60-0.91), acceptability was high, and the time taken to complete the 31-item questionnaire was reasonable (mean [standard deviation]: 9.8 [11.8] minutes).
The Spanish version of the MusiQoL questionnaire appears to be a valid and reliable instrument for measuring quality of life in patients with MS in Spain and constitutes a useful instrument to measure health-related quality of life in the clinical setting.
PMID: 22264993
Rapamycin reduces clinical signs and neuropathic pain in a chronic model of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Current treatments used in Multiple Sclerosis (MS) are partly effective in the early stages of the disease but display very limited benefits in patients affected by progressive MS.
One possible explanation is that these therapies are unable to target the inflammatory component most active during the progressive phase of the disease, and compartmentalized behind the blood-brain barrier.
Our findings show that Rapamycin ameliorates clinical and histological signs of chronic EAE when administered during ongoing disease.
Moreover, Rapamycin significantly reduced the hyperalgesia observed before clinical development of EAE which, in turn, is completely abolished by the administration of the drug.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23140228
Subcutaneous IFN-β1a to treat relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the main nontraumatic cause of handicap in young adults.
Immunomodulators and treatments limiting lymphocyte migration have been proven efficient to treat relapsing-remitting MS.
Subcutaneous IFN-β1a improve relapse rate and MRI parameters in a series of double-blind, placebo-controlled trials in relapsing-remitting MS patients.
Similar results, and with a greater extent, were obtained when treating patients with a first demyelinating event suggestive of MS.
Except for the rare liver toxicity, the drug is well tolerated and has no severe adverse reaction.
When compared with intramuscular IFN-β1a, both relapse rate and MRI parameters were modulated in favor of the subcutaneous administration.
Although the effect of subcutaneous IFN-β1a on disability progression is limited, the good tolerance profile together with the efficiency of the drug explain why this treatment, as well as the other interferons and glatiramer acetate, is a first-line therapy for relapsing-remitting MS.
PMID: 23458065
Biosynthetic assembly of the Bacteroides fragilis capsular polysaccharide A precursor bactoprenyl diphosphate-linked acetamido-4-amino-6-deoxygalactopyranose.
The sugar capsule capsular polysaccharide A (CPSA), which coats the surface of the mammalian symbiont Bacteroides fragilis, is a key mediator of mammalian immune system development.
In addition, this sugar polymer has shown therapeutic potential in animal models of multiple sclerosis and other autoimmune disorders.
The structure of the CPSA polymer includes a rare stereoconfiguration sugar acetamido-4-amino-6-deoxygalactopyranose (AADGal) that we propose is the first sugar linked to a bactoprenyl diphosphate scaffold in the production of CPSA.
In this report, we have utilized a heterologous system to reconstitute bactoprenyl diphosphate-linked AADGal production.
Construction of this system included a previously reported Campylobacter jejuni dehydratase, PglF, coupled to a B. fragilis-encoded aminotransferase (WcfR) and initiating hexose-1-phosphate transferase (WcfS).
The function of the aminotransferase was confirmed by capillary electrophoresis and a novel high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) method.
Production of the rare uridine diphosphate (UDP)-AADGal was confirmed through a series of one- and two-dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance experiments and high-resolution mass spectrometry.
A spectroscopically unique analogue of bactoprenyl phosphate was utilized to characterize the transfer reaction catalyzed by WcfS and allowed HPLC-based isolation of the isoprenoid-linked sugar product.
Importantly, the entire heterologous system was utilized in a single-pot reaction to biosynthesize the bactoprenyl-linked sugar.
This work provides the first critical step in the in vitro reconstitution of CPSA biosynthesis.
PMID: 22734127
Natural killer cells and their receptors in multiple sclerosis.
The immune system has crucial roles in the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis.
While the adaptive immune cell subsets, T and B cells, have been the main focus of immunological research in multiple sclerosis, it is now important to realize that the innate immune system also has a key involvement in regulating autoimmune responses in the central nervous system.
Natural killer cells are innate lymphocytes that play vital roles in a diverse range of infections.
There is evidence that they influence a number of autoimmune conditions.
Recent studies in multiple sclerosis and its murine model, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, are starting to provide some understanding of the role of natural killer cells in regulating inflammation in the central nervous system.
Natural killer cells express a diverse range of polymorphic cell surface receptors, which interact with polymorphic ligands; this interaction controls the function and the activation status of the natural killer cell.
In this review, we discuss evidence for the role of natural killer cells in multiple sclerosis and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
We consider how a change in the balance of signals received by the natural killer cell influences its involvement in the ensuing immune response, in relation to multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 22792325
Laminin-411 is a vascular ligand for MCAM and facilitates TH17 cell entry into the CNS.
TH17 cells enter tissues to facilitate pathogenic autoimmune responses, including multiple sclerosis (MS).
However, the adhesion molecules involved in the unique migratory capacity of TH17 cells, into both inflamed and uninflamed tissues remain unclear.
Herein, we characterize MCAM (CD146) as an adhesion molecule that defines human TH17 cells in the circulation; following in vitro restimulation of human memory T cells, nearly all of the capacity to secrete IL-17 is contained within the population of cells expressing MCAM.
Furthermore, we identify the MCAM ligand as laminin 411, an isoform of laminin expressed within the vascular endothelial basement membranes under inflammatory as well as homeotstatic conditions.
Purified MCAM-Fc binds to laminin 411 with an affinity of 27 nM, and recognizes vascular basement membranes in mouse and human tissue.
MCAM-Fc binding was undetectable in tissue from mice with targeted deletion of laminin 411, indicating that laminin 411 is a major tissue ligand for MCAM.
An anti-MCAM monoclonal antibody, selected for inhibition of laminin binding, as well as soluble MCAM-Fc, inhibited T cell adhesion to laminin 411 in vitro.
When administered in vivo, the antibody reduced TH17 cell infiltration into the CNS and ameliorated disease in an animal model of MS.
Our data suggest that MCAM and laminin 411 interact to facilitate TH17 cell entry into tissues and promote inflammation.
PMID: 23728300
BACH2 represses effector programs to stabilize T(reg)-mediated immune homeostasis.
Through their functional diversification, distinct lineages of CD4(+) T cells can act to either drive or constrain immune-mediated pathology.
Transcription factors are critical in the generation of cellular diversity, and negative regulators antagonistic to alternate fates often act in conjunction with positive regulators to stabilize lineage commitment.
Genetic polymorphisms within a single locus encoding the transcription factor BACH2 are associated with numerous autoimmune and allergic diseases including asthma, Crohn's disease, coeliac disease, vitiligo, multiple sclerosis and type 1 diabetes.
Although these associations point to a shared mechanism underlying susceptibility to diverse immune-mediated diseases, a function for BACH2 in the maintenance of immune homeostasis has not been established.
Here, by studying mice in which the Bach2 gene is disrupted, we define BACH2 as a broad regulator of immune activation that stabilizes immunoregulatory capacity while repressing the differentiation programs of multiple effector lineages in CD4(+) T cells.
BACH2 was required for efficient formation of regulatory (Treg) cells and consequently for suppression of lethal inflammation in a manner that was Treg-cell-dependent.
Assessment of the genome-wide function of BACH2, however, revealed that it represses genes associated with effector cell differentiation.
Consequently, its absence during Treg polarization resulted in inappropriate diversion to effector lineages.
In addition, BACH2 constrained full effector differentiation within TH1, TH2 and TH17 cell lineages.
These findings identify BACH2 as a key regulator of CD4(+) T-cell differentiation that prevents inflammatory disease by controlling the balance between tolerance and immunity.
PMID: 22907116
Meningeal inflammation plays a role in the pathology of primary progressive multiple sclerosis.
The primary progressive form of multiple sclerosis is characterized by accrual of neurological dysfunction from disease onset without remission and it is still a matter of debate whether this disease course results from different pathogenetic mechanisms compared with secondary progressive multiple sclerosis.
Inflammation in the leptomeninges has been identified as a key feature of secondary progressive multiple sclerosis and may contribute to the extensive cortical pathology that accompanies progressive disease.
Our aim was to investigate the extent of perivascular and meningeal inflammation in primary progressive multiple sclerosis in order to understand their contribution to the pathogenetic mechanisms associated with cortical pathology.
A comprehensive immunohistochemical analysis was performed on post-mortem brain tissue from 26 cases with primary progressive multiple sclerosis.
A variable extent of meningeal immune cell infiltration was detected and more extensive demyelination and neurite loss in the cortical grey matter was found in cases exhibiting an increased level of meningeal inflammation.
However, no tertiary lymphoid-like structures were found.
Profound microglial activation and reduction in neuronal density was observed in both the lesions and normal appearing grey matter compared with control cortex.
Furthermore, cases with primary progressive multiple sclerosis with extensive meningeal immune cell infiltration exhibited a more severe clinical course, including a shorter disease duration and younger age at death.
Our data suggest that generalized diffuse meningeal inflammation and the associated inflammatory milieu in the subarachnoid compartment plays a role in the pathogenesis of cortical grey matter lesions and an increased rate of clinical progression in primary progressive multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 22204770
Environmental triggers and epigenetic deregulation in autoimmune disease.
The study of epigenetic mechanisms in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases is receiving unprecedented attention from clinicians and researchers in the field.
Autoimmune disorders comprise a wide range of genetically complex diseases, including systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, type 1 diabetes, and multiple sclerosis.
Together they affect a significant proportion of the population and have a great economic impact on public health systems.
Epigenetic mechanisms control gene expression and are influenced by external stimuli, linking environment and gene function.
A variety of environmental agents, such as viral infection, hormones, certain drugs, and pollutants, have been found to influence the development of autoimmune diseases.
On the other hand, there is considerable evidence of epigenetic changes, particularly DNA methylation alterations, in diseases like systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, or multiple sclerosis.
However, the gap in our understanding between the specific effects of external agents and the influence on epigenetic profiles has not yet been filled.
Here we review a number of studies describing epigenetic alterations in autoimmune diseases and a range of environmental factors that influence the development of autoimmune diseases.
We also discuss potential mechanisms linking environment and epigenetics, consider the prospects for future epigenetic studies addressing the relationship between environment and epigenetics, and comment on the use of drugs with an epigenetic-reversing effect in the clinical management of these diseases.
© Discovery Medicine
PMID: 22902473
Bi-exponential diffusion signal decay in normal appearing white matter of multiple sclerosis.
Our aim was to characterize bi-exponential diffusion signal changes in normal appearing white matter of multiple sclerosis (MS) patients.
Diffusion parameters were measured using mono-exponential (0-1000 s/mm(2)) and bi-exponential (0-5000 s/mm(2)) approaches from 14 relapsing-remitting subtype of MS patients and 14 age- and sex-matched controls after acquiring diffusion-weighted images on a 3T MRI system.
The results were analyzed using parametric or nonparametric tests and multiple linear regression models.
Mono-exponential apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) slightly increased in controls (P=.09), but decreased significantly in MS as a function of age, nonetheless an elevated ADC was observed with increasing lesion number in patients.
Bi-exponential analyses showed that the increased ADC is the result of decreased relative volume fraction of slow diffusing component (f(s)).
However, the fast and slow diffusion components (ADC(f), ADC(s)) did not change as a function of either age in controls or lesion number and age in MS patients.
These data demonstrated that the myelin content of the white matter affects diffusion in relapsing-remitting subtype of multiple sclerosis that is possibly a consequence of the shift between different water fractions.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22622860
Teriflunomide added to interferon-β in relapsing multiple sclerosis: a randomized phase II trial.
To evaluate teriflunomide as add-on therapy to ongoing stable-dosed interferon-β (IFNβ) in patients with relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis (RMS).
A total of 118 patients with RMS were randomly assigned 1:1:1 to receive oral placebo or teriflunomide, 7 or 14 mg, once daily for 24 weeks; 86 patients entered the 24-week extension.
The primary objective was to evaluate safety; secondary objectives were to evaluate the effects of treatment on disease activity assessed by MRI and relapse rate.
Teriflunomide was well tolerated with a low and similar incidence of treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) across the 3 groups; TEAEs led to treatment discontinuation of 4.9%, 8.1%, and 7.9% of patients in the placebo, 7-mg, and 14-mg groups, respectively.
The number of gadolinium-enhancing T1 (T1-Gd) lesions was reduced in both teriflunomide groups, with relative risk reductions (RRRs) of 84.6% (p = 0.0005) and 82.8% (p &lt; 0.0001) for 7 and 14 mg, respectively, compared with IFNβ alone at 48 weeks.
T1-Gd lesion volume was also reduced in the 7-mg group (RRR 72.1%, p = 0.1104) and 14-mg group (RRR 70.6%, p = 0.0154).
A trend toward dose-dependent reduction in annualized relapse rate was also noted (RRRs 32.6% [p = 0.4355] and 57.9% [p = 0.1005] for 7 and 14 mg, respectively).
Teriflunomide as add-on therapy to IFNβ had acceptable safety and tolerability and reduced MRI disease activity compared with IFNβ alone.
Classification of evidence: This study provides Class II evidence that teriflunomide, 7 and 14 mg, added to IFNβ, is safe.
The T1-Gd lesion burden was significantly reduced with both teriflunomide doses.
PMID: 22729386
What sample sizes for reliability and validity studies in neurology?
Rating scales are increasingly used in neurologic research and trials.
A key question relating to their use across the range of neurologic diseases, both common and rare, is what sample sizes provide meaningful estimates of reliability and validity.
Here, we address two questions: (1) to what extent does sample size influence the stability of reliability and validity estimates; and (2) to what extent does sample size influence the inferences made from reliability and validity testing?
We examined data from two studies.
In Study 1, we retrospectively reduced the total sample randomly and nonrandomly by decrements of approximately 50 % to generate sub-samples from n = 713-20.
In Study 2, we prospectively generated sub-samples from n = 20-320, by entry time into study.
In all samples we estimated reliability (internal consistency, item total correlations, test-retest) and validity (within scale correlations, convergent and discriminant construct validity).
Reliability estimates were stable in magnitude and interpretation in all sub-samples of both studies.
Validity estimates were stable in samples of n ≥ 80, for 75 % of scales in samples of n = 40, and for 50 % of scales in samples of n = 20.
In this study, sample sizes of a minimum of 20 for reliability and 80 for validity provided estimates highly representative of the main study samples.
These findings should be considered provisional and more work is needed to determine if these estimates are generalisable, consistent, and useful.
PMID: 21791428
Activation of p38 MAPK in CD4 T cells controls IL-17 production and autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Although several transcription factors have been shown to be critical for the induction and maintenance of IL-17 expression by CD4 Th cells, less is known about the role of nontranscriptional mechanisms.
Here we show that the p38 MAPK signaling pathway is essential for in vitro and in vivo IL-17 production by regulating IL-17 synthesis in CD4 T cells through the activation of the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E/MAPK-interacting kinase (eIF-4E/MNK) pathway.
We also show that p38 MAPK activation is required for the development and progression of both chronic and relapsing-remitting forms of experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE), the principal autoimmune model of multiple sclerosis.
Furthermore, we show that regulation of p38 MAPK activity specifically in T cells is sufficient to modulate EAE severity.
Thus, mechanisms other than the regulation of gene expression also contribute to Th17 cell effector functions and, potentially, to the pathogenesis of other Th17 cell-mediated diseases.
PMID: 23241565
What place for ▾ cannabis extract in MS?
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a neurological condition that is estimated to affect around 60,000 people in England and Wales, with a lifetime risk in the UK of 1 in 1,000.(1,2) Spasticity (an increase in muscle tone) is a common symptom of MS, resulting in muscle spasms, immobility, disturbed sleep and pain.(3,4) Complex drug combinations are sometimes necessary to manage symptoms of MS, but these are often only partially effective and associated with unacceptable side effects.(5) Cannabis extract containing delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol (dronabinol) and cannabidiol are the principal extracts from the cannabis plant present in a licensed preparation (▾Sativex - GW Pharma Ltd), the first cannabinoid preparation to be approved for medical use.
Sativex has been licensed for symptom improvement in adult patients with moderate to severe spasticity due to MS who have not responded adequately to other anti-spasticity medication and who demonstrate clinically significant improvement in spasticity related symptoms during an initial trial of therapy.(6) Here we review the evidence for cannabis extract and its place in the treatment of the condition.
PMID: 23192778
Regional cervical cord atrophy and disability in multiple sclerosis: a voxel-based analysis.
To (a) apply an active surface method to map the regional distribution of cord atrophy across levels and sectors in a relatively large group of patients with multiple sclerosis (MS), (b) compare the anatomic location of cord atrophy between patients with relapsing-remitting (RR) MS and those with secondary progressive (SP) MS, and (c) assess correlations between atrophy and disability.
This study was approved by the local ethical committee, and written informed consent was obtained from each participant.
High-spatial-resolution magnetic resonance (MR) images of the cervical cord were acquired from 45 patients with RR MS, 26 patients with SP MS, and 67 age-matched healthy control subjects.
The active surface method segmented the cord surface from C1 to C7 and created output images reformatted in planes perpendicular to the estimated cord center line.
These unfolded cervical cord images were coregistered into a common standard space, and smoothed cord binary masks were used as input images for spatial statistics.
Voxel-wise between-group comparisons and the correlation between regional cord atrophy versus clinical and conventional MR imaging variables were assessed with software.
Compared with control subjects, patients with RR MS showed localized clusters of atrophy in the posterior cord.
Conversely, patients with SP MS showed a widespread pattern of cord atrophy, predominantly in the posterior and lateral cord columns.
In patients with MS, cervical cord atrophy was correlated with clinical disability, disease duration, and, to a lesser extent, conventional MR imaging measures of brain injury.
No correlation was found between cord atrophy and the presence of focal cord lesions.
Voxel-wise assessment of the regional distribution of damage in the cervical cord is feasible and might improve our understanding of the mechanisms related to the development of irreversible clinical disability in MS.
PMID: 22193377
Cytokine profile, Foxp3 and nuclear factor-kB ligand levels in multiple sclerosis subtypes.
Patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) present with heterogeneous clinical courses.
To elucidate whether different immunopathological mechanisms are involved in MS subgroups, we compared serum levels of TNF-α, IL-1β, hs-CRP, receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand (RANKL) and peripheral blood foxp3 expression in clinical subtypes of MS (relapsing remitting: RR-MS; secondary progressive: SP-MS; primary progressive: PP-MS) and healthy subjects.
In a case-control study, 72 healthy individuals and 72 age- and sex-matched multiple sclerotic patients (57% RR-MS, 18% SP- MS and 25% PP-MS) were evaluated.
The age, gender distribution, and BMI of MS patients in these three sup-types were similar.
The serum levels of TNF-α, IL-1β, and RANKL were measured by ELISA. hs-CRP was measured by imunoturbidimetric method.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells expression of Foxp3 was measured by real time PCR.
A significant elevation of TNF-α, hs-CRP, IL-1β and RANKL and diminution of Foxp3 expression in MS patients compared to control was found (P&lt;0.001).
PP-MS had highest levels of TNF-α, IL-1β, CRP and RANKL, and lowest levels of foxp3, with difference in TNF-α reached significant level (P&lt;0.01).
RANKL and TNF-α showed a reverse (P&lt;0.01) significant correlation with Foxp3 relative expression levels.
Patients with early age onset (onset before 30 years) had significantly higher levels of hs-CRP compared to late age onset patients.
These data demonstrate the presence of immunopathogenesis differences between relapsing and non-relapsing form and is also the first to stress a role for cytokine RANKL in MS patients.
PMID: 22623407
Robot training of upper limb in multiple sclerosis: comparing protocols with or without manipulative task components.
In this pilot study, we compared two protocols for robot-based rehabilitation of upper limb in multiple sclerosis (MS): a protocol involving reaching tasks (RT) requiring arm transport only and a protocol requiring both objects' reaching and manipulation (RMT).
Twenty-two MS subjects were assigned to RT or RMT group.
Both protocols consisted of eight sessions.
During RT training, subjects moved the handle of a planar robotic manipulandum toward circular targets displayed on a screen.
RMT protocol required patients to reach and manipulate real objects, by moving the robotic arm equipped with a handle which left the hand free for distal tasks.
In both trainings, the robot generated resistive and perturbing forces.
Subjects were evaluated with clinical and instrumental tests.
The results confirmed that MS patients maintained the ability to adapt to the robot-generated forces and that the rate of motor learning increased across sessions.
Robot-therapy significantly reduced arm tremor and improved arm kinematics and functional ability.
Compared to RT, RMT protocol induced a significantly larger improvement in movements involving grasp (improvement in Grasp ARAT sub-score: RMT 77.4%, RT 29.5%, p=0.035) but not precision grip.
Future studies are needed to evaluate if longer trainings and the use of robotic handles would significantly improve also fine manipulation.
PMID: 22654782
Cognitive dysfunction in multiple sclerosis.
In Multiple Sclerosis (MS) prevalence studies of community and clinical samples, indicate that 45-60% of patients are cognitively impaired.
These cognitive dysfunctions have been traditionally described as heterogeneous, but more recent studies suggest that there is a specific pattern of MS-related cognitive dysfunctions.
With the advent of disease-modifying medications for MS and emphasis on early intervention and treatment, detection of cognitive impairment at its earliest stage becomes particularly important.
In this review the authors address: the cognitive domains most commonly impaired in MS (memory, attention, executive functions, speed of information processing, and visual-spatial abilities); the pathophysiological mechanism implied in MS cognitive dysfunction and correlated brain MRI features; the importance of neuropsychological assessment of MS patients in different stages of the disease and the influence of its course on cognitive performance; the most used tests and batteries for neuropsychological assessment; therapeutic strategies to improve cognitive abilities.
PMID: 22654783
Resveratrol neuroprotection in a chronic mouse model of multiple sclerosis.
Resveratrol is a naturally occurring polyphenol that activates SIRT1, an NAD-dependent deacetylase.
SRT501, a pharmaceutical formulation of resveratrol with enhanced systemic absorption, prevents neuronal loss without suppressing inflammation in mice with relapsing experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), a model of multiple sclerosis (MS).
In contrast, resveratrol has been reported to suppress inflammation in chronic EAE, although neuroprotective effects were not evaluated.
The current studies examine potential neuroprotective and immunomodulatory effects of resveratrol in chronic EAE induced by immunization with myelin oligodendroglial glycoprotein peptide in C57/Bl6 mice.
Effects of two distinct formulations of resveratrol administered daily orally were compared.
Resveratrol delayed the onset of EAE compared to vehicle-treated EAE mice, but did not prevent or alter the phenotype of inflammation in spinal cords or optic nerves.
Significant neuroprotective effects were observed, with higher numbers of retinal ganglion cells found in eyes of resveratrol-treated EAE mice with optic nerve inflammation.
Results demonstrate that resveratrol prevents neuronal loss in this chronic demyelinating disease model, similar to its effects in relapsing EAE.
Differences in immunosuppression compared with prior studies suggest that immunomodulatory effects may be limited and may depend on specific immunization parameters or timing of treatment.
Importantly, neuroprotective effects can occur without immunosuppression, suggesting a potential additive benefit of resveratrol in combination with anti-inflammatory therapies for MS.
PMID: 23169153
Different mechanisms underlying changes in excitability of peripheral nerve sensory and motor axons in multiple sclerosis.
Subtle involvement of peripheral nerves may occur in multiple sclerosis.
Motor excitability studies have suggested upregulation of slow K+ currents, probably secondary to altered motoneuron properties resulting from the central lesion.
This study concentrates on sensory axons.
Excitability of median nerve axons at the wrist was studied in 26 patients.
Sensory recordings were possible in 22 patients, and reduced superexcitability was the sole abnormality.
There was no evidence for changes in membrane potential or demyelination.
The decrease was significant in patients taking immunomodulatory therapy.
These findings could be reproduced in a computer model by changing the gating of fast K+ channels.
Motor axon findings were consistent with previously reported increased slow K+ current.
The sensory findings differ from motor findings.
They can be explained by a humoral factor, possibly cytokines, which can penetrate the paranode and have been documented to alter the gating of K+ channels.
Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 23374378
[Visual neurorehabilitation of patients with cerebral damage using botulinum toxin].
The neurorehabilitation of the patient with cerebral damage implies the reestablishment of the visual functions.
Botulinum toxin can be considerate as a less invasive alternative for treatment.
to demonstrate the answer to the treatment using botulinum toxin of the visual motor alterations in patients with cerebral damage.
Descriptive study of patients with visual alterations associated to cerebral damage.
The visual treatment included three areas: sensorial, refracting and motor under quimiodenervation with botulinum toxin, of May 2009 to May 2010.
48 patients were studied, age 22,4 years ± 23.
The strabismus were: esotropia 52%, exotropia 39,5%, vertical 8%, nystagmus 4%.
50% of the patients had psychomotor delay.
Some of the most important causes of cerebral damage were: Down syndrome, epilepsy, tumor, hydrocephalus, neuroinfection, infantile cerebral paralysis, multiple sclerosis, metabolic syndrome, cranial trauma, congenital cardiopathy, ventricular hemorrhage, cerebrovascular stroke.
The dose of botulinum toxin was 8,1 UI ± 3.
We registered good results in 56.5%, regular 23,9% and bad 19,5%.
The global percentage of rehabilitation was 69% of correction with a r of Pearson of 0,5.
Patients with cerebral damage have diverse types of visuomotor alterations, strabismus and nystagmus.Use of botulinum toxin as a paralytic muscle agent is a good alternative in these cases.
The botulinum toxin is an effective option for the visual rehabilitation in patients with cerebral damage and prevents the progression of more cerebral changes secondary to strabismus.
PMID: 23097433
Genomic characterization of Japanese macaque rhadinovirus, a novel herpesvirus isolated from a nonhuman primate with a spontaneous inflammatory demyelinating disease.
Japanese macaque rhadinovirus (JMRV) is a novel gamma-2 herpesvirus that was isolated from a Japanese macaque (JM) with an inflammatory demyelinating encephalomyelitis referred to as Japanese macaque encephalomyelitis, a disease that possesses clinical and histopathological features resembling multiple sclerosis in humans.
Genomic DNA sequence analysis reveals that JMRV is a gammaherpesvirus closely related to rhesus macaque rhadinovirus (RRV) and human herpesvirus 8.
We describe here the complete nucleotide sequence and structure of the JMRV genome, as well as the sequence of two plaque isolates of this virus.
Analysis of the JMRV genome not only demonstrates that this virus shares a number of genes with RRV that may be involved in pathogenesis but also indicates the presence of unique JMRV genes that could potentially contribute to disease development.
The knowledge of the genomic sequence of JMRV, and the ability to easily propagate the virus in vitro, make JMRV infection of JM an attractive model for examining the potential role of an infectious viral agent in the development of demyelinating encephalomyelitis disease in vivo.
PMID: 23844334
Immunity and inflammation in neurodegenerative diseases.
Immune reactions inside the central nervous system are finely regulated, thanks to the presence of several checkpoints that have the fundamental purpose to preserve this fragile tissue form harmful events.
The current knowledge on the role of neuroinflammation and neuro-immune interactions in the fields of multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease is reviewed.
Moreover, a focus on the potential role of both active and passive immunotherapy is provided.
Finally, we propose a common perspective, which implies that, under pathological conditions, inflammation may exert both detrimental and protective functions, depending on local factors and the timing of immune activation and shutting-off systems.
PMID: 22016049
Using latent trajectory analysis of residuals to detect response shift in general health among patients with multiple sclerosis. [corrected].
Individuals experiencing a change in health may experience a response shift that may attenuate HRQoL change estimates.
The objective of this study was to estimate the proportion of individuals with multiple sclerosis (MS) who experienced a response shift as detected by the Latent Trajectory of Residuals approach.
Participants in the NARCOMS Registry were included if they responded to the general health (GH) question of the SF-12 in at least 3 surveys.
Linear growth modeling was used to identify predictors of self-reported GH, and the residuals from this model were used to determine group-based trajectories.
Dual trajectories of GH and a measure of disability (PDSS) were used to examine convergence in change patterns over time.
A total of 1,566 individuals were included in this study.
The predictive GH model explained 55% of the variance; 99.7% of subjects did not experience a response shift as indicated by flat trajectories, and 0.3% lowered their rating of health as compared to predicted indicating a potential response shift.
Among 13% of subjects with flat trajectories of PDDS, 5% had GH decreasing most strongly showing some discordance between symptoms and GH.
A lower percentage of individuals experienced response shift than previous research on smaller samples.
These results may indicate the true absence of response shift, or may be limited by using a categorical outcome of GH, and GH predictors that may have also been amenable to response shift, which decreases the appropriateness of using the LTA approach.
Future work will include the use of growth curve latent class analyses to assess response shift.
PMID: 23483715
Contribution of vitamin D insufficiency to the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis.
The contribution of vitamin D insufficiency to the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis (MS) is reviewed.
Among the multiple recently discovered actions of vitamin D, an immunomodulatory role has been documented in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis and in humans.
This action in the peripheral immune system is currently the main known mechanism through which vitamin D might influence MS, but other types of actions could be involved within the central nervous system.
Furthermore, vitamin D insufficiency is widespread in temperate countries and in patients with MS at the earliest stages of the disease, suggesting that the deleterious effects related to vitamin D insufficiency may be exerted in these patients.
In fact, many genetic and environmental risk factors appear to interact and contribute to MS.
In genetics, several human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles (more particularly HLA-DRB1*1501) could favour the disease whereas some others could be protective.
Some of the genes involved in vitamin D metabolism (e.g. CYP27B1) also play a significant role.
Furthermore, three environmental risk factors have been identified: past Epstein-Barr virus infection, vitamin D insufficiency and cigarette smoking.
Interactions between genetic and environmental risk or protective factors may occur during the mother's pregnancy and could continue during childhood and adolescence and until the disease is triggered in adulthood, therefore possibly modulating the MS risk throughout the first decades of life.
Furthermore, some clinical findings already strongly suggest that vitamin D status influences the relapse rate and radiological lesions in patients with MS, although the results of adequately powered randomized clinical trials using vitamin D supplementation have not yet been reported.
While awaiting these incontrovertible results, which might be long in coming, patients with MS who are currently in vitamin D insufficiency should be supplemented, at least for their general health status, using moderate doses of the vitamin.
PMID: 22868887
[Neuromyelitis optica following thymectomy with severe spinal cord atrophy after frequent relapses for 30 years].
A 60-year-old woman had frequent relapses of neuromyelitis optica (NMO) for 30 years despite receiving steroid and azathioprine therapy.
She developed MGFA Class IIIb type of myasthenia gravis (MG) at the age of 23, and thymectomy resulted in complete remission of MG.
The initial symptoms of NMO, including headache, high fever, retrobulbar optic neuritis, and neurogenic bladder, appeared at the age of 30.
Two years later, paraplegia also developed.
Although she received oral administration of steroids or azathioprine and intravenous steroid pulse therapy for treatment of NMO for over 30 years, she experienced frequent relapses.
The examination at the ages of 58 and 60 years showed that anti-aquaporin-4 antibody was absent.
Intravenous immunoglobulin therapy administered in January and June 2009 was effective, and she had 2 years of remission of NMO attack.
Spinal MRI after frequent NMO attacks for 30 years revealed an extended spinal cord atrophy involving the lower cervical region and the entire thoracic region.
We describe and discuss the prognosis of NMO and the effectiveness of therapies in an NMO patient who underwent thymectomy for MG.
PMID: 23430685
The American Academy of Neurology's top five choosing wisely recommendations.
To discuss the American Academy of Neurology (AAN)'s Top Five Recommendations in the Choosing Wisely campaign promoting high-value neurologic medicine and physician-patient communication.
The AAN published its Top Five Recommendations in February 2013 in collaboration with the American Board of Internal Medicine Foundation and Consumer Reports.
A Choosing Wisely Working Group of 10 AAN members was formed to oversee the process and craft the evidence-based recommendations.
AAN members were solicited for recommendations, the recommendations were sent out for external review, and the Working Group members (article authors) used a modified Delphi process to select their Top Five Recommendations.
The Working Group submitted 5 neurologic recommendations to the AAN Practice Committee and Board of Directors; all 5 were approved by both entities in September 2012.
Recommendation 1: Don't perform EEGs for headaches.
Recommendation 2: Don't perform imaging of the carotid arteries for simple syncope without other neurologic symptoms.
Recommendation 3: Don't use opioids or butalbital for treatment of migraine, except as a last resort.
Recommendation 4: Don't prescribe interferon-β or glatiramer acetate to patients with disability from progressive, nonrelapsing forms of multiple sclerosis.
Recommendation 5: Don't recommend carotid endarterectomy for asymptomatic carotid stenosis unless the complication rate is low (&lt;3%).
PMID: 22672953
Upper extremity function and its relation with hand sensation and upper extremity strength in patients with multiple sclerosis.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the relationships between the upper extremity functions, upper extremity strength and hand sensation in patients with Multiple Sclerosis (MS).
Twenty-two patients with MS (mean age: 38.5 ± 8.31 years, median Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS): 2) and 10 healthy subjects were included.
Upper extremity function was measured with the Nine-hole peg test, upper extremity strength (shoulder flexion-abduction, elbow flexion, pinch and grip) with hand-held dynamometer, hand grip dynamometer and manual pinch meter, threshold of light touch-pressure with Semmes-Weinstein monofilament, duration of vibration with 128-Hz frequency tuning fork, and distance of two-point discrimination with an aesthesiometer.
Strength and functional level of the upper extremity, light touch-pressure, two-point discrimination, vibration sensations of the hand were lower in patients with MS compared with healthy controls (p &lt; 0.05).
Light touch-pressure sensation of thumb and index fingers, two-point discrimination of index finger and elbow flexion strength were found to be related with upper extremity function in patients with MS (p&lt; 0.05).
These results indicate that the hand sensation, upper extremity strength and function were affected in MS patients.
Additionally upper extremity functions seem to be related with light touch-pressure and two-point discrimination sensations of the hand and elbow flexion strength.
Upper extremity strengthening and sensorial training of the hand may contribute to the upper extremity function in patients with MS.
PMID: 23235683
Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty for treatment of chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency (CCSVI) in multiple sclerosis patients.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a leading cause of neurological disability in young adults.
The most widely accepted hypothesis regarding its pathogenesis is that it is an immune-mediated disease.
It has been hypothesised more recently that chronic venous congestion may be an important factor in the pathogenesis of MS.
This concept has been named 'chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency' (CCSVI) and is characterised by stenoses of either the internal jugular or azygos veins, or both.
It is suggested that these stenoses restrict the normal blood flow from the brain, causing the deposition of iron in the brain and the eventual triggering of an auto-immune response.
The proposed treatment for CCSVI is percutaneous transluminal angioplasty, also known as the 'liberation procedure', which is claimed to improve the blood flow in the brain thereby alleviating some of the symptoms of MS.
To assess the effects of percutaneous transluminal angioplasty for the treatment of CCSVI in people with MS.
We searched the following databases up to June 2012: The Cochrane Multiple Sclerosis and Rare Diseases of the Central Nervous System Group Specialised Register, CENTRAL in The Cochrane Library 2012, Issue 5, MEDLINE (from 1946), EMBASE (from 1974), and reference lists of articles.
We also searched several online trials registries for ongoing trials.
Randomised controlled trials assessing the effects of percutaneous transluminal angioplasty in adults with multiple sclerosis, that have been diagnosed to have CCSVI.
Our searches retrieved 159 references, six of which were to ongoing trials.
Based on assessment of the title or abstract, or both, we excluded all of the studies, with the exception of one which was evaluated following examination of the full text report.
However, this study also did not meet our inclusion criteria and was subsequently excluded.
No randomised controlled trials met our inclusion criteria.
There is currently no high level evidence to support or refute the efficacy or safety of percutaneous transluminal angioplasty for treatment of CCSVI in people with MS.
Clinical practice should be guided by evidence supported by well-designed randomised controlled trials: closure of some of the gaps in the evidence may be feasible at the time of completion of the six ongoing clinical trials.
PMID: 23235682
Teriflunomide for multiple sclerosis.
Disease-modifying therapies (DMTs) for multiple sclerosis aim to specifically reduce inflammation in relapsing multiple sclerosis and promote neuroprotection and neurorepair in progressive multiple sclerosis (MS).
Most of the currently available disease-modifying drugs (DMDs) require regular and frequent parenteral administration, which imposes a burden on patients and leads to reduced adherence.
Not all MS patients respond adequately to current DMDs and, therefore, alternative MS treatments with less invasive routes of administration and new modes of action are required to expand the current treatment repertoire, increase adherence, and thereby improve efﬁcacy.
As one of the oral DMDs, teriflunomide is a potentially promising new oral agent in the treatment of relapsing MS.
It inhibits dihydro-orotate dehydrogenase (DHODH) and the synthesis of pyrimidine and has selective immunosuppressive and immunomodulatory properties.
To explore the potential benefits of teriflunomide and so expand the available DMT options, the effectiveness and safety of teriflunomide, as monotherapy or combination therapy, were assessed versus placebo or approved DMDs (IFN-β, glatiramer acetate, natalizumab, mitoxantrone, fingolimod) for modifying disease in patients with MS.
The Trials Search Co-ordinator searched the Cochrane Multiple Sclerosis and Rare Diseases of the Central Nervous System Group Specialised Register (27 June 2012).
We checked references in identified trials and manually searched the reports (2004 to June 2012) from neurological associations and MS societies.
We also communicated with researchers participating in trials on teriflunomide and contacted Sanofi-Aventis.
All randomised, double-blind, controlled, parallel clinical trials (RCTs) with a length of follow-up of at least one year evaluating teriflunomide, as monotherapy or combination therapy, versus placebo or other treatments (IFN-β, glatiramer acetate, natalizumab, mitoxantrone, fingolimod) for patients with MS.
Titles and abstracts of the citations retrieved by the literature search were screened independently for inclusion or exclusion by two review authors.
Any disagreement regarding inclusion was resolved by discussion or by referral to a third assessor if necessary.
Two review authors independently extracted data and assessed trial quality.
Disagreements were discussed and resolved by consensus among review authors.
Principal investigators of included studies were contacted for additional data or confirmation of information.
Two studies involving 1204 people evaluated the efficacy and safety of teriflunomide 7 mg and 14 mg, alone or with add-on IFN-β, versus placebo for adult patients with relapsing forms of MS (relapsing-remitting (RRMS), secondary progressive (SPMS) with relapse, and progressive relapsing MS (PRMS)) and an entry Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) score of ≤ 5.5.
Both studies had high attrition bias (26.8% and 36.4% attrition respectively).
Teriflunomide 7 or 14 mg alone had potential benefits on reducing relapse rates, and alone or with add-on IFN-β was safe for patients with relapsing forms of MS in the short term.
The most common adverse events included nasopharyngitis, headache, diarrhoea, fatigue, elevated alanine aminotransferase levels, nausea, hair thinning or decreased hair density, influenza, back pain, urinary tract infection, and pain in the arms or legs.
Four ongoing trials were identified.
We found low-level evidence for the use of teriflunomide as a disease-modifying therapy for MS, due to the limited quality of the available RCTs.
We did not conduct meta-analysis because of the clinical and methodological diversity of the included studies.
Short-term teriflunomide, 7 or 14 mg alone or with add-on IFN-β, was safe for patients with relapsing MS.
Both teriflunomide 7 and 14 mg alone had potential benefits for patients with relapsing forms of MS.
We are waiting for the publication of ongoing trials.
RCTs with high methodological quality and longer periods of observation are needed to assess safety, disability progression, neuroprotection and quality of life.
PMID: 23346094
MicroRNA dysregulation in multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory disease characterized by central nervous system (CNS) demyelination and axonal degeneration.
Although the cause of MS is still unknown, it is widely accepted that novel drug targets need to focus on both decreasing inflammation and promoting CNS repair.
In MS and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, non-coding small microRNAs (miRNAs) are dysregulated in the immune system and CNS.
Since individual miRNAs are able to down-regulate multiple targeted mRNA transcripts, even minor changes in miRNA expression may lead to significant alterations in gene expression.
Herein, we review miRNA signatures reported in CNS tissue and immune cells of MS patients and consider how altered miRNA expression may influence MS pathology.
PMID: 22683122
Oligodendrocytes enforce immune tolerance of the uninfected brain by purging the peripheral repertoire of autoreactive CD8+ T cells.
Myelin-specific CD8(+) T cells are thought to contribute to the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis.
Here we modeled this contribution in mice with CD8(+) T cells recognizing ovalbumin (OVA) expressed in oligodendrocytes (ODCs).
Surprisingly, even very high numbers of activated OVA-reactive CD8(+) T cells failed to induce disease and were cleared from the immune system after antigen encounter in the central nervous system (CNS).
Peripheral infection with OVA-expressing Listeria (Lm-OVA) enabled CD8(+) T cells to enter the CNS, leading to the deletion of OVA-specific clones after OVA recognition on ODCs.
In contrast, intracerebral infection allowed OVA-reactive CD8(+) T cells to cause demyelinating disease.
Thus, in response to infection, CD8(+) T cells also patrol the CNS.
If the CNS itself is infected, they destroy ODCs upon cognate antigen recognition in pursuit of pathogen eradication.
In the sterile brain, however, antigen recognition on ODCs results in their deletion, thereby maintaining tolerance.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22904139
Cerebrospinal fluid myelin basic protein is frequently ordered but has little value: a test utilization study.
Diagnosis of multiple sclerosis (MS) is facilitated by analyzing biochemical properties of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
Oligoclonal bands (OCBs) and immunoglobulin G (IgG) index are well-established markers for evaluating patients suspected of having MS.
Myelin basic protein (MBP) is also ordered frequently, but its usefulness remains questionable.
OCB, IgG index, and MBP were measured in 16,690 consecutive CSF samples.
Samples were divided into 2 groups based on MS status known (n = 71) or unknown (n = 16,118).
Medical charts of the MS status known group were reviewed to determine their MS status.
OCBs have a stronger association to IgG index results than does MBP.
Importantly, MBP does not add a statistically significant increase in diagnostic sensitivity or specificity when used in combination with OCB and/or IgG index.
The data indicate that MBP is an unnecessary and overused test.
PMID: 23837503
The importance of HLA DRB1 gene allele to clinical features and disability in patients with multiple sclerosis in Lithuania.
The association of HLA DRB1 alleles with susceptibility to multiple sclerosis (MS) has been consistently reported although its effect on the clinical features and disability is still unclear probably due to diversity in ethnicity and geographic location of the studied populations.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the influence of HLA DRB1 alleles on the clinical features and disability of the patients with MS in Lithuania.
This was a prospective study of 120 patients with MS.
HLA DRB1 alleles were genotyped using the polymerase chain reaction.
The first symptoms of MS in patients with HLA DRB1*15 allele manifested at younger age than in those without this allele (28.32 +/- 5.49 yrs vs. 30.94 +/- 8.43 yrs, respectively, p = 0.043).
HLA DRB1*08 allele was more prevalent among relapsing-remitting (RR) MS patients than among patients with progressive course of MS (25.0% vs. 8.3%, respectively, chi^2 = 6.000, p = 0.05).
MS patients with this allele had lower relapse rate than those without this allele (1.00 +/- 0.97 and 1.44 +/- 0.85, respectively, p = 0.043).
Degree of disability during the last visit was lower among the patients with HLA DRB1*08 allele (EDSS score 3.15 +/- 1.95 vs. 4.49 +/- 1.96, p = 0.006), and higher among those with HLA DRB1*15 allele (EDSS score 4.60 +/- 2.10 vs.4.05 +/- 1.94, p = 0.047) compared to patients without these alleles but there were no significant associations between these alleles and the duration of the disease to disability.
HLA DRB1*08 allele (OR = 0.18, 95% CI 0,039-0,8, p = 0.029) was demonstradet to be independent factor to take a longer time to reach an EDSS of 6, while HLA DRB1*01 allele (OR = 5.92, 95% CI 1,30-26,8, p = 0.021) was related in a shorter time to reach and EDSS of 6.
Patients with HLA DRB1*08 allele had lower IgG index compared to patients without this allele (0.58 +/- 0.17 and 0.73 +/- 0.31, respectively, p = 0.04), and HLA DRB1*15 allele was more often found among MS patients with oligoclonal bands (OCBs) in cerebrospinal fluid than among those without OCBs (OR 2.3, CI 95% 1.017-5.301; p = 0.043).
HLA DRB1*15 allele was related with an earlier manifestation of the first MS symptoms, progressive course of the disease and higher degree of disability.
HLA DRB1*08 allele was more prevalent among the RR MS patients and was associated with the lower rate of relapse, degree of disability and IgG index.
PMID: 24179745
Multicentre absolute myelin water content mapping: Development of a whole brain atlas and application to low-grade multiple sclerosis.
The current study investigates the whole brain myelin water content distribution applying a new approach that allows for the simultaneous mapping of total and relative myelin water content, T 1 and T 2* with full brain coverage and high resolution (1 × 1 × 2 mm(3)).
The data was collected at two different sites in healthy controls to validate the independence of a specific setup.
In addition, a group of patients with known white matter affections was investigated to compare two measures of myelin, i.e. relative and absolute myelin water content.
Based on the first dataset, a quantitative myelin water content atlas was created which served as a control set for the other two datasets.
Both control groups measured at different institutions yielded consistent results.
However, distinct regions of reduced myelin water content were observed for the patient dataset, both on an individual basis and in a group-wise comparison.
The comparison between the absolute and relative measurement of myelin water content in MS patients showed that the relative measurement, which is employed by many researchers, overestimates both disease volume and the corresponding reduction of myelin water content in white matter lesions.
However, for normal appearing white matter, no difference between both approaches was detected.
The results obtained in the current study demonstrate that absolute myelin water content can reliably be determined in a multicentre environment using standard MR sequences.
The optimised protocol allows for a measurement of four quantitative parameters with full brain coverage in only 10 min.
This might expedite a more widespread future use of quantitative MRI methods for clinical research and diagnosis.
PMID: 22118860
Interleukin 17 gene polymorphism is associated with anti-aquaporin 4 antibody-positive neuromyelitis optica in the Southern Han Chinese--a case control study.
Interleukin 17 (IL-17) plays an important role in many autoimmune diseases including neuromyelitis optica (NMO) and multiple sclerosis (MS), which are inflammatory demyelinating diseases of the central nervous system.
A large number of non-HLA single nucleotide polymorphisms have been reported to increase the risk of MS.
However, their effects on NMO have been less well studied.
Fifty-two anti-aquaporin 4 antibody-positive NMO patients, 69 anti-aquaporin 4 antibody-negative conventional MS patients, and 131 controls were genotyped for the IL-17A rs2275913 and IL-17F rs763780 single nucleotide polymorphisms by DNA sequencing.
Significantly higher frequencies of the rs763780 T allele (p(uncorr)=0.011) and TT genotype (p(uncorr)=0.007, p(corr)=0.042) were observed in NMO patients versus controls.
The rs763780 T allele and TT genotype may increase susceptibility to NMO in the Southern Han Chinese.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22341909
Serum prolactin level in patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis during relapse.
It has been hypothesized that hyperprolactinemia may contribute to the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis (MS).
In a case-control study, 58 patients with definite relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) during relapse and 58 sex-matched and age-matched healthy controls were assessed for serum prolactin (PRL) concentration.
Mean serum PRL levels (± standard deviation) were significantly higher in patients with MS (501.3 ± 232.6 mIU/L) than in healthy control patients (233.3 ± 142.7 mIU/L; p &lt; 0.0001).
Furthermore, these differences were consistent in each sex: females with MS (704.4 ± 119.6 mIU/L) compared to female controls (305.5 ± 156.9 mIU/L p &lt; 0.001); and in males with MS (358.0 ± 180.0 mIU/L) compared to male controls (182.3 ± 107.5 mIU/L; p &lt; 0.001).
Our findings provided more evidence to support the hypothesis that patients with RRMS, regardless of gender, are in a hyperprolactinemic state.
Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 24179740
Magnetic resonance elastography reveals altered brain viscoelasticity in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Cerebral magnetic resonance elastography (MRE) measures the viscoelastic properties of brain tissues in vivo.
It was recently shown that brain viscoelasticity is reduced in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS), highlighting the potential of cerebral MRE to detect tissue pathology during neuroinflammation.
To further investigate the relationship between inflammation and brain viscoelasticity, we applied MRE to a mouse model of MS, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE).
EAE was induced and monitored by MRE in a 7-tesla animal MRI scanner over 4 weeks.
At the peak of the disease (day 14 after immunization), we detected a significant decrease in both the storage modulus (G') and the loss modulus (G″), indicating that both the elasticity and the viscosity of the brain are reduced during acute inflammation.
Interestingly, these parameters normalized at a later time point (day 28) corresponding to the clinical recovery phase.
Consistent with this, we observed a clear correlation between viscoelastic tissue alteration and the magnitude of perivascular T cell infiltration at both day 14 and day 28.
Hence, acute neuroinflammation is associated with reduced mechanical cohesion of brain tissues.
Moreover, the reduction of brain viscoelasticity appears to be a reversible process, which is restored when inflammation resolves.
For the first time, our study has demonstrated the applicability of cerebral MRE in EAE, and showed that this novel imaging technology is highly sensitive to early tissue alterations resulting from the inflammatory processes.
Thus, MRE may serve to monitor early stages of perivascular immune infiltration during neuroinflammation.
PMID: 22361625
Ocular myasthenia gravis in an academic neuro-ophthalmology clinic: clinical features and therapeutic response.
The frequency of ocular myasthenia gravis (OMG) in patients referred to an academic neuro-ophthalmology clinic for suspected myasthenia gravis is not known.
Our objective was to determine the frequency of ocular OMG in patients referred to an academic neuro-ophthalmologist and determine alternate diagnoses and response to therapy.
We performed a retrospective chart review of patients presenting to the University of Kansas Neuro-Ophthalmology Clinic with suspected OMG over 9 years.
We defined OMG as isolated ptosis/diplopia at initial presentation supported by at least one of the following abnormal tests: edrophonium test, ice test, Cogan lid twitch, fatigability on sustained upgaze, acetylcholine receptor binding antibody, greater than 10% decrement on repetitive stimulation, or abnormal single-fiber jitter.
We also determined the cause of ptosis/diplopia if it was not the result of OMG.
Patients who progressed from OMG to generalized disease were termed transformed myasthenia gravis (TMG).
One hundred thirty-eight patients were referred with mean age at presentation 58 ± 19 years.
Myasthenia gravis was diagnosed in 101 patients; 95 had OMG; six had generalized MG.
Diagnosis in the other 37 was cranial nerve palsies (nine), levator dehiscence (five), multiple sclerosis (two), blepharospasm (two), decompensated phorias (three), accommodation spasm (four), exophoria (three), skew deviation (two), Graves disease (one), hypertropia (one), myopathy (one), neurosarcoidosis (one), progressive supranuclear palsy (one), Miller Fisher variant of Guillain-Barre syndrome (one), and obstructive sleep apnea (one).
Mean follow-up was 3.0 ± 2.8 years.
Test sensitivity/specificity in OMG was fatigability on sustained upgaze 0.80/0.63; ice pack 0.80/0.25; Cogan lid twitch 0.59/1.00; edrophonium 0.88/0.50; acetylcholine receptor binding antibody 0.38/1.00; repetitive nerve stimulation 0.24/1.00; and single-fiber electromyography 0.90/1.00.
Pyridostigmine was used without prednisone in 59 of 97 patients with OMG and 12 of 59 developed TMG.
Prednisone was used in 38 patients; 21 of 38 (55%) met Myasthenia Gravis Foundation of America improvement status and none had TMG.
The diagnosis of myasthenia gravis was confirmed in the majority of patients referred to our academic neuro-ophthalmology clinic, but 27% did not have myasthenia gravis.
It is possible that prednisone treatment of OMG may prevent progression to TMG, but further study is required.
PMID: 22524586
An investigation of multidisciplinary complex health care interventions--steps towards an integrative treatment model in the rehabilitation of people with multiple sclerosis.
The Danish Multiple Sclerosis Society initiated a large-scale bridge building and integrative treatment project to take place from 2004-2010 at a specialized Multiple Sclerosis (MS) hospital.
In this project, a team of five conventional health care practitioners and five alternative practitioners was set up to work together in developing and offering individualized treatments to 200 people with MS.
The purpose of this paper is to present results from the six year treatment collaboration process regarding the development of an integrative treatment model.
The collaborative work towards an integrative treatment model for people with MS, involved six steps: 1) Working with an initial model 2) Unfolding the different treatment philosophies 3) Discussing the elements of the Intervention-Mechanism-Context-Outcome-scheme (the IMCO-scheme) 4) Phrasing the common assumptions for an integrative MS program theory 5) Developing the integrative MS program theory 6) Building the integrative MS treatment model.
The model includes important elements of the different treatment philosophies represented in the team and thereby describes a common understanding of the complexity of the courses of treatment.
An integrative team of practitioners has developed an integrative model for combined treatments of People with Multiple Sclerosis.
The model unites different treatment philosophies and focuses on process-oriented factors and the strengthening of the patients' resources and competences on a physical, an emotional and a cognitive level.
PMID: 21963295
Generalized likelihood ratio tests for change detection in diffusion tensor images: application to multiple sclerosis.
The automatic analysis of subtle changes between MRI scans is an important tool for monitoring disease evolution.
Several methods have been proposed to detect changes in serial conventional MRI but few works have considered Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI), which is a promising modality for monitoring neurodegenerative disease and particularly Multiple Sclerosis (MS).
In this paper, we introduce a comprehensive framework for detecting changes between two DTI acquisitions by considering different levels of representation of diffusion imaging, namely the Apparent Diffusion Coefficient (ADC) images, the diffusion tensor fields, and scalar images characterizing diffusion properties such as the fractional anisotropy and the mean diffusivity.
The proposed statistical method for change detection is based on the Generalized Likelihood Ratio Test (GLRT) that has been derived for the different diffusion imaging representations, based on the core assumption of a Gaussian diffusion model and of an additive Gaussian noise on the ADCs.
Results on synthetic and real images demonstrate the ability of the different tests to bring useful and complementary information in the context of the follow-up of MS patients.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21988668
Dose titration of intramuscular interferon beta-1a reduces the severity and incidence of flu-like symptoms during treatment initiation.
Flu-like symptoms (FLS) are common side effects of interferon beta (IFNβ) therapy and can negatively affect the willingness of patients with multiple sclerosis to initiate therapy.
Although dose titration is commonly used to reduce the severity and incidence of IFNβ-related FLS during treatment initiation, these benefits have not been confirmed in a well controlled study.
The objective of this randomized, dose-blinded, parallel-group study was to assess the effect of dose titration on the severity and incidence of FLS during the initial 8 weeks of once-weekly intramuscular (IM) IFNβ-1a administration.
Healthy volunteers were randomized 1:1:1 to one of three IM IFNβ-1a regimens: 3-week titration (weekly quarter-dose increments over 3 weeks to full dose [30 µg]); 6-week titration (biweekly quarter-dose increments over 6 weeks to full dose); or no titration (full dose over 8 weeks).
At weekly clinic visits, the severity of each FLS was rated 1 hour pre-injection and 4-6 hours and 12-15 hours post-injection.
Study endpoints included post-injection change in FLS severity and post-injection FLS incidence (percentage of subjects with a ≥2-point increase in total FLS severity score) at each time point.
Clinicaltrials.gov identifier: NCT01119677.
Of 234 subjects enrolled, 194 (83%) completed the study.
At 8 weeks, FLS severity was significantly reduced at both post-injection time points with 3-week titration (76% reduction at 4-6 hours, p &lt; 0.001; 37% reduction at 12-15 hours; p &lt; 0.001) and 6-week titration (50% reduction at 4-6 hours, p &lt; 0.001; 32% reduction at 12-15 hours; p = 0.002) compared with no titration.
The incidence of FLS was also significantly reduced at both time points with both titration regimens.
Safety profiles for both titration regimens were consistent with the current IM IFNβ-1a label.
Study limitations included that there is currently no validated assessment tool for evaluating the severity of FLS, that the study enrolled healthy volunteers, that different proportions of females were randomized to the 3-week-titration group than to the 6-week and no-titration groups, and that evaluation of the potential impact of titration on symptoms occurring substantially later after injection was not part of the study protocol.
Dose titration during initiation of IM IFNβ-1a reduces FLS severity and incidence in healthy volunteers compared with no titration.
PMID: 23637027
Autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation as a treatment option for aggressive multiple sclerosis.
Despite the development of several injectable or oral treatments for relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS), it remains difficult to treat patients with aggressive disease, and many of these continue to develop severe disability.
During the last two decades autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (aHSCT) has been explored with the goal to eliminate an aberrant immune system and then re-install a healthy and tolerant one from hematopoietic precursor cells that had been harvested from the patient prior to chemotherapy.
Clinical studies have shown that aHSCT is able to completely halt disease activity in the majority of patients with aggressive RRMS.
Research on the mechanisms of action supports that aHSCT indeed leads to renewal of a healthy immune system.
Below we will summarize important aspects of aHSCT and mention the currently best-examined regimen.
PMID: 22652781
IL-6, IL-17 and STAT3: a holy trinity in auto-immunity?
Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is a pleiotropic cytokine involved in the regulation of the cross talk between haematopoietic/immune cells and stromal cells, including the onset and resolution of inflammation, responses to infection, tissue remodelling and cancer.
It is produced, among others, by fibroblasts, endothelial cells, macrophages and lymphocytes.
IL-6 can interact with both membrane-bound and soluble forms of its ligand-binding receptor, the IL-6Ralpha, triggering signalling via dimerization of gp130, the signalling subunit of the IL-6 receptor complex.
This leads to the activation of the JAK/STAT pathway and mainly culminates in the activation of the STAT3 transcription factor.
Both IL-6 and STAT3 have recently emerged as main regulators of the differentiation and function of Th17 cells, via a positive feedback loop enhancing expression and/or activation of IL-6 itself, IL-17 and STAT3.
Dysregulated IL-6 production and signalling are associated with chronic inflammatory diseases, auto-immunity and cancer, and are the object of intense translational research as promising therapeutic targets.
PMID: 22226402
International cohort study of 73 anti-Ku-positive patients: association of p70/p80 anti-Ku antibodies with joint/bone features and differentiation of disease populations by using principal-components analysis.
An international cohort study of 73 anti-Ku-positive patients with different connective tissue diseases was conducted to differentiate the anti-Ku-positive populations of patients based on their autoantibody profile and clinical signs/symptoms and to establish possible correlations between antibodies against Ku p70 and Ku p80 with autoimmune diseases.
Sera of anti-Ku-positive patients were collected from six European centers and were all secondarily tested (in the reference center); 73 were confirmed as positive.
Anti-Ku antibodies were detected with counter-immunoelectrophoresis (CIE), line immunoassay (LIA), and immunoblot analyses.
All clinical and laboratory data were follow-up cumulative data, except for anti-Ku antibodies.
Statistical analyses were performed by using R (V 2.12.1).
The Fisher Exact test was used to evaluate the association between anti-Ku antibodies and diagnosis, gender, clinical signs, and other observed antibodies.
The P values were adjusted for multiple testing.
Separation of disease populations based on the presence of antibodies and clinical signs was investigated by principal-components analysis, which was performed by using thr// R's prcomp function with standard parameters.
A 16% higher prevalence of anti-Ku p70 was found over anti-Ku p80 antibodies.
In 41 (57%) patients, a combination of both was detected.
Five (7%) patients, who were CIE and/or LIA anti-Ku positive, were negative for both subsets, as detected with the immunoblot; 31% of the patients had undifferentiated connective tissue disease (UCTD); 29% had systemic sclerosis (SSc); 18% had systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE); 11% had rheumatoid arthritis; 7% had polymyositis; and 3% had Sjögren syndrome.
A significant positive association was found between female patients with anti-Ku p70 and joint/bone features, and a significant negative association was found between female patients with anti-Ku p80 only and joint/bone features (P = 0.05, respectively).
By using the first and the third components of the principal-component analysis (PCA) with 29 parameters evaluated, we observed that the anti-Ku-positive population of UCTD patients had overlapping parameters, especially with SLE, as opposed to SSc, which could be helpful in delineating UCTD patients.
PMID: 22554400
Kinin-mediated inflammation in neurodegenerative disorders.
The mediatory role of kinins in both acute and chronic inflammation within nervous tissues has been widely described.
Bradykinin, the major representative of these bioactive peptides, is one of a few mediators of inflammation that directly stimulates afferent nerves due to the broad expression of specific kinin receptors in cell types in these tissues.
Moreover, kinins may be delivered to a site of injury not only after their production at the endothelium surface but also following their local production through the enzymatic degradation of kininogens at the surface of nerve cells.
A strong correlation between inflammatory processes and neurodegeneration has been established.
The activation of nerve cells, particularly microglia, in response to injury, trauma or infection initiates a number of reactions in the neuronal neighborhood that can lead to cell death after the prolonged action of inflammatory substances.
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in the effects of kinins on neuronal destruction.
In these studies, the overexpression of proteins involved in kinin generation or of kinin receptors has been observed in several neurologic disorders including neurodegenerative diseases such Alzheimer's disease and multiple sclerosis as well as disorders associated with a deficiency in cell communication such as epilepsy.
This review is focused on recent findings that provide reliable evidence of the mediatory role of kinins in the inflammatory responses associated with different neurological disorders.
A deeper understanding of the role of kinins in neurodegenerative diseases is likely to promote the future development of new therapeutic strategies for the control of these disorders.
An example of this could be the prospective use of kinin receptor antagonists.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23377559
Presentation and outcomes with clinically apparent interferon beta hepatotoxicity.
The aim of this study was to describe the presenting features and outcomes of consecutive patients with liver injury attributed to interferon beta.
The presenting features of eight subjects with clinically apparent liver injury attributed to interferon beta enrolled in the U.S.
Drug-Induced Liver Injury Network (DILIN) prospective registry between 2004 and 2010 were reviewed and compared to 11 published reports of symptomatic hepatotoxicity.
All eight of the DILIN patients were women, 75 % were Caucasian and the mean age was 49 years.
Most subjects presented with an acute hepatocellular injury pattern and mean serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels were 725 ± 593 U/L.
The median duration of interferon beta use before injury onset was 462 days, and four patients had been treated for more than a year.
No patient had detectable antinuclear or smooth muscle antibodies.
One patient died of acute liver failure and the remaining patients usually recovered within 2-3 months.
Causality assessment scored three cases as definite, three highly likely, one probable and one possible.
Eleven additional published cases were all women, mean age was 40 years, mean ALT at onset 840 U/L, and 7 (63 %) had autoantibodies.
Liver histology in three cases from DILIN and nine from the literature commented upon centrilobular (zone 3) necrosis and infiltrates with lymphocytes and plasma cells.
Interferon beta hepatotoxicity occurs mostly in women and has a variable, but often prolonged time to onset.
Most patients have self-limited acute hepatocellular liver injury but several have required liver transplantation or died of acute liver failure.
Liver histology available in three cases demonstrated zone 3 necrosis and autoimmune features suggestive of an immunologic basis to this adverse drug reaction.
PMID: 23819946
Cytometric profiling in various clinical forms of multiple sclerosis with respect to CD21+, CD32+, and CD35+ B and T cells.
We aimed to evaluate the frequency of various types of B and T cells expressing CD21, CD32, and CD35 in multiple sclerosis (MS) clinical courses.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cell from 30 MS patients (17 relapsing remitting [RRMS], six secondary progressive [SPMS], and seven primary progressive MS [PPMS]) and 18 healthy subjects were analyzed.
All patients were in acute attack.
Healthy controls were matched for age and gender ratio.
The frequencies of various subsets of B and T cells were determined using flow cytometry.
The frequency of CD4+T cells was lower in MS patients compared to control subjects (41.14 ± 9.45% vs. 46.88 ± 6.98%, respectively, P &lt; 0.05).
The CD32+ fraction of CD4+T cells and the CD21+ fraction of CD8+T cells were higher in MS patients (2.85 ± 3.72% vs. 1.06 ± 0.62% for CD32+CD4+T cells, 2.71 ± 1.86% vs. 1.16 ± 0.99% for CD21+CD8+T cells in MS patients and control subjects, respectively, P &lt; 0.05).
After dividing subjects by type of MS course, higher values of these two T cell subsets were found in SPMS patients compared to control subjects (P &lt; 0.05).
Further, RRMS patients had lower levels of CD32+CD4+T cells than SPMS patients and also they had lower levels of CD32+CD8+T cells than PPMS patients (P &lt; 0.05).
However, neither the expression of CD35 on T cells nor the various B cell subsets were statistically different between the compared groups.
Our findings demonstrate that T cell subsets expressing CD21 and CD32 may differ with respect to the presence or clinical forms of MS disease.
By contrast, CD35+T cells and different subsets of B cells are not altered in various MS clinical courses.
PMID: 22517104
Simultaneous PML-IRIS after discontinuation of natalizumab in a patient with MS.
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a severe complication of natalizumab therapy in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS), which is often accompanied by an immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) after removal of the drug.
We describe a patient with MS who presented with simultaneous PML-IRIS 2 months after stopping natalizumab for other reasons.
CASE REPORT and The patient had widespread PML and severe IRIS.
He received corticosteroids and displayed a vigorous JC virus-specific cellular immune response.
Elevated myoinositol and lipid/creatine peaks measured in PML lesions by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy ((1)H-MRS) corresponded to episodes of contrast enhancement on MRI scans and persisted after the enhancement subsided.
He demonstrated steady clinical improvement, but developed marked residual atrophy in areas affected by PML and inflammation, as well as seizures.
New enhancing white matter lesions, occurring after discontinuation of natalizumab, can be the manifestation of PML-IRIS rather than an MS exacerbation.
Elevated myoinositol and lipid/creatine peaks appear to be more sensitive markers of inflammation in PML lesions than contrast enhancement.
(1)H-MRS may become useful as a biomarker for PML-IRIS by helping clinicians determine the need for corticosteroid administration and anticipate continuing clinical recovery.
PMID: 23039390
Disease-specific therapy of idiopathic inflammatory demyelinating disorders.
Central nervous system idiopathic inflammatory demyelinating disorders are a heterogenous group of diseases that share inflammation and demyelination as key features.
Although the exact pathophysiology remains to be fully unveiled, these conditions are challenging to clinicians who seek specific therapeutic options for their patients.
For two of these conditions, multiple sclerosis and neuromyelitis optica, there are now several possible therapies in an ever-evolving field.
This review will touch on the various idiopathic inflammatory demyelinating disorders and discuss the various treatment options currently available.
PMID: 21880336
Efficacy and safety of subcutaneous interferon β-1a in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: further outcomes from the IMPROVE study.
The IMPROVE study demonstrated that the fetal bovine serum (FBS)- and human serum albumin (HSA)-free formulation of subcutaneous (sc) interferon (IFN) beta-1a had beneficial effects on the numbers of combined unique active magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) lesions in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS).
Here we report additional MRI endpoints (including post hoc analyses), and clinical efficacy, safety, and immunogenicity outcomes.
Patients with active RRMS were randomized (2:1) to IFN beta-1a, 44 mcg sc three times weekly (tiw) (n=120), or placebo (n=60), for 16 weeks (double-blind phase).
All patients then received IFN beta-1a, 44 mcg sc tiw, for 24 weeks (rater-blind phase).
Patients underwent MRI brain scans every 4 weeks.
Compared with placebo, there was a 68% reduction in the mean cumulative number of new gadolinium-enhancing lesions with IFN beta-1a as early as week 4 (p&lt;0.001), and a 53% reduction in the mean cumulative number of new T2 lesions as early as week 8 (p=0.025; post hoc analyses).
During the 16-week double-blind phase, the relapse rate was 0.14 (95% confidence interval [CI] 0.09-0.23) with IFN beta-1a and 0.33 (95% CI 0.22-0.52) with placebo (p=0.010).
Safety outcomes were consistent with those expected with IFN-beta treatment.
The FBS/HSA-free formulation of sc IFN beta-1a has a beneficial impact on MRI and efficacy outcomes as early as 4 weeks after treatment initiation in patients with RRMS and has a safety profile consistent with previous trials of sc IFN beta-1a.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22950068
Clinical usefulness of cell-based indirect immunofluorescence assay for the detection of aquaporin-4 antibodies in neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder.
The presence of antibodies to aquaporin-4 (AQP4) has been identified as a key characteristic of neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD), an autoimmune inflammatory demyelinating central nervous system (CNS) disorder.
We evaluated the performance of a cell-based indirect immunofluorescence assay (CIIFA) for detecting AQP4 antibodies using antigen prepared with a recombinant AQP4 peptide transfection technique and assessed the usefulness of CIIFA for diagnosis of NMOSD in routine clinical practice.
Forty-six serum samples from 36 patients as a comparison set and another 101 patients enrolled consecutively from a neurology clinic were included.
CIIFA and fluorescence immunoprecipitation assays (FIPA) were performed.
CIIFA was performed at 2 different institutions for comparison purposes.
CIIFA and FIPA sensitivity in the comparison set was 86% and 79% in neuromyelitis optica (NMO) patients and 55% and 36% in high-risk NMO patients, respectively.
The semiquantitative titer measured by CIIFA correlated well with the arbitrary unit (fluorescence units [FU]) derived from FIPA (r=0.66).
Titers measured by CIIFA and FIPA were elevated in NMO patients compared to high-risk NMO patients (1:240 vs. 1:180 and 8,390 vs. 4,059 FU, respectively).
The frequency of AQP4 antibody detection by CIIFA in 101 consecutively enrolled patients was 100% in NMO and 23% in high-risk NMO patients, while only 4.6% in control patients, including those with multiple sclerosis.
Detection of AQP4 antibodies by CIIFA provides sensitive and highly specific diagnostic information for NMO and high-risk NMO patients, which can be used to differentiate these conditions from other demyelinating CNS diseases.
PMID: 22491862
Influence of pregnancy on neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder.
To investigate the influence of pregnancy on patients with neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD).
A total of 190 women with NMOSD were enrolled from 7 referral hospitals in 4 countries.
We reviewed medical records and used a structured questionnaire to investigate gravidity, parity, and the number of relapses during the 2 years before pregnancy, during each trimester of pregnancy, during the first and second trimesters after delivery, and for 6 months thereafter.
The annualized relapse rate (ARR) was calculated for each period.
Of the 190 women with NMOSD, 40 patients experienced 54 informative pregnancies, and all of them were seropositive for aquaporin-4 antibody.
Fourteen patients developed the first symptoms of NMOSD either during the pregnancy (3 patients) or within a year after delivery or abortion (8 and 3 patients, respectively).
Twenty-six patients experienced 40 pregnancies after the onset of NMOSD (26 deliveries and 14 abortions [1 spontaneous and 13 elective]).
There was one preterm delivery with birth defects and no stillbirths.
The ARR during pregnancy did not differ from that before pregnancy, but it increased significantly during the first and second trimesters after delivery (5.3 and 3.7 times, respectively).
Moreover, 77% of the deliveries were associated with postpartum relapses.
The significantly increased relapse rate and numerous cases of NMOSD onset after pregnancy suggest that delivery adversely affects the course of NMOSD.
Prospective studies are needed to confirm our findings.
PMID: 22334973
A young female patient of neuromyelitis optica presenting with hypocalcemic tetany.
Neuromyelitis optica, a variant of multiple sclerosis, presenting with hypocalcemic tetany is an unusual presentation.
We report here a case of 25 years old female who was a case of neuromyelitis optica and had hypocalcemic tetany as the initial presentation among others.
The case is interesting in that the hypocalcemic tetany was not coincidental.
The patient had low vitamin D status and probably, this was correlated etiologically to neuromyelitis optica.
Vitamin D has immunomodulatory effect and low vitamin D status has been implicated in the etiology of autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, and inflammatory bowel disease.
PMID: 23076828
Combination of cyclosporine A with corticosteroids is effective for the treatment of neuromyelitis optica.
Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) and associated NMO spectrum disorders (NMOSDs) are neuroinflammatory diseases that frequently result in severe neurological disabilities.
The aim of this study was to explore additional treatment options for NMO/NMOSD patients who are seropositive for anti-aquaporin 4 (AQP4) antibodies.
We retrospectively evaluated the efficacy of immunosuppressants for NMO/NMOSDs by reviewing the clinical records of 52 patients confirmed as seropositive for anti-AQP4 antibodies.
Of the 52 patients, 26 (23 women, three men) had received at least one kind of immunosuppressant other than corticosteroids.
After eliminating ineligible cases, we evaluated the following 24 treatments in 22 patients (20 women, two men) that used azathioprine (AZA) (n = 9), cyclophosphamide (n = 1), cyclosporine A (CyA) (n = 9), tacrolimus (n = 2), methotrexate (n = 1), and mizoribine (n = 2).
Both AZA and CyA treatments allowed us to decrease the median dose of the coadministered prednisone without affecting the expanded disability severity scale scores.
In patients with relapsing-remitting courses, the annual relapse rate decreased from 1.7 (1.2-2.7) to 0.47 (0.36-0.59) after AZA treatments (n = 6, P = 0.028), and also showed a significant decrease from 2.7 (1.8-4.3) to 0.38 (0-0.97) after CyA treatment (n = 8, P = 0.012).
These results indicate that CyA as well as AZA may help stabilize the disease activity in NMO/NMOSD patients seropositive for anti-AQP4 antibodies.
This is the first case series study demonstrating the efficacy of CyA for the treatment of NMO/NMOSDs.
PMID: 23153337
Induction of cognitive fatigue in MS patients through cognitive and physical load.
The objective of the study was to investigate whether cognitive fatigue in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) is a spontaneous phenomenon or whether it can be provoked or exacerbated through cognitive effort and motor exercise.
Thirty two patients with definite MS and cognitive fatigue according to the Fatigue Scale for Motor and Cognitive Functions (FSMC ≥ 22) performed attention tests (alertness, selective, and divided attention subtests from the TAP test battery for attention performance) twice during rest (baseline), and before and after treadmill training and cognitive load (a standardised battery of neuropsychological tests lasting 2.5 hours).
Subjective exhaustion was assessed with a 10-point rating scale.
Tonic alertness turned out to be the most sensitive test and showed significantly increased reaction times after treadmill training and after cognitive load.
Patients' subjective assessment of exhaustion (10-point rating scale) and the objective test results were discrepant.
In contrast, healthy control subjects (N = 20) did not show any decline of performance in the subtest alertness after cognitive or physical load.
Data favour the concept that fatigue is induced by physical and mental load.
Discrepancies between subjective and objective assessment offer therapeutic options.
The common notion of a purely subjective lack of physical and/or mental energy should be reconsidered.
PMID: 23730204
Progress in multiple sclerosis genetics.
A genetic component in the susceptibility to multiple sclerosis (MS) has long been known, and the first and major genetic risk factor, the HLA region, was identified in the 1970's.
However, only with the advent of genome-wide association studies in the past five years did the list of risk factors for MS grow from 1 to over 50.
In this review, we summarize the search for MS risk genes and the latest results.
Comparison with data from other autoimmune and neurological diseases and from animal models indicates parallels and differences between diseases.
We discuss how these translate into an improved understanding of disease mechanisms, and address current challenges such as genotype-phenotype correlations, functional mechanisms of risk variants and the missing heritability.
PMID: 23517930
Fraction of IL-10+ and IL-17+ CD8 T cells is increased in MS patients in remission and during a relapse, but is not influenced by immune modulators.
In the present study, circulating proportions of CD8(+) T (Tc) cell subsets, including IL-17 (Tc17) and IL-10 (Tc10) producing cells, were assessed in relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) patients and a possible effect of beta interferon (IFN-β), glatiramer acetate (GA), and vitamin D (VitD) on these cell subsets was investigated.
We show that both Tc17 and Tc10 cell fractions are elevated in the circulation of RRMS patients in remission compared to healthy subjects and that these Tc subsets remain unaffected by current immune modulating regimens.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22123928
Multiple sclerosis, natalizumab, and PML: helping patients decide.
The treatment benefits of natalizumab in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) appear to exceed those of other disease-modifying drugs, but progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) has been identified as a risk in patients receiving natalizumab.
As of August 2011, a total of 150 cases of natalizumab-associated PML had been reported worldwide.
The overall risk is estimated at approximately 1.66 in 1,000 patients.
Independent risk factors for natalizumab-associated PML are number of infusions beyond 36 and prior use of immunosuppressive drugs.
Classifying JC virus antibody status appears to be useful in treatment decision-making for individual MS patients.
Patient tolerance for risk plays an important role in the selection of therapy, and the treating physician's perception and tolerance of risk may differ markedly from the patient's.
Physicians can help patients make individual informed decisions regarding the use of natalizumab, given the known risk of PML.
PMID: 23439953
Understanding tremor in multiple sclerosis: prevalence, pathological anatomy, and pharmacological and surgical approaches to treatment.
Given that tremor is one of the most prevalent and disabling features of multiple sclerosis (MS), we will review the most significant milestones in tremor in this disease in recent years, focusing on prevalence, clinical features, anatomical basis, and treatment.
Data for this review were identified by searching MEDLINE with the search terms multiple sclerosis and tremor.
References were also identified from relevant articles published between January 1966 and May 2012.
The predominant type of MS tremor is a large-amplitude, postural, and kinetic tremor, which most commonly affects the arms, although tremor can also involve head, neck, vocal cords, and trunk.
Involvement of the tongue, jaw, or palate has not been reported.
Although the anatomical basis underlying tremor in MS is poorly understood, the link between the cerebellum and the MS-related tremor is supported by clinical and experimental studies.
Currently available medication is often unsuccessful in most cases.
Surgical treatment can be a satisfactory alternative to treat severe and disabling tremor.
Tremor in MS patients could be considered as an advanced consequence of the disease and its presence suggests a more aggressive course.
MS tremor can be severe and very disabling for a small group of patients.
Treatment of MS tremor remains a great challenge.
Recent studies suggest that dissociating tremor from cerebellar dysfunction using selected clinical tests would be the key issue to successful surgical treatment.
Understanding the pathophysiology and biochemistry of tremor production in MS may lead to new therapeutic approaches.
PMID: 22434614
Falls on an inpatient rehabilitation unit: risk assessment and prevention.
To determine the relationship between admission diagnosis and admission score on Functional Independence Measure (FIM) to the likelihood that a patient will fall.
To measure the effectiveness of a multifactorial program to reduce falls.
The Quality Improvement Team put in place a multifactorial program to reduce the incidence of falls on an inpatient rehabilitation unit.
The authors reviewed the records of all patients admitted to the rehabilitation unit between January 2006 and December 2009 to determine if the program resulted in a reduced rate of falls.
The authors also reviewed the data to evaluate if admission score on the FIM and the diagnosis or impairment group of the patient are related to the risk of fall.
FIM score is inversely related to the rate of falls.
Patients with admission diagnosis of stroke, brain injury, amputation, neurologic disorders (Parkinson's disease, multiple sclerosis, Guillain-Barre, myopathy, peripheral neuropathy), and spinal cord injury are at higher risk for fall than patients whose admission diagnosis related to orthopedic, cardiac, pulmonary disorders, prolonged stay on medical or surgical units, or trauma without spinal cord injury or head injury.
There was a significant reduction in the rate of falls from 14.9% to 7.3% of patients admitted to the IRF.
Patients with low FIM scores, disorders of the central and peripheral nervous system, and amputations are at high risk of fall.
Compliance with recommended guidelines can reduce the rate of fall and improve patient safety.
The rate of falls on an IRF will be determined in part by the case mix and functional levels of the patients on the unit.
Strict adherence to appropriate nursing protocols can reduce the rate of falls.
© 2012 Association of Rehabilitation Nurses.
PMID: 23124081
[MAIT cells in autoimmunity].
Mucosal associated invariant T (MAIT) cells are restricted by a nonpolymorphic MHC-related molecule-1 (MR1), and express an invariant TCRα chain: Vα7.2-Jα33 in humans and Vα19-Jα33 in mice.
MAIT cells are selected in the thymus, but, interestingly, MAIT cells require B cells as well as commensal flora for their peripheral expansion.
Bourhis et al demonstrated that MAIT cells display antimicrobial capacity.
Both human and mouse MAIT cells have been shown to be activated by Escherichia coli-infected antigen presenting cells in an MR1-dependent manner.
MAIT cells show a protective role against Mycobacteriu abscessus or E. coli infections in mice.
Human MAIT cells are capable of producing IFNγ and IL-17 and are found in Mycobacterium tuberculosis-infected lung tissues.
Thus, MAIT cells play an antimicrobial function under these infectious conditions.
MAIT cells play a protective role against autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model of human multiple sclerosis (MS), whereas they play a pathogenic role in murine models of arthritis.
In patients with autoimmune diseases, the frequency of MAIT cells in peripheral blood was significantly reduced.
The frequency of MAIT cells reflected the disease activity in MS patients, suggesting the involvement of MAIT cells in the regulation of autoimmune diseases.
PMID: 22520586
Auras in temporal lobe epilepsy with hippocampal sclerosis: relation to seizure focus laterality and post surgical outcome.
We examined the relationship between presence and frequency of different types of auras and side of lesion and post surgical outcomes in 205 patients with medically intractable mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE) with unilateral hippocampal sclerosis (HS).
With respect to the number of auras, multiple auras were not associated with side of lesion (p=0.551).
The side of HS was not associated with the type of auras reported.
One hundred fifty-seven patients were operated.
The occurrence of multiple auras was not associated with post-surgical outcome (p=0.740).
The presence of extratemporal auras was significantly higher in patients with poor outcome.
In conclusion, this study suggests that the presence of extratemporal auras in patients with MTLE-HS possibly reflects extratemporal epileptogenicity in these patients, who otherwise showed features suggestive of TLE.
Therefore, TLE-HS patients undergoing pre-surgical evaluation and presenting clinical symptoms suggestive of extratemporal involvement should be more extensively evaluated to avoid incomplete resection of the epileptogenic zone.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21840409
Multi-task functional MRI in multiple sclerosis patients without clinical disability.
While the majority of individuals with multiple sclerosis (MS) develop significant clinical disability, a subset experiences a disease course with minimal impairment even in the presence of significant apparent tissue damage on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in MS patients with low disability suggests that increased use of the cognitive control system may limit the clinical manifestation of the disease.
The current fMRI studies tested the hypothesis that nondisabled MS patients show increased recruitment of cognitive control regions while performing sensory, motor and cognitive tasks.
Twenty two patients with relapsing-remitting MS and an Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) score of ≤1.5 and 23 matched healthy controls were recruited.
Subjects underwent fMRI while observing flashing checkerboards, performing right or left hand movements, or executing the 2-back working memory task.
Compared to control subjects, patients demonstrated increased activation of the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate cortex during the performance of the working memory task.
This pattern of functional recruitment also was observed during the performance of non-dominant hand movements.
These results support the mounting evidence of increased functional recruitment of cognitive control regions in the working memory system of MS patients with low disability and provide new evidence for the role of increased cognitive control recruitment in the motor system.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22492884
Survey results show that adults are willing to pay higher insurance premiums for generous coverage of specialty drugs.
Generous coverage of specialty drugs for cancer and other diseases may be valuable not only for sick patients currently using these drugs, but also for healthy people who recognize the potential need for them in the future.
This study estimated how healthy people value insurance coverage of specialty drugs, defined as high-cost drugs that treat cancer and other serious health conditions like multiple sclerosis, by quantifying willingness to pay via a survey.
US adults were estimated to be willing to pay an extra $12.94 on average in insurance premiums per month for generous specialty-drug coverage--in effect, $2.58 for every dollar in out-of-pocket costs that they would expect to pay with a less generous insurance plan.
Given the value that people assign to generous coverage of specialty drugs, having high cost sharing on these drugs seemingly runs contrary to what people value in their health insurance.
PMID: 23472882
N-Acetylcysteine amide: a derivative to fulfill the promises of N-Acetylcysteine.
In the present human health scenario, implication of oxidative stress in numerous pathologies including neurodegenerative, cardiovascular, liver, renal, pulmonary disorders, and cancer has gained attention.
N-Acetylcysteine (NAC), a popular thiol antioxidant, has been clinically used to treat various pathophysiological disorders.
However, NAC therapy is routine only in paracetamol intoxication and as a mucolytic agent.
Over six decades, numerous studies involving NAC therapy have yielded inconsistent results, and this could be due to low bioavailability.
In order to overcome the limitations of NAC, an amide derivative N-Acetylcysteine amide (NACA) has been synthesized to improve the lipophilicity, membrane permeability, and antioxidant property.
Recent studies have demonstrated the blood-brain barrier permeability and therapeutic potentials of NACA in neurological disorders including Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, Multiple sclerosis, Tardive dyskinesia, and HIV-associated neurological disorders.
In addition, NACA displays protective effect against pulmonary inflammation and antibiotic-induced apoptosis.
Forthcoming research on the possible therapeutic properties of NACA and its generics in the management of pathologies associated with extracellular matrix degradation and oxidative stress-related inflammation is highly exiting.
Superior bioavailability of NACA is likely to fulfill the promises of NAC as well as a molecule to improve the endurance and resident time of bioscaffolds and biomaterials.
Till date, more than 800 reviews on NAC have been published.
However, no comprehensive review is available on the therapeutic applications of NACA.
Therefore, the current review would be the first to emphasize the therapeutic potentials of NACA and its derivatives.
PMID: 24250890
Assessment of bone densitometry in Iranian patients with multiple sclerosis: A case-control study.
We compared bone mineral density (BMD) in patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) on interferon with that of patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) who were not receiving interferon and healthy age- and sex-matched controls.
Overall, 30 patients with RRMS on interferon (treated patients), 30 patients with RRMS but not receiving interferon (untreated patients), and 30 healthy controls were enrolled.
The subjects were matched for age, sex, body mass index, physical activity and nutritional habits (as possible), duration of illness, frequency of attacks, and the amount of corticosteroid therapy.
BMD was measured at the lumbar spine and proximal femur.
The results of dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry were expressed as BMD (g/cm(2)), Z-scores, and T-scores.
Osteopenia in patients with RRMS was 61.7% in proximal femur and 53.3% in lumbar spine (vs.
53.3% and 40% in healthy controls, respectively).
There was an inverse relationship between Expanded Disability Status Scale scores and lumbar and femoral BDM in the patients.
In treated patients, there was an inverse relationship between the duration of interferon therapy and lumbar and femoral BDM.
In untreated patients, there was a similar relation between the duration of the illness and BMD.
Moreover, inverse relationships existed between the frequency of attacks and lumbar and femoral BDM in both treated and untreated groups.
However, this association was only significant in the untreated group.
Patients with MS showed reduced BMD in comparison with healthy controls.
This reduction was related to the frequency of attacks.
We also found lower BMD in untreated patients compared to interferon-treated patients.
PMID: 23020533
Late-onset multiple sclerosis in Isfahan, Iran.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) typically affects young adults; however, the first symptoms can occur after age 50 and is classified as late-onset MS (LOMS).  In this retrospective study, we extracted the records of 3522 MS patients (2716 females and 806 males) registered in the Isfahan MS Society (IMSS) from 2003 to 2010.
Next, we searched for LOMS cases.
We aimed to compare these cases with 1698 non-LOMS subjects also extracted from the IMSS database.
We found 48 LOMS patients (28 females and 20 males), which gave a crude frequency of 1.36%.
The frequency by sex of LOMS in males (2.4%) was significantly greater than in females (1.0%, P = 0.002).
The mean age at onset was 55.1 ± 4.3 years.
The female to male ratio of 1.4:1 in these patients was significantly lower than in non-LOMS subjects (3.37:1, P = 0.003).
The leading pattern of MS was relapsing-remitting (RR) in 62.5%, followed by primary progressive (PP) in 27.1%, and secondary progressive (SP) in 10.4%.
Predominant presenting symptoms and signs were motor disturbances (35.4%), followed by brainstem (25%), optic neuritis (22.9%), and sensory related deficits (18.7%).
The mean progression index (PI) in LOMS patients (0.88 ± 0.48) was significantly higher than in non-LOMS cases, 0.37 ± 0.17 (P &lt; 0.0001).
In comparing LOMS patients with the non-LOMS cohort, there was a higher frequency of the PP pattern and a higher PI in the LOMS group.
In comparing other high-risk populations with the Isfahan cohort, LOMS formed a lower percentage of the total Isfahan MS population.
PMID: 22412845
Deep sequencing for the detection of virus-like sequences in the brains of patients with multiple sclerosis: detection of GBV-C in human brain.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a demyelinating disease of unknown origin that affects the central nervous system of an estimated 400,000 Americans.
GBV-C or hepatitis G is a flavivirus that is found in the serum of 1-2% of blood donors.
It was originally associated with hepatitis, but is now believed to be a relatively non-pathogenic lymphotropic virus.
Fifty frozen specimens from the brains of deceased persons affected by MS were obtained along with 15 normal control brain specimens.
RNA was extracted and ribosomal RNAs were depleted before sequencing on the Illumina GAII.
These 36 bp reads were compared with a non-redundant database derived from the 600,000+ viral sequences in GenBank organized into 4080 taxa.
An individual read successfully aligned to the viral database was considered to be a hit.
Normalized MS specimen hit rates for each viral taxon were compared to the distribution of hits in the normal controls.
Seventeen MS and 11 control brain extracts were sequenced, yielding 4-10 million sequences (reads) each.
Over-representation of sequence from at least one of 12 viral taxa was observed in 7 of the 17 MS samples.
Sequences resembling other viruses previously implicated in the pathogenesis of MS were not significantly enriched in any of the diseased brain specimens.
Sequences from GB virus C (GBV-C), a flavivirus not previously isolated from brain, were enriched in one of the MS samples.
GBV-C in this brain specimen was confirmed by specific amplification in this single MS brain specimen, but not in the 30 other MS brain samples available.
The entire 9.4 kb sequence of this GBV-C isolate is reported here.
This study shows the feasibility of deep sequencing for the detection of occult viral infections in the brains of deceased persons with MS.
The first isolation of GBV-C from human brain is reported here.
PMID: 22939550
Prospective evaluation of laparoscopic assisted cystectomy and ileal conduit in advanced multiple sclerosis.
To assess the morbidity, mortality, and impact on quality of life and renal function after laparoscopic cystectomy and ileal conduit in patients with multiple sclerosis with lower urinary tract symptom refractory to conservative management.
A prospective study was conducted between February 2004 and December 2010 on 44 consecutive patients with multiple sclerosis who underwent laparoscopic cystectomy and ileal conduit for lower urinary tract symptom.
Median Expanded Disability Status Scale score was 8 (6.5-8.5).
Mean duration of multiple sclerosis was 19.3 ± 7.9 years.
The quality of life was determined using the validated Qualiveen questionnaire preoperatively and at minimum 6 months after the surgery.
No conversion to open surgery was required.
Postoperative morbidity rate was 18.2%; minor (Clavien ≤ 2) and major (Clavien ≥ 3) complications occurred in 13.6% and 6.8%, respectively.
Mean follow-up was 44.5 ± 20.6 months.
Complications noted were asymptomatic ureteroileal stenosis (n = 6) and pyelonephritis (n = 3).
Neurological status and Expanded Disability Status Scale score remained stable throughout.
Renal function remained unchanged.
Limitations, constraints, and specific urinary impact index subscores of the Qualiveen were significantly improved at 6 months time.
Laparoscopic cystectomy and ileal conduit for lower urinary tract symptom in advanced multiple sclerosis is a safe procedure with low complications.
Neurological status and renal function remain stable and quality of life improves and continues to remain improved during long-term follow-up, suggesting this to be an attractive option in patients with advanced multiple sclerosis with lower urinary tract symptom refractory to conservative treatment.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23240282
A web-based electronic neurology referral system: a solution for an overburdened healthcare system?
Ireland has the lowest number of consultant neurologists per capita in Europe.
This results in long waiting lists, overbooked clinics, unnecessary emergency department presentations and patient frustration.
In 2006, the neurology department in St.
Vincent's University Hospital and the National Healthlink project, launched an internet referral system (Neurolink) for GPs, to alleviate the administrative burden on staff, reduce unnecessary visits for patients, shorten waiting lists and improve patient care.
710 electronic referrals from GPs between December 2006 and January 2011 were analysed.
The average time taken to for a consultant to reply to a GP referral was 19hours 8minutes.
When asked their opinion as to the suspected aetiology 33.7% (239/710) of GPs selected the option unknown, followed by epilepsy 12.1% (86/710), migraine 12% (85/710), and multiple sclerosis 7.6% (54/710).
Significantly, 19% (127/662) of referrals did not require a neurology outpatient appointment and the GP was given advice.
The results highlight the benefits of using an electronic communication system with primary care; allowing prompt response to GP enquires, early initiation of treatment and reducing the number of patients attending hospital clinics.
PMID: 21865212
Relative mortality and survival in multiple sclerosis: findings from British Columbia, Canada.
To examine mortality and factors associated with survival in a population based multiple sclerosis (MS) cohort.
Clinical and demographic data of MS patients registered with the British Columbia MS clinics (1980-2004) were linked to provincial death data, and patients were followed until death, emigration or study end (31 December 2007).
Absolute survival and the influence of patient characteristics (sex, disease course (primary progressive (PPMS) vs relapsing onset (R-MS)) and onset age) were estimated by Kaplan-Meier analyses (from birth and disease onset).
Mortality relative to the general population was examined using standardised mortality ratios.
Excess mortality associated with patient characteristics and time period of cohort entry was assessed by relative survival modelling.
Of 6917 patients, 1025 died.
Median survival age was 78.6 years (95% CI 77.5 to 79.7) for women and 74.3 years (95% CI 73.1 to 75.4) for men.
Survival from onset was longer for R-MS (49.7 years; 95% CI 47.9 to 51.5) than for PPMS (32.5 years; 95% CI 29.5 to 35.7); however, survival age was similar.
The overall standardised mortality ratios was 2.89 (95% CI 2.71 to 3.07), and patients survived approximately 6 years less than expected, relative to the general population.
PPMS had a higher relative mortality risk compared with R-MS (relative mortality ratio (RMR) 1.52; 95% CI 1.30 to 1.80).
Women with PPMS had a relative survival disadvantage compared with men with PPMS (RMR 1.55; 95% CI 1.19 to 2.01).
Relative survival within 10 years of cohort entry was similar between time periods.
Some of the longest MS survival times are reported here but the risk of death was still greater than in the age, sex and calendar year matched general population.
No evidence of increased survival over time was found when improved survival in the general population was taken into consideration.
PMID: 21865211
Treatment effect of natalizumab on relapse outcomes in multiple sclerosis patients despite ongoing MRI activity.
Natalizumab treatment significantly reduced the annualised relapse rate and MRI activity over 2 years compared with placebo in phase III trials when administered as monotherapy in AFFIRM or in combination with interferon β-1a (IFNβ) in SENTINEL.
The post hoc analyses reported here sought to determine the effect of natalizumab treatment on relapse activity in the minority of patients who continued to show MRI activity (ie, ≥ 1 gadolinium enhancing (Gd+) lesions or new or enlarging T2 hyperintense lesions) over 2 years in these trials.
These analyses demonstrated that natalizumab treatment, both alone (AFFIRM) and in combination with IFNβ (SENTINEL), resulted in a reduced annualised relapse rate despite the presence of Gd+ lesions (p=0.004 and p=0.008, respectively) or new or enlarging T2 hyperintense lesions (each p&lt;0.0001).
Thus patients treated with natalizumab show clinical benefit even in the presence of continued MRI activity.
Long term clinical outcome of these patients has not been studied.
PMID: 22762559
Development of nucleic acid drugs for neurological disorders.
Novel therapeutic strategies using nucleic acid drugs, such as plasmid DNA (pDNA) and nuclear factor-κB (NFκB) decoy, have been sought for non-treatable neurological disorders.
Among them, the application of pDNA has been extensively studied in diabetic neuropathy.
Since growth factors, such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), have both neurotrophic and angiogenic properties, intramuscular injection of pDNA encoding these genes has been examined and shown to be effective for treatment in experimental animals and also in clinical trials.
These growth factors have also been shown to accelerate neuroprotection, angiogenesis, and regeneration in the brain, and overexpression of these factors showed therapeutic effects in cerebral ischemia in rodents.
Inhibition of inflammation is another strategy to treat cerebrovascular diseases.
Recent studies suggest that NFκB plays critical roles in the formation of cerebral aneurysms, and inhibition of its function by NFκB decoy was shown to prevent cerebral aneurysm enlargement through inhibition of NFκB-mediated inflammation.
In the field of neurodegenerative disease, the potential of pDNA as a tool for vaccination has attracted researchers since pDNA itself has shown adjuvant properties and the potential to induce immunity or immune tolerance.
pDNA encoding disease antigens, such as amyloid-Aβ in Alzheimer disease or myelin basic protein in multiple sclerosis (MS), was shown to have therapeutic effects in rodents, and its efficacy and safety were reported in a phase I/II clinical study in MS.
In this review, we discuss the potential and problems of nucleic acid drugs in neurological disorders.
PMID: 23115653
Soluble axoplasm enriched from injured CNS axons reveals the early modulation of the actin cytoskeleton.
Axon injury and degeneration is a common consequence of diverse neurological conditions including multiple sclerosis, traumatic brain injury and spinal cord injury.
The molecular events underlying axon degeneration are poorly understood.
We have developed a novel method to enrich for axoplasm from rodent optic nerve and characterised the early events in Wallerian degeneration using an unbiased proteomics screen.
Our detergent-free method draws axoplasm into a dehydrated hydrogel of the polymer poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate), which is then recovered using centrifugation.
This technique is able to recover axonal proteins and significantly deplete glial contamination as confirmed by immunoblotting.
We have used iTRAQ to compare axoplasm-enriched samples from naïve vs injured optic nerves, which has revealed a pronounced modulation of proteins associated with the actin cytoskeleton.
To confirm the modulation of the actin cytoskeleton in injured axons we focused on the RhoA pathway.
Western blotting revealed an augmentation of RhoA and phosphorylated cofilin in axoplasm-enriched samples from injured optic nerve.
To investigate the localisation of these components of the RhoA pathway in injured axons we transected axons of primary hippocampal neurons in vitro.
We observed an early modulation of filamentous actin with a concomitant redistribution of phosphorylated cofilin in injured axons.
At later time-points, RhoA is found to accumulate in axonal swellings and also colocalises with filamentous actin.
The actin cytoskeleton is a known sensor of cell viability across multiple eukaryotes, and our results suggest a similar role for the actin cytoskeleton following axon injury.
In agreement with other reports, our data also highlights the role of the RhoA pathway in axon degeneration.
These findings highlight a previously unexplored area of axon biology, which may open novel avenues to prevent axon degeneration.
Our method for isolating CNS axoplasm also represents a new tool to study axon biology.
PMID: 22133733
Prevalence of multiple sclerosis: door-to-door survey in three rural areas of coastal Black Sea regions of Turkey.
Little information exists on multiple sclerosis (MS) in Turkey.
With a door-to-door survey in an urban part of Istanbul, we recently reported a prevalence rate of 101/100,000 population.
We therefore investigated three rural areas of Turkey at the same latitude.
The same survey methods were used for total populations of two rural areas (Kandıra and Geyve) near Istanbul, and for half the population of Erbaa, all near 40° north latitude on the Black Sea coast.
In Kandıra, 5 of 8 suspects were diagnosed as having MS among 8,171 screened, resulting in a prevalence rate of 61/100,000.
Geyve with 7 MS cases in 17,016 screened had a prevalence of 41/100,000, and Erbaa with 15 MS cases in 28,177 screened one of 53/100,000.
Together they showed a prevalence of 51/100,000.
Of the 27 patients, 20 were women; 25 had definite and 2 possible MS, the former all with abnormal laboratory findings.
Average ages were 30.5 years at onset and 39.1 years at diagnosis.
Clinical features and course were typical of European MS.
These findings indicate that Turkey is a high-risk MS area, similar to most regions of Mediterranean Europe, where all recent increases are likely due to (undefined) environmental factors.
Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.
PMID: 22319549
Simulation of spread and control of lesions in brain.
A simulation model for the spread and control of lesions in the brain is constructed using a planar network (graph) representation for the central nervous system (CNS).
The model is inspired by the lesion structures observed in the case of multiple sclerosis (MS), a chronic disease of the CNS.
The initial lesion site is at the center of a unit square and spreads outwards based on the success rate in damaging edges (axons) of the network.
The damaged edges send out alarm signals which, at appropriate intensity levels, generate programmed cell death.
Depending on the extent and timing of the programmed cell death, the lesion may get controlled or aggravated akin to the control of wild fires by burning of peripheral vegetation.
The parameter phase space of the model shows smooth transition from uncontrolled situation to controlled situation.
The simulations show that the model is capable of generating a wide variety of lesion growth and arrest scenarios.
PMID: 22099277
Botulinum toxin A for the treatment of neurogenic detrusor overactivity in multiple sclerosis patients.
Neurogenic detrusor overactivity (NDO) is common in patients who suffer from multiple sclerosis (MS).
When the usual pharmacological treatment fails, botulinum toxin type A (BTX-A) injections can be proposed.
The safety and efficacy of this treatment are already well known, but only a few studies focus on its use in patients with MS.
Seventy-one patients with MS underwent their first BTX-A injection for refractory NDO.
They had clinical and urodynamic cystometry assessment before and three months after injection.
The patients were divided in three groups according to treatment efficacy: full success (total urinary continence, no overactive detrusor), improvement, or total failure (urge incontinence and overactive detrusor).
77% of the patients had clinical improvement or full success of the treatment with a reduction of their urgency and incontinence.
Significant urodynamic improvement after treatment was shown on different parameters: volume at first involuntary bladder contraction (p = 0.0000001), maximum cystometric capacity (p = 0.0035), maximum detrusor pressure (p = 0.0000001).
46% of the patients were in the full success group.
31% of the patients had a partial improvement.
23% of the patients had no efficacy of the treatment.
Duration of MS was a predictive factor of treatment failure (p = 0.015).
Despite that a full success was obtained in 46% of the cases, BTX-A injection therapy failed to treat refractory NDO in 23% of patients suffering from MS.
Duration of the disease was a predictive factor for an inefficient treatment.
The injection therapy should be considered as soon as oral anti cholinergic drugs fail to reduce NDO.
PMID: 23385699
Sleep and comorbid neurologic disorders.
An understanding of the impact of sleep on neurologic disorders, and the impact of neurologic disorders on sleep, provides fresh opportunities for neurologists to improve the quality of life and functioning of their patients.
Sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) is a risk factor for cerebrovascular disease and should be considered in all TIA and stroke patients.
Sleep disorders can amplify nociception and worsen headache disorders; and some headaches, including those related to SDB and hypnic headache, are sleep specific.
REM sleep behavior disorder may be an early sign of neurodegenerative disease.
Focal lesions of almost any etiology (eg, multiple sclerosis and CNS malignancies) in the hypothalamus, basal forebrain, or brainstem may result in sleep disturbance, sleepiness, and insomnia.
Sleep-related hypoventilation and fatigue are common in neuromuscular disease.
SDB and epilepsy are mutually facilitatory, and poor sleep can exacerbate epilepsy.
Continued surveillance for sleep disorders by neurologists is rewarded by new treatment avenues in their patients with the possibility of improved clinical outcomes.
PMID: 22203815
Electrostatically Stabilized Magnetic Nanoparticles - An Optimized Protocol to Label Murine T Cells for in vivo MRI.
We present a novel highly efficient protocol to magnetically label T cells applying electrostatically stabilized very small superparamagnetic iron oxide particles (VSOP).
Our long-term aim is to use magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to investigate T cell dynamics in vivo during the course of neuroinflammatory disorders such as experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model of multiple sclerosis.
Encephalitogenic T cells were co-incubated with VSOP, or with protamine-complexed VSOP (VProt), respectively, at different conditions, optimizing concentrations and incubation times.
Labeling efficacy was determined by atomic absorption spectrometry as well as histologically, and evaluated on a 7 T MR system.
Furthermore, we investigated possible alterations of T cell physiology caused by the labeling procedure.
T cell co-incubation with VSOP resulted in an efficient cellular iron uptake.
T2 times of labeled cells dropped significantly, resulting in prominent hypointensity on T2*-weighted scans.
Optimal labeling efficacy was achieved by VProt (1 mM Fe/ml, 8 h incubation; T2 time shortening of ∼80% compared to untreated cells).
Although VSOP promoted T cell proliferation and altered the ratio of T cell subpopulations toward a CD4(+) phenotype, no effects on CD4 T cell proliferation or phenotypic stability were observed by labeling in vitro differentiated Th17 cells with VProt.
Yet, high concentrations of intracellular iron oxide might induce alterations in T cell function, which should be considered in cell tagging studies.
Moreover, we demonstrated that labeling of encephalitogenic T cells did not affect pathogenicity; labeled T cells were still capable of inducing EAE in susceptible recipient mice.
PMID: 23673145
Reactivity to AQP4 epitopes in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
Autoantibodies against the water channel AQP4, expressed predominately in central nervous system astrocytes, are markers and pathogenic factors in Devic's disease.
In this study we examined whether Multiple Sclerosis (MS) patients recognize antigenic epitopes on AQP4 that may define distinct disease subsets.
We screened sera from 45 patients with relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) and 13 patients with primary progressive MS (PMS).
23 Neuromyelitis Optica (NMO) patients previously characterized were used as assay positive/negative controls.
Sera from 23 patients with Systemic Lupus Erythematosus, 23 with primary Sjogren syndrome without neurological involvement and from 28 healthy individuals were also used as controls.
NMO-positive sera exhibited reactivity against the intracellular epitope AQPaa252-275, confirming previous observations.
All RRMS sera tested negative for anti-AQP4 antibodies using a cell-based assay, but surprisingly, 13% of them reacted with the epitope AQPaa252-275.
PMS, healthy and disease controls showed no specific reactivity.
Whether these antibodies define distinct MS subsets and have a pathogenic potential pointing to convergent pathogenetic mechanism with NMO, or are simply markers of astrocytic damage, remains to be determined.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22211513
Human platelet concentrates: a source of solvent/detergent-treated highly enriched brain-derived neurotrophic factor.
Human blood platelets (PLTs) contain brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), a neurotrophin that binds to neurotrophic tropomyosin-related kinase B (TrkB) receptor on central nervous system cells.
This binding promotes neural synaptic plasticity and memory and prevents neuronal degeneration.
Alterations in BDNF homeostasis are associated with aging and are found in several neurodegenerative conditions such as Alzheimer's, Huntington's, and Parkinson's diseases and multiple sclerosis.
We have developed PLT viral inactivation and chromatographic fractionation processes and decided here to identify fractions enriched in BDNF.
PLT concentrates (PCs) were treated by solvent/detergent (S/D), extracted by oil, and subjected to fractionation (C18, sulfopropyl [SP]-Sepharose, diethylaminoethyl [DEAE]-Sepharose, or activated charcoal).
BDNF and pro-BDNF were evaluated by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and Western blot.
TrkB was studied by Western blot.
Tri-n-butyl phosphate (TnBP) was quantified by high-performance liquid chromatography, and Triton X-45 by gas chromatography.
The mean BDNF content of 2.9 ± 0.7 ng/mL in PC was noted to increase to 56.2 ± 2.4 ng/mL after S/D treatment and remained stable during oil extraction.
Approximately 70% of the BDNF content was recovered after C18 chromatography.
BDNF did not bind to DEAE-Sepharose and was almost completely adsorbed by charcoal.
Chromatography on SP-Sepharose yielded a highly enriched 13-kDa mature BDNF fraction that was more than 170-fold purified, with a mean of 137 ± 29.4 ng/mL and 82% chromatographic recovery, devoid of detectable TnBP and Triton X-45.
Pro-BDNF and TrkB proteins were not detected in the PLT extracts.
We obtained a S/D-treated, highly enriched mature PLT-derived BDNF fraction that could help unveil the pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamic, and potential therapeutic applications of the BDNF neurotrophin.
© 2011 American Association of Blood Banks.
PMID: 22349416
Provision and financing of assistive technology devices in Germany: a bureaucratic odyssey? The case of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
The regulations for financing assistive technology devices (ATDs) are complex and fragmented and, thus, might influence adequate provision of these devices to people who need multiple ATDs.
This study aims to explore and analyze patients' problems with the provision and financing of ATDs for the following two rare diseases: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD).
A survey was conducted by means of semi-standardized questionnaires addressing the issues of coverage decisions for ATDs and problems with provision of ATDs.
Information was retrieved from ALS (n=19) and DMD (n=14) patients.
Conducted interviews were transcribed verbatim and analyzed using qualitative content analysis.
Respondents experienced difficulties with the provision and financing of ATDs.
They underlined problems such as long approval processes and a serious bureaucratic burden, which induced inadequate provision of ATDs.
Experiences of ALS and DMD respondents frequently were similar, especially regarding financing decisions and the process of decision making by sickness funds.
The results suggest that difficulties in receiving and financing ATDs are common problems among ALS and DMD patients.
There is a need for an interdisciplinary approach in the provision of ATDs and their financing, which should be coordinated by case managers.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22927730
Current options for the treatment of optic neuritis.
Optic neuritis can be defined as typical (associated with multiple sclerosis, improving independent of steroid treatment), or atypical (not associated with multiple sclerosis, steroid-dependent improvement).
Causes of atypical optic neuritis include connective tissue diseases (eg, lupus), vasculitis, sarcoidosis, or neuromyelitis optica.
In this manuscript, updated treatment options for both typical and atypical optic neuritis are reviewed.
Conventional treatments, such as corticosteroids, therapeutic plasma exchange, and intravenous immunoglobulin therapy are all discussed with commentary regarding evidence-based outcomes.
Less commonly used treatments and novel purported therapies for optic neuritis are also reviewed.
Special scenarios in the treatment of optic neuritis - pediatric optic neuritis, acute demyelinating encephalomyelitis, and optic neuritis occurring during pregnancy - are specifically examined.
PMID: 23287362
Pattern of demyelination occurring during anti-TNF-α therapy: a French national survey.
To determine the pattern of demyelinating disorders (DDs) occurring during anti-TNF-α therapy.
Between June 2005 and April 2008, 1800 French rheumatologists and internists were contacted to report cases of DDs occurring in patients treated with anti-TNF-α.
After a median of 10.2 (1.5-39.9) months of treatment, 33 patients developed DDs: 22 had CNS and 11 peripheral nervous system (PNS) involvement.
Underlying diseases were RA (n = 16), AS (n = 11), PsA (n = 4), JIA (n = 1) and PM (n = 1).
Anti-TNF-α was infliximab (n = 15), etanercept (n = 12) or adalimumab (n = 6).
CNS involvement was encephalic lesions (n = 16), transverse myelitis (n = 8) or retrobulbar optic neuritis (n = 5).
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis in 16 patients and MRI in 20 patients were abnormal.
All patients discontinued anti-TNF-α.
Fifteen patients required steroids.
Twenty patients initially improved.
Five patients developed multiple sclerosis.
PNS involvement was chronic (n = 9) or acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (n = 2).
CSF analysis revealed an increased protein level in nine patients.
Nerve conduction studies confirmed DD in all these patients.
Anti-TNF-α was discontinued in 10 patients and 8 received i.v.
immunoglobulins.
Two patients relapsed after introduction of another anti-TNF-α.
Overall, a causal relationship between anti-TNF-α and DD was considered as probable in 31 patients and definite in 2 who had positive rechallenge.
Causal relationship between anti-TNF-α and induction of DD remains unclear, but in some cases the chronology of clinical events is suggestive.
Nevertheless, DD might persist despite treatment discontinuation, suggesting that anti-TNF-α could trigger the demyelinating process, which further evolves independently.
PMID: 23390485
Inhibition of myelin-cleaving poteolytic activities by interferon-beta in rat astrocyte cultures. Comparative analysis between gelatinases and calpain-II.
Proteolytic enzymes have been implicated in the pathogenesis of Multiple Sclerosis (MS) for both their ability to degrade myelin proteins and for their presence in MS plaques.In this study we investigated whether interferon-beta (IFN-β) could differently modulate the activity and the expression of proteolytic activities against myelin basic protein (MBP) present in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated astrocytes.
Rat astrocyte cultures were activated with LPS and simultaneously treated with different doses of IFN-β.
To assess the presence of MBP-cleaving proteolytic activity, culture supernatants and cellular extracts collected from astrocytes were incubated with exogenous MBP.
A MBP-degrading activity was found in both lysates and supernatants from LPS-activated astrocytes and was dose-dependently inhibited by IFN-β.
The use of protease inhibitors as well as the zymographic analysis indicated the presence of calpain II (CANP-2) in cell lysates and gelatinases A (MMP-2) and B (MMP-9) in cell supernatants.
RT-PCR revealed that the expression of CANP-2 as well as of MMP-2 and MMP-9 was increased in LPS-activated astrocytes and was dose-dependently inhibited by IFN-β treatment.
The expression of calpastatin, the natural inhibitor of CANPs, was not affected by IFN-β treatment.
By contrast, decreased expression of TIMP-1 and TIMP-2, the natural inhibitors of MMP-9 and MMP-2, respectively, was observed in IFN-β-treated astrocytes compared to LPS-treated cells.
The ratio enzyme/inhibitor indicated that the effect of IFN-β treatment is more relevant to CANP-2 than on MMPs.
These results suggest that the neuroinflammatory damage during MS involves altered balance between multiple proteases and their inhibitors and indicate that IFN-β is effective in regulating different enzymatic systems involved in MS pathogenesis.
PMID: 23270679
[Hypersensitivity to radiation therapy in a patient with tuberous sclerosis: biological considerations about a clinical case].
A 61-year-old man, with a tuberous sclerosis, experienced severe acute reactions during a concomitant chemoradiotherapy regimen after 22Gy and one cycle of 5-fluorouracil-cisplatinum.
He was treated for a cervical squamous cell lymph node of unknown origin.
Grade 3 mucitis and epitheliitis were observed only in the irradiated fields and required the end of the radiotherapy.
Tuberous sclerosis is characterized by a loss of the TSC2 function, with a permanent activation of the mTOR pathway.
Logically, some kind of radioresistance should be observed.
Increased radiosensitivity is paradoxical.
This case illustrates how radiosensitivity is a complex phenomenon and clinically unpredictable.
Efficiency of the protocols associations of mTOR inhibitors and radiotherapy should be carefully scrutinized.
Copyright © 2012 Société française de radiothérapie oncologique (SFRO).
Published by Elsevier SAS.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23233142
[LACTRIMS consensus document for the pharmacological treatment of the multiple sclerosis and its clinical variants].
INTRODUCTION.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) it is not considered any more a rare disease in Latin America.
Most of the Latin American countries have reported moderate or lower prevalence data.
However only very few countries have developed therapeutic guidelines.
LACTRIMS prepared this consensus document with specific recommendations for the treatment of the disease.
DEVELOPMENT.
Experts on treatment and clinical research on MS were invited by LACTRIMS in order to generate a initial document to be discussed in Quito, Ecuador.
Several groups were organized in relation of the different clinical variants.
These groups were coordinated by experts leaders and prepared a preliminary document that was discussed in Quito during July 8th and 9th, 2011.
Finally the final version was submitted to the members and delegates of LACTRIMS in most of the Latin American countries who were able to make modifications and suggest changes to the final manuscript.
CONCLUSIONS.
Based on the different evidence levels and the AGREE criteria, the clinical variants were reviewed and recommendations were made for the use of drugs and different modifying disease therapeutic agents.
PMID: 23459383
Oral available agents in the treatment of relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis: an overview of merits and culprits.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic immunological disease of the central nervous system characterized by early inflammatory demyelination and subsequent neurodegeneration.
Major therapeutic progress has occurred during the past decade, in particular since the introduction of immunomodulatory agents, however, MS is still an incurable disease.
In addition, parenteral application of the currently licensed drugs is associated with injection-related adverse events (AEs) and low patient compliance.
Thus, there remains an unmet need for the development of more effective and well tolerated oral therapies for the treatment of MS.
A number of new orally administered agents including fingolimod, laquinimod, teriflunomide, cladribine, and BG-12 have been licensed recently or are currently under investigation in relapsing remitting MS patients.
In multi-center, randomized, placebo-controlled phase III clinical studies, all of these agents have already shown their efficacy on both clinical disease parameters and magnetic resonance imaging-based measures of disease activity in patients with relapsing remitting MS.
However, there are essential differences concerning their clinical efficacy and side-effect profiles.
Additionally, the mechanisms by which these substances exert clinical efficacy have not been fully elucidated.
In this article, we review the pharmaceutical properties of fingolimod, laquinimod, teriflunomide, cladribine, and BG-12; and their suggested mechanisms of action, clinical efficacy, and side-effect profiles.
PMID: 22764258
Increased PK11195 PET binding in the cortex of patients with MS correlates with disability.
Activated microglia are thought to play a major role in cortical gray matter (GM) demyelination in multiple sclerosis (MS).
Our objective was to evaluate microglial activation in cortical GM of patients with MS in vivo and to explore its relationship to measures of disability.
Using PET and optimized modeling and segmentation procedures, we investigated cortical (11)C-PK11195 (PK11195) binding in patients with relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS), patients with secondary progressive MS (SPMS), and healthy controls.
Disability was assessed with the Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) and Multiple Sclerosis Impact Scale (MSIS-29).
Patients with MS showed increased cortical GM PK11195 binding relative to controls, which was multifocal and highest in the postcentral, middle frontal, anterior orbital, fusiform, and parahippocampal gyri.
Patients with SPMS also showed additional increases in precentral, superior parietal, lingual and anterior superior, medial and inferior temporal gyri.
Total cortical GM PK11195 binding correlated with EDSS scores, with a stronger correlation for the subgroup of patients with SPMS.
In patients with SPMS, PK11195 binding also correlated with MSIS-29 scores.
No correlation with disability measures was seen for PK11195 binding in white matter.
Higher EDSS scores correlated with higher levels of GM PK11195 binding in the postcentral gyrus for patients with RRMS and in precentral gyrus for those with SPMS.
Microglial activation in cortical GM of patients with MS can be assessed in vivo.
The distribution is not uniform and shows a relationship to clinical disability.
We speculate that the increased PK11195 binding corresponds to enhanced microglial activation described in postmortem SPMS cortical GM.
PMID: 23467418
Methotrexate is an alternative to azathioprine in neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders with aquaporin-4 antibodies.
Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) is a severe autoimmune inflammatory disorder associated with considerable relapse-related disability.
Immunosuppression is the mainstay of treatment but many patients do not tolerate first-line immunosuppressive agents, or experience ongoing relapses.
To evaluate the effectiveness and tolerability of methotrexate in aquaporin-4 antibody seropositive NMO spectrum disorders.
Retrospective observational case series of 14 aquaporin-4 antibody positive NMO and NMO spectrum disorder patients treated with methotrexate at two specialist centres within the UK.
Annualised relapse rates, Expanded Disability Status Scale scores and tolerability were evaluated.
Median duration of treatment with methotrexate was 21.5 months (range 6-28 months) and only three patients were prescribed it first line.
Median annualised relapse rate significantly decreased following treatment (0.18 during methotrexate therapy vs 1.39 premethotrexate; p&lt;0.005).
On treatment, 43% patients were relapse free, although this increased to 64% when relapses occurring within the first 3 months of treatment or on subtherapeutic doses were excluded.
Disability stabilised or improved in 79%.
No patients stopped methotrexate due to adverse effects.
Methotrexate is a commonly prescribed drug in general practice and when used in NMO it reduces relapse frequency, stabilises disability and is well tolerated, even in patients who have failed one or more other treatments.
We would therefore recommend methotrexate as a treatment option in NMO patients who do not tolerate first-line therapy, experience ongoing relapses or in situations where financial constraints limit the available treatment options.
PMID: 22368774
Obstructive sleep apnea.
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) affects millions of Americans and is estimated to be as prevalent as asthma and diabetes.
Given the fact that obesity is a major risk factor for OSA, and given the current global rise in obesity, the prevalence of OSA will increase in the future.
Individuals with sleep apnea are often unaware of their sleep disorder.
It is usually first recognized as a problem by family members who witness the apneic episodes or is suspected by their primary care doctor because of the individual's risk factors and symptoms.
The vast majority remain undiagnosed and untreated, despite the fact that this serious disorder can have significant consequences.
Individuals with untreated OSA can stop breathing hundreds of times a night during their sleep.
These apneic events can lead to fragmented sleep that is of poor quality, as the brain arouses briefly in order for the body to resume breathing.
Untreated, sleep apnea can have dire health consequences and can increase the risk of hypertension, diabetes, heart disease, and heart failure.
OSA management has also become important in a number of comorbid neurological conditions, including epilepsy, stroke, multiple sclerosis, and headache.
Diagnosis typically involves use of screening questionnaires, physical exam, and an overnight polysomnography or a portable home study.
Treatment options include changes in lifestyle, positive airway pressure, surgery, and dental appliances.
PMID: 21924866
B cells undergo unique compartmentalized redistribution in multiple sclerosis.
Increasing evidence fosters the role of B cells (BC) in multiple sclerosis (MS).
The compartmentalized distribution of BC in blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is incompletely understood.
In this study, we analyzed BC-patterns and BC-immunoreactivity at these sites during active and during stable disease and the impact of disease modifying drugs (DMD) on peripheral BC-homeostasis.
For this purpose we assessed BC-subsets in blood and CSF from patients with clinically isolated syndrome (CIS), relapsing remitting MS (RRMS), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and healthy controls (HC) by flow cytometric detection of whole (W-BC), naïve, transitional (TN-BC), class-switched memory (CSM-BC), unswitched memory (USM-BC), double-negative memory (DNM-BC) BC-phenotypes, plasma blasts (PB), and plasma cells (PC).
FACS-data were correlated with BC-specific chemotactic activities in CSF, intrathecal CXCL13-levels, and immunoreactivity of peripheral W-BC.
Our study revealed that frequencies of systemic CSM-BC/USM-BC became contracted in active CIS/MS while proportions of naive BC, TN-BC and DNM-BC were reciprocally expanded.
Moreover, the shifted BC-composition promoted reduced immunoreactivity of W-BC and resolved during remission.
Cross-over changes in CSF included privileged accumulation of CSM-BC linked to intrathecal CXCL13-concentrations and expansion of PB/PC.
Treatment with interferon-beta and natalizumab evoked distinct though differing redistribution of circulating BC-subsets.
We conclude that symptomatic CIS and MS are accompanied by distinctive changes in peripheral and CSF BC-homeostasis.
The privileged reciprocal distribution between naïve versus CSM-phenotypes in both compartments together with the marked chemotactic driving force towards BC prompted by CSF supernatants renders it likely that CSF BC are mainly recruited from peripheral blood during active CIS/MS, whereas constantly low percentages of circulating PB/PC and their failure to respond to migratory stimuli favors intrathecal generation of antibody secreting cells.
Notably, BC-redistribution closely resembles alterations detectable in systemic autoimmunity associated with active RA and impacts BC-function Together with unique effects of DMDs on BC-homeostasis these findings underline the important role of BC in MS.
2011 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21973313
Nocebo in fibromyalgia: meta-analysis of placebo-controlled clinical trials and implications for practice.
Nocebo refers to adverse effects (AEs) generated by negative expectations that medical treatment will likely harm instead of heal and can be assessed in placebo-controlled randomized clinical trials (RCTs).
We examined AEs following placebo administration in RCTs for fibromyalgia (FM), a condition characterized by patients' poor medication adherence, which may affect outcome and/or increase healthcare costs.
  Following a systematic Medline search for RCTs for FM pharmacologic treatment published between 2001 and 2010, we assessed percentages of placebo-treated patients reporting at least one AE or discontinuing because of placebo intolerance and searched for factors influencing nocebo's extent.
Percentages were compared with those revealed by similar meta-analyses of RCTs for multiple sclerosis and primary headaches.
  Data were extracted from 16 RCTs fulfilling search criteria.
Of 2026 placebo-treated patients, 67.2% (95%CI: 51.0-81.5%) reported at least one AE, and 9.5% (95%CI: 8.3-10.9%) discontinued placebo treatment because of intolerance.
AEs in placebo arms corresponded quantitatively and qualitatively to those in active drug arms (ρ &gt; 0.88, P &lt; 0.0001).
Younger age and larger placebo arm size were associated with increased dropout rates.
Patients with depression were more likely to withdraw from trials.
Nocebo dropouts in FM trials were fourfold and twofold higher than in RCTs for multiple sclerosis treatment and migraine preventive treatment, respectively.
  Nocebo is remarkably prevalent in FM patients participating in RCTs.
Because nocebo contributes to drug intolerance and treatment failure in clinical practice, identification of predisposing factors and efforts to prevent nocebo by educating these patients appropriately may be important for FM outcome.
© 2011 The Author(s).
European Journal of Neurology © 2011 EFNS.
PMID: 23160238
TRPM4 cation channel mediates axonal and neuronal degeneration in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis and multiple sclerosis.
In multiple sclerosis, an inflammatory disease of the central nervous system (CNS), axonal and neuronal loss are major causes for irreversible neurological disability.
However, which molecules contribute to axonal and neuronal injury under inflammatory conditions remains largely unknown.
Here we show that the transient receptor potential melastatin 4 (TRPM4) cation channel is crucial in this process.
TRPM4 is expressed in mouse and human neuronal somata, but it is also expressed in axons in inflammatory CNS lesions in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) in mice and in human multiple sclerosis tissue.
Deficiency or pharmacological inhibition of TRPM4 using the antidiabetic drug glibenclamide resulted in reduced axonal and neuronal degeneration and attenuated clinical disease scores in EAE, but this occurred without altering EAE-relevant immune function.
Furthermore, Trpm4(-/-) mouse neurons were protected against inflammatory effector mechanisms such as excitotoxic stress and energy deficiency in vitro.
Electrophysiological recordings revealed TRPM4-dependent neuronal ion influx and oncotic cell swelling upon excitotoxic stimulation.
Therefore, interference with TRPM4 could translate into a new neuroprotective treatment strategy.
PMID: 22083799
Low serum vitamin D levels and recurrent inflammatory spinal cord disease.
Low 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels have been associated with a higher risk of developing multiple sclerosis and increased relapse rates in patients with multiple sclerosis.
As a sterol hormone involved in multiple immunologic pathways, vitamin D may play a role in preventing monophasic immune-mediated central nervous system attacks from developing into recurrent disease.
To investigate the association between low serum vitamin D levels and recurrent spinal cord disease.
We performed a retrospective analysis at Johns Hopkins Transverse Myelitis Center, Baltimore, Maryland, evaluating 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels in 77 patients with monophasic and recurrent inflammatory diseases of the spinal cord.
Levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D.
Vitamin D levels are significantly lower in patients who developed recurrent spinal cord disease, adjusting for season, age, sex, and race.
This study provides a basis for a prospective trial of measuring 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels in these patient populations and assessing the influence of vitamin D supplementation on the frequency of relapses in those with recurrent inflammatory spinal cord disease.
PMID: 22354742
Increased radial diffusivity in spinal cord lesions in neuromyelitis optica compared with multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) and neuromyelitis optica (NMO) both affect spinal cord with notable differences in pathology.
Determine the utility of diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) to differentiate the spinal cord lesions of NMO from MS within and outside T2 lesions.
Subjects greater than or equal to 12 months from a clinical episode of transverse myelitis underwent a novel transaxial cervical spinal cord DTI sequence.
Ten subjects with NMO, 10 with MS and 10 healthy controls were included.
Within T2 affected white matter regions, radial diffusivity was increased in both NMO and MS compared with healthy controls (p&lt;0.001, respectively), and to a greater extent in NMO than MS (p&lt;0.001).
Axial diffusivity was decreased in T2 lesions in both NMO and MS compared with controls (p&lt;0.001, p=0.001), but did not differ between the two diseases.
Radial diffusivity and fractional anisotropy within white matter regions upstream and downstream of T2 lesions were different from controls in each disease.
Higher radial diffusivity within spinal cord white matter tracts derived from diffusion tensor imaging were appreciated in NMO compared with MS, consistent with the known greater tissue destruction seen in NMO.
DTI also detected tissue alterations outside T2 lesions and may be a surrogate of anterograde and retrograde degeneration.
PMID: 22354741
Corticospinal output during muscular fatigue differs in multiple sclerosis patients compared to healthy controls.
In multiple sclerosis (MS), fatigue is a common and often disabling symptom.
It has multiple causes with central motor fatigue playing an important role.
The objective of this study was to analyse the central motor conduction changes in relation to muscle contraction force during muscle fatigue and recovery in MS patients compared to healthy controls.
A total of 23 MS patients with fatigue and 13 healthy subjects were assessed during 2 minutes of fatiguing exercise of the abductor digiti minimi muscle of the hand and the subsequent 7 minutes of recovery.
Central motor conduction was quantified by transcranial magnetic stimulation using the triple stimulation protocol and calculating a central conduction index (CCI).
Force declined to 36% of the pre-exercise level (SD 16%; p &lt; 0.01) in MS patients and to 44% (SD 9%, p &lt; 0.01) in healthy subjects (group differences, not statistically significant).
The decline of the CCI was significantly less marked in patients (-20%, SD 26%, p &lt; 0.05) than in healthy subjects (-57%, SD 15%, p &lt; 0.05; group differences, p &lt; 0.05).
The decline of force and CCI were not correlated in either group.
During a fatiguing exercise, the decline in central motor conduction is significantly less pronounced in MS patients than healthy subjects, although the reduction of force is similar.
PMID: 22354740
Estimating the prevalence and incidence of multiple sclerosis in the Lorraine region, France, by the capture-recapture method.
The objective of this study was to assess the prevalence and incidence of multiple sclerosis (MS) in the Lorraine region, in France.
Data from three sources - Regional Health Insurance System, medical records departments and the Lorraine registry of MS - and a capture-recapture method with log-linear models were used to estimate the prevalence and incidence of MS.
We identified 7193 records of reported MS corresponding to 4299 unique suspected cases of MS existing on 31 December 2008, in Lorraine.
On the basis of the 4001 validated cases, the observed crude prevalence of MS was 170.9 cases per 100,000 inhabitants (95% confidence interval [CI]: 165.7; 176.3), and the observed annual crude incidence of MS was 4.4 cases per 100,000 inhabitants (95% CI: 3.6; 5.4).
With the capture-recapture method, the estimated prevalence of MS was 4405.7 (95% CI: 4261.5; 4629.7), so an estimated 405 cases were not identified by the three sources.
The estimated prevalence was 188.2 cases per 100,000 inhabitants (95% CI: 182.7; 193.8), and the estimated annual incidence was 8.5 cases per 100,000 inhabitants (95% CI: 7.3; 9.7).
The capture-recapture method allowed us to estimate an additional 10.1% of unobserved prevalent cases and to anticipate 47.5% of unobserved incident cases.
PMID: 22873729
Early classification of multivariate temporal observations by extraction of interpretable shapelets.
Early classification of time series is beneficial for biomedical informatics problems such including, but not limited to, disease change detection.
Early classification can be of tremendous help by identifying the onset of a disease before it has time to fully take hold.
In addition, extracting patterns from the original time series helps domain experts to gain insights into the classification results.
This problem has been studied recently using time series segments called shapelets.
In this paper, we present a method, which we call Multivariate Shapelets Detection (MSD), that allows for early and patient-specific classification of multivariate time series.
The method extracts time series patterns, called multivariate shapelets, from all dimensions of the time series that distinctly manifest the target class locally.
The time series were classified by searching for the earliest closest patterns.
The proposed early classification method for multivariate time series has been evaluated on eight gene expression datasets from viral infection and drug response studies in humans.
In our experiments, the MSD method outperformed the baseline methods, achieving highly accurate classification by using as little as 40%-64% of the time series.
The obtained results provide evidence that using conventional classification methods on short time series is not as accurate as using the proposed methods specialized for early classification.
For the early classification task, we proposed a method called Multivariate Shapelets Detection (MSD), which extracts patterns from all dimensions of the time series.
We showed that the MSD method can classify the time series early by using as little as 40%-64% of the time series' length.
PMID: 22873728
Human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cell therapy on neuromyelitis optica.
Stem cell transplantation is a promising therapy for neuromyelitis optica (NMO).
Among stem cell varieties, human umbilical cord-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hUC-MSCs) possess many advantages, add a differential potential into neural cells, secrete a set of trophic factors and cytokines, regulate immunological function, and have therapeutic potential for neurological diseases.
In this study, hUC-MSCs transplantation was used to treat five NMO patients with follow-up for 18 months including evaluation of Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) levels, clinical course, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) characteristics, adverse events, and so on.
Among the five cases, four showed therapeutic improvement after hUC-MSCs treatment.
Both symptoms and signs improved and relapse frequencies were reduced.
MRI characteristics also showed decreased volume and severity of lesions, while few adverse events occurred.
The results suggest that hUC-MSCs transplantation appear safe and might be effective for NMO treatment in the near future.
In addition, according to flow cytometry assay (FACS) results, B cells of blood were inhibited while T cells increased after treatment, indicating an immune-related mechanism.
PMID: 22454397
Evaluating the role of the FUS/TLS-related gene EWSR1 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease affecting motor neurons.
Mutations in related RNA-binding proteins TDP-43, FUS/TLS and TAF15 have been connected to ALS.
These three proteins share several features, including the presence of a bioinformatics-predicted prion domain, aggregation-prone nature in vitro and in vivo and toxic effects when expressed in multiple model systems.
Given these commonalities, we hypothesized that a related protein, EWSR1 (Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1), might also exhibit similar properties and therefore could contribute to disease.
Here, we report an analysis of EWSR1 in multiple functional assays, including mutational screening in ALS patients and controls.
We identified three missense variants in EWSR1 in ALS patients, which were absent in a large number of healthy control individuals.
We show that disease-specific variants affect EWSR1 localization in motor neurons.
We also provide multiple independent lines of in vitro and in vivo evidence that EWSR1 has similar properties as TDP-43, FUS and TAF15, including aggregation-prone behavior in vitro and ability to confer neurodegeneration in Drosophila.
Postmortem analysis of sporadic ALS cases also revealed cytoplasmic mislocalization of EWSR1.
Together, our studies highlight a potential role for EWSR1 in ALS, provide a collection of functional assays to be used to assess roles of additional RNA-binding proteins in disease and support an emerging concept that a class of aggregation-prone RNA-binding proteins might contribute broadly to ALS and related neurodegenerative diseases.
PMID: 22113097
A test of the rambling and trembling hypothesis: multiple sclerosis and postural control.
The rambling-trembling analysis of postural control maintains that the center of pressure (COP) trajectory can be decomposed into deviations resulting from supraspinal (i.e., rambling; RM) and spinal processes (i.e., trembling; TM).
The purpose of this investigation was to test the rambling and trembling hypothesis by comparing persons with multiple sclerosis (MS) who had either elevated or normal spinal reflexes to healthy controls.
16 subjects with MS and 16 age and gender matched control subjects completed a postural control task.
The persons with MS were divided into groups with high (MShigh) or low (MSlow) H-reflex amplitude.
The MShigh group had an elevated ratio of TM to COP compared with healthy controls, but no differences in the ratio between RM and COP.
The findings are congruent with the assumptions of the rambling-trembling hypothesis.
Further work is needed to determine if RM and TM represent distinct spinal and supraspinal mechanisms to postural control.
PMID: 23669355
The Evi5 family in cellular physiology and pathology.
The Ecotropic viral integration site 5 (Evi5) and Evi5-like (Evi5L) belong to a small subfamily of the Tre-2/Bub2/Cdc16 (TBC) domain-containing proteins with enigmatically divergent roles as modulators of cell cycle progression, cytokinesis, and cellular membrane traffic.
First recognized as a potential oncogene and a cell cycle regulator, Evi5 acts as a GTPase Activating Protein (GAP) for Rab11 in cytokinesis.
On the other hand, its homologue Evi5L has Rab-GAP activity towards Rab10 as well as Rab23, and has been implicated in primary cilia formation.
Recent genetic susceptibility analysis points to Evi5 as an important factor in susceptibility to multiple sclerosis.
We discuss below the myriad of cellular functions exhibited by the Evi5 family members, and their associations with disease conditions.
Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.
Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21228025
Effect of disease-modifying drugs on cortical lesions and atrophy in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
To measure the effects of disease-modifying drugs (DMDs) on the development of cortical lesions (CL) and cortical atrophy in patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS).
RRMS patients (n = 165) were randomized to subcutaneous (sc) interferon (IFN) beta-1a (44 mcg three times weekly), intramuscular (im) IFN beta-1a (30 mcg weekly) or glatiramer acetate (GA; 20 mg daily).
The reference population comprised 50 untreated patients.
Clinical and MRI examinations were performed at baseline, 12 months and 24 months.
One hundred and forty-one treated patients completed the study.
After 12 months, 37/50 (74%) of untreated patients developed ≥ 1 new CL (mean 1.6), compared with 30/47 (64%) of im IFN beta-1a-treated patients (mean 1.2, p = 0.021), 24/48 (50%) of GA-treated patients (mean 0.8, p = 0.001) and 12/46 (26%) of sc IFN beta-1a-treated patients (mean 0.4, p &lt; 0.001).
After 24 months, ≥ 1 new CL was observed in 41/50 (82%) of untreated (mean 3.0), 34/47 (72%) of im IFN beta-1a-treated (mean 1.6, p &lt; 0.001), 30/48 (62%) of GA-treated (mean 1.3, p &lt; 0.001) and 24/46 (52%) of sc IFN beta-1a-treated patients (mean 0.8, p &lt; 0.001).
Mean grey matter fraction decrease in DMD-treated patients at 24 months ranged from 0.7 to 0.8 versus 1.0 in untreated patients (p = 0.023).
Disease-modifying drugs significantly decreased new CL development and cortical atrophy progression compared with untreated patients, with faster and more pronounced effects seen with sc IFN beta-1a than with im IFN beta-1a or GA.
PMID: 23516324
Cognitive impairment differs between primary progressive and relapsing-remitting MS.
To characterize the cognitive abilities of patients with primary progressive multiple sclerosis (PPMS) and relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) compared with healthy controls (HCs) matched for age, sex, and education level while considering the different characteristics of PPMS and RRMS and to compare the cognitive patterns of these types of multiple sclerosis.
Forty-one patients with PPMS, 60 patients with RRMS, and 415 HCs were recruited in a cross-sectional study.
Controls were divided into 20 groups according to age, sex, and education level.
Participants were assessed with a large battery of neuropsychological (NP) tests that included a modified version of the Brief Repeatable Battery, the Stroop test, computerized tests from the Test of Attentional Performance battery, the numerical span test, and the Rey Complex Figure.
Patients with PPMS performed worse than their matched HCs on nearly all NP tests.
Patients with RRMS performed worse than matched HCs on a computerized digit-symbol substitution task and the alertness test, reaction time for visual scanning, and Paced-Auditory Serial Addition Test-3 seconds.
Patients with PPMS had worse NP scores and were more impaired in cognitive domains than patients with RRMS.
After controlling for Expanded Disability Status Scale score, the results remained unchanged.
The patients with PPMS presented with a wide range of cognitive deficits in information processing speed, attention, working memory, executive function, and verbal episodic memory, whereas the impairments in patients with RRMS were limited to information processing speed and working memory compared with their matched HCs.
Cognitive deficits were more severe in patients with PPMS than in patients with RRMS.
PMID: 21975545
Quantitative and phenotypic analysis of bone marrow-derived cells in the intact and inflamed central nervous system.
Bone marrow has been proposed as a possible source of cells capable of replacing injured neural cells in diseases such as Multiple Sclerosis (MS).
Previous studies have reported conflicting results regarding the transformation of bone marrow cells into neural cells in vivo.
This study is a detailed analysis of the fate of bone marrow derived cells (BMDC) in the CNS of C57Bl/6 mice with and without experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis using flow cytometry to identify GFP-labeled BMDC that lacked the pan-hematopoietic marker, CD45 and co-expressed neural markers polysialic acid-neural cell adhesion molecule or A2B5.
A small number of BMDC displaying neural markers and lacking CD45 expression was identified within both the non-inflamed and inflamed CNS.
However, the majority of BMDC exhibited a hematopoietic phenotype.
PMID: 23516321
In vivo identification of morphologic retinal abnormalities in neuromyelitis optica.
To assess eyes with neuromyelitis optica (NMO) for morphologic retinal abnormalities utilizing high-definition optical coherence tomography (OCT) imaging.
In this cross-sectional study, 39 patients with NMO spectrum disorders and 39 age- and sex-matched healthy controls underwent spectral-domain OCT and visual function testing.
Microcystic macular edema (MME) of the inner nuclear layer (INL) was identified in 10 of 39 patients (26%) and was exclusively found in eyes with a history of optic neuritis (ON).
MME eyes had lower high- and low-contrast letter-acuity scores (100%: p = 0.002; 2.5%: p = 0.002; 1.25%: p = 0.004), lower peripapillary retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) thickness (p = 0.04), lower macular RNFL thickness (p = 0.004), lower ganglion cell layer + inner plexiform layer (GCIP) thickness (p = 0.007), higher INL thickness (p &lt; 0.001), and a greater number of ON episodes (p = 0.008) relative to non-MME eyes with a history of ON.
After adjusting for history of multiple ON episodes, these findings remained significant for macular-RNFL thickness (p = 0.03), INL thickness (p &lt; 0.001), and 100% and 2.5% contrast letter-acuity scores (p = 0.008 and p = 0.03, respectively).
NMO spectrum eyes without ON history had lower macular RNFL thickness (p = 0.003), GCIP thickness (p = 0.002), outer nuclear layer thickness (p = 0.02), and low-contrast letter-acuity scores (2.5%: p = 0.03; 1.25%: p = 0.002) compared to healthy controls.
We have identified a pattern of retinal morphologic abnormalities in NMO that is associated with severe retinal axonal and neuronal loss and corresponding visual disability.
MME may contribute to poor visual outcomes following NMO-associated ON or alternatively represent a marker of ON severity.
Additionally, our results support that subclinical involvement of the anterior visual pathway may occur in NMO spectrum disorders.
PMID: 21400258
Sacral neuromodulation in patients with multiple sclerosis.
We present a case series of patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) and neurogenic lower urinary tract dysfunction treated by sacral neuromodulation (SNM).
We reviewed charts of 25 patients who were treated for refractory lower urinary tract symptoms; during the SNM testing phase, patient management included evaluation of number of daily voiding, number of episodes of incontinence, residual urine and quality of life score.
Patients who experienced greater than 50% improvement in symptoms of frequency and incontinence episodes and/or a greater than 50% decrease in the number of catheterizations and a greater than 50% increase in voided volumes were offered placement of the permanent InterStim(TM) .
Fifteen patients were implanted with InterStim(TM); mean duration of MS was 13.66 years; mean follow-up of patients was 49.4 months.
Nine patients were on clean intermittent catheterization, and in all of them, a significant decrease in residual volume with increase in voided volume and number of voiding per day; in 6 patients, the main problem was incontinence, and in them incontinence, episodes decreased and voided volume increased.
Sixty-six per cent of patients have a functioning device after a mean follow-up of 61.2 months.
SNM is a good option in the treatment of voiding dysfunction in patients with MS in a medium to long-term follow-up.
Urinary retention due to detrusor underactivity is not a good indication for SNM; it should be offered to MS patients with refractory urgency urinary incontinence and MS patients with urinary retention due to detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia (DSD).
PMID: 22041093
Screening for the risk of job loss in multiple sclerosis (MS): development of an MS-specific Work Instability Scale (MS-WIS).
Multiple sclerosis (MS) mainly presents amongst those of working age.
Depending upon the type of MS, many people embark upon a long period of managing their day-to-day work-related needs in the face of intermittent and sometimes persistent disabling symptoms.
The objective of this study was to explore the concept of work instability (WI) following the onset of MS and develop a Work Instability Scale (WIS) specific to this population.
WI amongst those with MS in work was explored through qualitative interviews which were then used to generate items for a WIS.
Rasch analysis was used to refine the scaling properties of the MS-WIS, which was then validated against expert vocational assessment by occupational health physiotherapists and ergonomists.
The resulting measure is a 22-item, self-administered scale which can be scored in three bands indicating low, medium and high risk of WI (job retention) problems.
The scale meets modern psychometric requirements for measurement, indicated by adequate fit to the Rasch model with absence of local dependency and differential item functioning (DIF) by age, gender and hours worked.
The scale presents an opportunity in routine clinical practice to take positive action to reduce sickness absence and prevent job loss.
PMID: 23437995
Acceptance of pain in neurological disorders: associations with functioning and psychosocial well-being.
Chronic pain acceptance has been shown to be related to positive adjustment to chronic pain in patients presenting with pain as a primary problem.
However, the role of pain acceptance in adjustment to chronic pain secondary to a neurological disorder that is often associated with physical disability has not been determined.
The purpose of this study was to examine whether two domains of chronic pain acceptance--activity engagement and pain willingness--predict adjustment to pain, controlling for pain intensity and key demographic and clinical variables in individuals with muscular dystrophy (MD), multiple sclerosis (MS), post-polio syndrome (PPS), or spinal cord injury (SCI).
Participants were 508 community-dwelling adults with a diagnosis of MD, MS, PPS, or SCI who also endorsed a chronic pain problem.
Participants completed self-report measures of pain acceptance, quality of life, pain interference, pain intensity, depression, and social role satisfaction.
Hierarchical linear regressions indicated that activity engagement predicted lower pain interference and depression, and greater quality of life and social role satisfaction.
Pain willingness predicted less pain interference and depression.
Together, the two pain acceptance subscales accounted for more variance in outcomes than did self-reported pain intensity.
Findings correspond with the broader pain acceptance literature, although activity engagement appears to be a more robust predictor of adjustment than does pain willingness.
This research supports the need for future studies to determine the extent to which treatments that increase acceptance result in positive outcomes in persons with chronic pain secondary to neurological disorders.
PMID: 23139387
Alpha actinin is specifically recognized by Multiple Sclerosis autoantibodies isolated using an N-glucosylated peptide epitope.
Sophisticated approaches have recently led to the identification of novel autoantigens associated with Multiple Sclerosis (MuS), e.g.
neurofascin, contactin, CNPase, and other T-cell receptor membrane anchored proteins.
These putative antigens, although differing from the conventional myelin derivatives, are conceptually based on an animal model of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
In this report we describe the identification of putative antigens based on their recognition by autoantibodies isolated from MuS patient serum.
In a previous work from this laboratory we have shown that a peptide probe, named CSF114(Glc), specifically identifies serum autoantibodies in a subset of MuS patients, representing ∼30% of the patient population.
The autoantibodies, purified from MuS patients' sera (six), through CSF114(Glc) affinity chromatography, detected three immunoreactive protein bands present in the rat brain.
Proteomic analysis of the immunoreactive bands, involving MALDI and MS/MS techniques, revealed the presence of four proteins distinguishable by their mass: alpha fodrin, alpha actinin 1, creatine kinase, and CNPase.
The immunoreactive profile of these rat brain proteins was compared with that of commercially available standard proteins by challenging against either CSF114(Glc) purified MuS autoantibodies, or monoclonal antibodies.
Further discrimination among the rat brain proteins was provided by the following procedure: whereas monoclonal antibodies recognized all rat brain proteins, isolated MuS specific antibodies recognize only alpha actinin 1 as a putative antigen.
In fact, alpha actinin 1 displayed a robust immunoreactive response against all MuS patients' sera examined, whereas the other three bands were not consistently detectable.
Thus, alpha actinin 1, a cytoskeleton protein implicated in inflammatory/degenerative autoimmune diseases (lupus nephritis and autoimmune hepatitis) might be regarded as a novel MuS autoantigen, perhaps a prototypic biomarker for the inflammatory/degenerative process typical of the disease.
PMID: 22304712
Glutamate in CNS neurodegeneration and cognition and its regulation by GCPII inhibition.
Glutamate, first identified in 1866, is the primary excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain.
While it is critically important in many highly regulated cortical functions such as learning and memory, glutamate can be much like the magic the Sorcerer's Apprentice used in Goethe's poem: when conjured under unregulated conditions glutamate can get quickly out of control and lead to deleterious consequences.
Two broad types of glutamate receptors, the ionotropic and metabotropic, facilitate glutamatergic neurotransmission in the CNS and play key roles in regulating cognitive function.
Excessive activation of these receptors leads to excitotoxicity, especially in brain regions that are developmentally and regionally vulnerable to this kind of injury.
Dysregulation of glutamate signaling leads to neurodegeneration that plays a role in a number of neuropsychiatric diseases, prompting the development and utilization of novel strategies to balance the beneficial and deleterious potential of this important neurotransmitter.
Inhibition of the enzyme glutamate carboxypeptidase II (GCPII) is one method of manipulating glutamate neurotransmission.
Positive outcomes (decreased neuronal loss, improved cognition) have been demonstrated in preclinical models of ALS, stroke, and Multiple Sclerosis due to inhibition of GCPII, suggesting this method of glutamate regulation could serve as a therapeutic means for treating neurodegeneration and cognitive impairment.
PMID: 22050974
Spring-like Ankle Foot Orthoses reduce the energy cost of walking by taking over ankle work.
In patients with central neurological disorders, gait is often limited by a reduced ability to push off with the ankle.
To overcome this reduced ankle push-off, energy-storing, spring-like carbon-composite Ankle Foot Orthoses (AFO) can be prescribed.
It is expected that the energy returned by the AFO in late stance will support ankle push-off, and reduce the energy cost of walking.
In 10 patients with multiple sclerosis and stroke the energy cost of walking, 3D kinematics, joint power, and joint work were measured during gait, with and without the AFO.
The mechanical characteristics of the AFO were measured separately, and used to calculate the contribution of the AFO to the ankle kinetics.
We found a significant decrease of 9.8% in energy cost of walking when walking with the AFO.
With the AFO, the range of motion of the ankle was reduced by 12.3°, and the net work around the ankle was reduced by 29%.
The total net work in the affected leg remained unchanged.
The AFO accounted for 60% of the positive ankle work, which reduced the total amount of work performed by the leg by 11.1% when walking with the AFO.
The decrease in energy cost when walking with a spring-like energy-storing AFO in central neurological patients is not induced by an augmented net ankle push-off, but by the AFO partially taking over ankle work.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21383059
Social services homecare for people with motor neurone disease/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: why are such services used or refused?
Many patients with the terminal condition motor neurone disease/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (MND/ALS) do not access social service homecare, which may have implications for the location of end-of-life care.
We aimed to identify factors related to uptake of such care in MND/ALS.
A case note review of patients at a UK MND/ALS clinic (N = 97) provided data concerning disease onset and severity, demographic variables and care received.
Narrative interviews with people with MND/ALS (N = 24) and family carers (N = 18) explored their perspectives on social services homecare.
Quantitative analyses highlighted the role of increasing disease severity and age for social services homecare uptake.
However, qualitative findings revealed a number of barriers delaying the uptake of such care.
'Internal' issues focused on retaining control and normality within the home.
'External' issues arose from limited understanding of the disease amongst service providers and lack of awareness of service entitlement amongst patients and carers.
Multiple factors are implicated in the uptake of social services homecare.
Uncertainties surrounding service entitlement must be addressed, including the simplification of bureaucratic procedures and clarification of the roles of health and social care professionals.
Service providers need a greater awareness of the nature of the disease and their role in its management.
PMID: 22316314
Efficacy of vitamin D supplementation in multiple sclerosis (EVIDIMS Trial): study protocol for a randomized controlled trial.
Multiple sclerosis is the most common chronic inflammatory disease of the central nervous system in young adults.
Despite the fact that numerous lines of evidence link both the risk of disease development and the disease course to the serum level of 25-hydroxyvitamin D it still remains elusive whether multiple sclerosis patients benefit from boosting the serum level of 25-hydroxyvitamin D, mainly because interventional clinical trials that directly address the therapeutic effects of vitamin D in multiple sclerosis are sparse.
We here present the protocol of an interventional clinical phase II study to test the hypothesis, that high-dose vitamin D supplementation of multiple sclerosis patients is safe and superior to low-dose supplementation with respect to beneficial therapeutic effects.
The EVIDIMS trial is a German multi-center, stratified, randomized, controlled and double-blind clinical phase II pilot study.
Eighty patients with the diagnosis of definite multiple sclerosis or clinically isolated syndrome who are on a stable immunomodulatory treatment with interferon-β1b will be randomized to additionally receive either high-dose (average daily dose 10.200 IU) or low-dose (average daily dose 200 IU) cholecalciferol for a total period of 18 months.
The primary outcome measure is the number of new lesions detected on T2-weighted cranial MRI at 3 tesla.
Secondary endpoints include additional magnetic resonance imaging and optical coherence tomography parameters for neuroinflammation and -degeneration, clinical parameters for disease activity, as well as cognition, fatigue, depression, and quality of life.
Safety and tolerability of high-dose vitamin D supplementation are further outcome parameters.
In light of the discrepancy between existing epidemiological and preclinical data on the one hand and available clinical data on the other the EVIDIMS trial will substantially contribute to the evaluation of the efficacy of high-dose vitamin D supplementation in MS patients.
The study design presented here fulfills the criteria of a high-quality clinical phase II trial in MS.
ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01440062.
PMID: 23919214
Inflammatory bowel disease: An archetype disorder of outer environment sensor systems.
The pathogenesis of the two inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs) phenotypes ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn's disease (CD) has remained elusive, thus frustrating attempts at defining a cure.
IBD often presents as a complex inflammatory process wherein colon lesions (UC) or widespread ulceration and fissure (CD) might be accompanied by ancillary extra-intestinal manifestations involving the eye, skin, joints or liver, but also by full-blown autoimmune disorders from psoriasis and multiple sclerosis to rheumatoid arthritis; attempts at unraveling a link or a hierarchical order in these entities have proven almost fruitless.
More recently, the input of genetics has suggested that the IBDs might be multi-organ inflammatory processes, elicited by a large number of low-penetrance susceptibility genes, with environmental factors needed to induce full-blown disease.
At a noteworthy exception to this rule, the description of the nucleotide-oligomerization domain (NOD) gene mutations in CD came at the beginning of the 2000s: the NOD-LRR are part of a highly conserved microbial sensor system which respond to bacterial peptidoglycans by mounting an inflammatory response.
At least in Caucasian patients, the prevalently loss-of-function mutation of NOD permitted to unexpectedly define CD as an immune deficiency state, and upon its recent description in apparently unrelated disorders such as the Blau syndrome (a granulomatous pediatric syndrome), and perhaps in psoriasis and chronic obstructive pulmonary disorders, has contributed to revolutionize our view of IBD and CD in particular.
The latter affection, together with psoriasis and chronic pulmonary disease can now be included into a newly identified category named barrier organ disease, wherein a barrier organ is defined as a large mucosal or epithelial surface with an abundant metagenomic microbial population and an underneath reactive tissue, the whole structure being in contact with the outer environment and capable to react to it.
Personalized treatments and empowerment of research across different disease phenotypes should be the advantages of this novel mindset.
PMID: 23061472
Confronting patients about insufficient effort: the impact on subsequent symptom validity and memory performance.
Symptom validity tests (SVTs) are commonly used to assess effort in neuropsychological evaluations.
However, no empirical research or official guidelines exist about how clinicians should proceed if a patient produces a non-valid SVT result.
The purpose of this study was to examine whether confronting patients immediately after scoring in a non-valid range on a SVT would have an impact on subsequent symptom validity and memory tests performance.
Archival patient data for 507 adults with clinically definite multiple sclerosis (MS) (ages 18-76) were examined.
All patients completed the Victoria Symptom Validity Test (VSVT), the Wechsler Memory Scale, 3rd edition (WMS III), and the Beck Depression Inventory, 2nd edition (BDI II).
Although the majority (89%) of patients produced valid VSVT scores (the Valid group), 56 patients produced non-valid VSVT scores.
Due to a change in clinical procedure, 28 of the 56 were confronted regarding their non-valid VSVT performances and were asked to complete the test a second time (the CONF group), while the remaining 28 proceeded with testing as usual following a non-valid score (the N-CONF group).
Results showed that 68% of the CONF group produced valid VSVT scores on re-administration, as well as memory performances that were comparable to those of the Valid group.
In contrast the N-CONF group produced memory scores that were significantly below the Valid group.
This is the first study to provide empirical support for the effectiveness of intervention when patients exhibit inadequate effort on SVTs in clinical, non-forensic settings.
PMID: 23011861
[Treatment of spasticity in multiple sclerosis: new perspectives regarding the use of cannabinoids].
Spasticity remains a prevalent symptom in multiple sclerosis, with a significant associated disability and quality of life impairment.
A significant improvement in therapy aimed at reducing multiple sclerosis relapses and modifying its course has been achieved in recent years.
Both general and specific traditional treatments have, however, major limitations.
Thus, its use in real practice is lower than expected.
Cannabinoids provide a new way for therapy.
A delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol plus cannabidiol (1:1) association, administered through an oromucosal route, has been approved in several countries including Spain; it causes a specific effect on CB(1) and CB(2) receptors, with traditional psychotropic cannabis actions being minimized.
Randomized, placebo-controlled trials, as well as longer-term open-label extensions, have shown a clear-cut efficacy to reduce spasticity and their associated symptoms in those patients refractory to other therapies, with a good tolerability/safety profile.
No tolerance, abuse or addictive issues have been found.
New studies will be needed to find out potential new cannabinoid-related therapies.
PMID: 22204900
Sex differences and genomics in autoimmune diseases.
Autoimmune diseases (AIDs) are believed to be multifactorial diseases that commonly involve multiple organ systems.
About three fourth of the patients afflicted with AIDs are women suggesting that sex differences impact the incidence of AID.
However, the proportion of females to males suffering from AID varies depending on the disease.
The response to some AID therapeutics also differs in females versus males, suggesting that enrollment of adequate numbers of women and men is important in clinical trials for development of AID drugs.
It is known for a long time that genetic factors are important contributors to AID susceptibility.
Currently available information suggests that multiple genes with modest association to AID contribute to susceptibility to AID.
Also, the associations may differ for the various ethnicities.
The major histocompatibility (MHC) locus appears to be a major genetic factor that confers susceptibility to multiple AIDs, even though the locus is complex and has the highest density of genes in the human genome.
Thus, the association of different AIDs could be with different genes in the MHC locus.
Among the non-MHC genes, some of the risk alleles are shared between different AIDs, but may not be common to all AIDs.
For example, genetic polymorphisms in the Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase-22 (PTPN22) gene have reproducibly shown to have association with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), Graves' disease (GD), rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and multiple sclerosis (MS), but not with psoriasis.
Identification of factors responsible for risk for developing AID and the of the pathways underlying these diseases are likely to help understand subsets of disease, identify responders to a specific treatment and develop better therapeutics for AID.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
PMID: 23136726
[Fingolimod therapy in multiple sclerosis--the issue of the pathomechanism].
Multiple sclerosis is an autoimmune inflammatory disease of the central nervous system with neurodegenerative chararacteristics.
The newly discovered per os administrable drug fingolimod (FTY720) has a different mechanism of action than the current disease-modifying therapies.
In vivo the drug binds to four out of the five sphingosine-1-phosphate receptors after phosphorylation.
Fingolimod-phosphate (FTY720-P) causes internalization and degradation of the sphingosine-1-phosphate receptors in the membrane of lymphocytes thus in contrast to sphingosine-1-phosphate it acts like a functional antagonist.
In experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis--an animal model of multiple sclerosis--fingolimod blocks the sphingosine-1-phosphate gradient controlled lymphocyte egress from the lymph nodes and therefore reduces the peripheral lymphocyte count especially the encephalitogenic Th17 subset is reduced.
Modulation of the sinus lining and blood-brain-barrier constructing endothelial cells also contributes to the complex mechanism of action.
Additionally due to its liphohilic nature fingolimod is able to penetrate the blood brain barrier thus, beside its peripheral effects the drug can probably modulate the cells of the central nervous system directly.
Presumably it can reduce neurodegeneration caused by astrogliosis through modification of astrocyte and oligodendrocyte activity.
The results of current clinical studies show a bright perspective for both, the favourable therapeutic effects and the well-tolerated side effects.
PMID: 22739983
Cannabidiol protects oligodendrocyte progenitor cells from inflammation-induced apoptosis by attenuating endoplasmic reticulum stress.
Cannabidiol (CBD) is the most abundant cannabinoid in Cannabis sativa that has no psychoactive properties.
CBD has been approved to treat inflammation, pain and spasticity associated with multiple sclerosis (MS), of which demyelination and oligodendrocyte loss are hallmarks.
Thus, we investigated the protective effects of CBD against the damage to oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) mediated by the immune system.
Doses of 1 μM CBD protect OPCs from oxidative stress by decreasing the production of reactive oxygen species.
CBD also protects OPCs from apoptosis induced by LPS/IFNγ through the decrease of caspase 3 induction via mechanisms that do not involve CB1, CB2, TRPV1 or PPARγ receptors.
Tunicamycin-induced OPC death was attenuated by CBD, suggesting a role of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in the mode of action of CBD.
This protection against ER stress-induced apoptosis was associated with reduced phosphorylation of eiF2α, one of the initiators of the ER stress pathway.
Indeed, CBD diminished the phosphorylation of PKR and eiF2α induced by LPS/IFNγ.
The pro-survival effects of CBD in OPCs were accompanied by decreases in the expression of ER apoptotic effectors (CHOP, Bax and caspase 12), and increased expression of the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2.
These findings suggest that attenuation of the ER stress pathway is involved in the 'oligoprotective' effects of CBD during inflammation.
PMID: 22967202
Internet-based self-help treatment for depression in multiple sclerosis: study protocol of a randomized controlled trial.
Depression in MS patients is frequent but often not treated adequately.
An important underlying factor may be physical limitations that preclude face-to-face contact.
Internet-based treatment showed to be effective for depressive symptoms in general and could thus be a promising tool for treatment in MS.
Here, we present a study protocol to investigate the effectiveness of a 5 week Internet-based self-help problem solving treatment (PST) for depressive symptoms in MS patients in a randomized controlled trial.
We aim to include 166 MS patients with moderate to severe depressive symptoms who will be randomly assigned to an Internet-based intervention (with or without supportive text-messages) or waiting list control group.
The primary outcome is the change in depressive symptoms defined by a change in the sum score on the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II).
Secondary outcomes will include measures of anxiety, fatigue, cognitive functioning, physical and psychological impact of MS, quality of life, problem solving skills, social support, mastery, satisfaction and compliance rate.
Assessments will take place at baseline (T0), within a week after the intervention (T1), at four months (T2) and at ten months follow-up (T3: only the intervention group).
The control group will be measured at the same moments in time.
Analysis will be based on the intention-to-treat principle.
If shown to be effective, Internet-based PST will offer new possibilities to reach and treat MS patients with depressive symptoms and to improve the quality of care.
The Dutch Cochrane Center, NTR2772.
PMID: 22897375
Celiac disease and multiple sclerosis in the northwest of Iran.
To compare the frequency of celiac disease (CD) in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) and healthy controls using tissue transglutaminase IgA antibodies (anti-tTGA) as a screening tool.
CD and MS are immune-mediated diseases, and it has been hypothesized that the genetic similarities between these conditions can predispose individuals to suffer from both.
Data regarding this association are limited, particularly in Eastern countries.
One hundred clinically defined MS patients were randomly selected from Tabriz, northwest of Iran.
The control group consisted of 121 age- and gender-matched healthy individuals.
All subjects were screened with anti-tTGA.
Total IgA was obtained for investigation of IgA deficiency.
The mean age of MS patients (32 male and 68 female) was 33.06±8.79 years; the mean age of controls was 32.98±9.62 years.
The mean expanded disability scale score (EDSS) for MS patients was 3.86±1.91.
Approximately 78.5 % of MS patients suffered from a remitting relapsing type of MS.
All subjects (MS patients and controls) were negative for anti-tTGA.
IgA deficiency was demonstrated in 14 % of MS patients and 11 % of controls (p&gt;0.1).
No IgA-deficient subjects consented to undergo a duodenal mucosa biopsy.
The present study failed to demonstrate a positive relationship between MS and CD.
Therefore, we conclude that there is no basis for recommending the routine screening of MS sufferers for celiac disease (Ref. 23).
PMID: 23054589
Regional heterogeneity of cuprizone-induced demyelination: topographical aspects of the midline of the corpus callosum.
The cuprizone model is a suitable animal model of de- and remyelination secondary to toxin-induced oligodendrogliopathy.
From a pharmaceutical point of view, the cuprizone model is a valuable tool to study the potency of compounds which interfere with toxin-induced oligodendrocyte cell death or boost/inhibit remyelinating pathways and processes.
The aim of this study was to analyze the vulnerability of neighboring white mater tracts (i.e., the fornix and cingulum) next to the midline of the corpus callosum which is the region of interest of most studies using this model.
Male mice were fed cuprizone for various time periods.
Different white matter areas were analyzed for myelin (anti-PLP), microglia (anti-IBA1), and astrocyte (anti-GFAP) responses by means of immunohistochemistry.
Furthermore, Luxol fast blue-periodic acid Schiff stains were performed to validate loss of myelin-reactive fibers in the different regions.
Cuprizone induced profound demyelination of the midline of the corpus callosum and medial parts of the cingulum that was paralleled by a significant astrocyte and microglia response.
In contrast, lateral parts of the corpus callosum and the cingulum, as well as the fornix region which is just beneath the midline of the corpus callosum appeared to be resistant to cuprizone exposure.
Furthermore, resistant areas displayed reduced astrogliosis and microgliosis.
This study clearly demonstrates that neighboring white matter tracts display distinct vulnerability to toxin-induced demyelination.
This important finding has direct relevance for evaluation strategies in this frequently used animal model for multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 21878542
Modulating impact of human chorionic gonadotropin hormone on the maturation and function of hematopoietic cells.
hCG hormone is a naturally occurring, immune-modulating agent, which is highly expressed during pregnancy and causes improvements of some autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis and Crohn's disease.
Little is known about its immune-modulating effects.
This study in MNCs of women who received hCG as preconditioning prior to IVF demonstrates that hCG increases anti-inflammatory IL-27 expression and reduces inflammatory IL-17 expression.
In addition, we found increased IL-10 levels and elevated numbers of Tregs in peripheral blood of women after hCG application.
Rejection of allogeneic skin grafts was delayed in female mice receiving hCG.
We conclude that hCG may be useful for the induction of immune tolerance in solid organ transplantation.
PMID: 22090147
Hygiene hypothesis and autoimmune diseases.
Throughout the twentieth century, there were striking increases in the incidences of many chronic inflammatory disorders in the rich developed countries.
These included autoimmune disorders such as Type 1 diabetes and multiple sclerosis.
Although genetics and specific triggering mechanisms such as molecular mimicry and viruses are likely to be involved, the increases have been so rapid that any explanation that omits environmental change is incomplete.
This chapter suggests that a series of environmental factors, most of them microbial, have led to a decrease in the efficiency of our immunoregulatory mechanisms because we are in a state of evolved dependence on organisms with which we co-evolved (and that had to be tolerated) as inducers of immunoregulatory circuits.
These organisms (Old Friends) are depleted from the modern urban environment.
Rather than considering fetal programming by maternal microbial exposures, neonatal programming, the hygiene hypothesis, gut microbiota, and diet as separate and competing hypotheses, I attempt here to integrate these ideas under a single umbrella concept that can provide the missing immunoregulatory environmental factor that is needed to explain the recent increases in autoimmune disease.
PMID: 22095036
Independent replication of STAT3 association with multiple sclerosis risk in a large German case-control sample.
Recent genome-wide association studies have implicated the signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 gene (STAT3) as a putative new multiple sclerosis (MS) susceptibility locus.
However, independent validation studies are sparse.
Therefore, we performed a genetic association study of two STAT3 polymorphisms (rs744166 and rs2293152) in a large and independent German case-control sample of 5,904 subjects.
We observed a nominally significant, albeit weak association between rs744166 and MS susceptibility (odds ratio = 1.09, P = 0.012) in our sample.
This study supports the association between STAT3 and an increase in MS risk.
Taking into account the functional role of STAT3, our results favour an involvement of T(h)17 lymphocytes in MS.
PMID: 23838529
Central nervous system inflammatory demyelinating disorders among Hong Kong Chinese.
Classical multiple sclerosis (CMS) and neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders (NMOSD) are distinct central nervous system inflammatory demyelinating disorders (CNS IDD).
Early diagnosis of CNS IDD is important as appropriate immunotherapies to optimize prognosis.
We studied the diagnoses of CNS IDD among Hong Kong Chinese in a hospital-based setting.
Consecutive Chinese patients who presented to our hospital with clinically isolated syndrome and subsequently diagnosed to have CNS IDD from 1980 to 2010 were reviewed.
Patients with known diagnosis of CNS IDD referred for further care were excluded.
Serial sera were assayed for aquaporin-4 autoantibodies (AQP4 Ab), at least 3 assays within 2-5years.
A total of 210 patients diagnosed to have CNS IDD with disease duration of at least 2years were studied.
Among 198 patients with serial sera available, 40 (20.2%, 20 had NMO and 20 other NMOSD) were AQP4 Ab-positive.
Four patients who were AQP4 Ab-negative on the initial assay converted to AQP4 Ab-positive on repeated assays.
The diagnoses of 210 patients were CMS in 88 (41.9%), NMOSD 47 (22.4%, 27 NMO, 20 other NMOSD), single attack of myelitis 23 (11.0%), single attack of optic neuritis 21 (10.0%), relapsing myelitis 10 (4.8%), acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) 9 (4.3%), relapsing optic neuritis in 6 (2.9%), opticospinal multiple sclerosis 3 (1.4%) and single attack of brainstem encephalitis 3 (1.4%).
Compared to CMS, NMOSD patients had older onset age, lower frequencies of brain MRI abnormalities and CSF OCB, higher frequency of LETM, higher CNS inflammation attack frequency in the first 2years, worse clinical outcome with higher EDSS score and mortality rate.
This hospital-based study suggests that CMS (41.9%) and NMOSD (22.4%) are the most common CNS IDD among Hong Kong Chinese.
NMOSD has worse clinical outcome than CMS.
Detection of AQP4 Ab facilitates early diagnosis and prompts immunotherapies of NMOSD.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23510567
Downbeat nystagmus associated with damage to the medial longitudinal fasciculus of the pons: a vestibular balance control mechanism via the lower brainstem paramedian tract neurons.
The paramedian tract (PMT) neurons, a group of neurons associated with eye movement that project into the cerebellar flocculus, are present in or near the medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) in the paramedian region of the lower brainstem.
A 66-year-old man with multiple sclerosis in whom downbeat nystagmus appeared along with right MLF syndrome due to a unilateral pontomedullary lesion is described.
In light of these findings, a possible schema for the vestibular balance control mechanism circuit of the PMT neurons via the flocculus is presented.
Damage to the PMT neurons impaired the elective inhibitory control mechanism of the anterior semicircular canal neural pathway by the flocculus.
This resulted in the appearance of anterior semicircular canal-dominant vestibular imbalance and the formation of downbeat nystagmus.
From the pathogenesis of this vertical vestibular nystagmus, the action of the PMT neurons in the vestibular eye movement neuronal pathway to maintain vestibular balance was conjectured to be as follows.
PMT neurons transmit vestibular information from the anterior semicircular canals to the cerebellum, forming a cerebellum/brainstem feedback loop.
Vestibular information from that loop is integrated in the cerebellum, inhibiting only the anterior semicircular canal neuronal pathway via the flocculus and controlling vestibular balance.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22108867
The use of multiple sclerosis condition-specific measures to inform health policy decision-making: mapping from the MSWS-12 to the EQ-5D.
Walking impairment has a major influence on the quality of life of people with multiple sclerosis (MS).
The Multiple Sclerosis Walking Scale (MSWS-12) assesses the impact of MS on walking ability from the patient's perspective, but in its current form, is not amenable for use in many policy decision-making settings.
Statistical 'mapping' methods were used to convert MSWS-12 scores to EQ-5D health state values.
The relationship between the measures was estimated using cohort data from people with MS in South West England.
Regression analyses were conducted, estimation errors assessed, and predictive performance of the best models tested using longitudinal data.
Model performance was in line with that of other mapping studies, with the best-performing models being an ordinary least squares (OLS) model using MSWS-12 item scores, and an OLS model using the total MSWS-12 score and its squared term.
A process has been described whereby data from a patient-reported outcome measure (MSWS-12) can be converted to (EQ-5D) health state values.
These values may be used to consider the health-related quality of life of people with MS, to estimate quality adjusted life-years for use in effectiveness and cost-effectiveness analyses, and to inform health policy decisions.
PMID: 21964417
A novel aza-anthrapyrazole blocks the progression of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis after the priming of autoimmunity.
Mitoxantrone is one of the few FDA-approved drugs available to treat rapidly progressing forms of multiple sclerosis; however, its utilization is compromised by a cardiotoxic potential and the risk of mitoxantrone-induced leukemia.
BBR3378, a novel aza-anthrapyrazole, is structurally similar to mitoxantrone, but lacks the ring hydroxyls that may contribute to cardiotoxicity.
Here, we investigated the therapeutic activity of BBR3378 in a C57BL/6 mouse model of multiple sclerosis.
Mice given BBR3378, before or after the priming and expansion of MOG-specific responses, were protected from ascending paralysis.
Strikingly, two doses of BBR3378 given a week after EAE induction were sufficient to provide significant protection from clinical symptoms and reduce MOG-specific proinflammatory T cell cytokine production, and serum IgG responses.
Furthermore, while mitoxantrone is associated with persistent lymphopenia and cardiotoxicity, no such outcomes were detected in BBR3378-treated mice.
Our findings show that BBR3378 can ameliorate encephalitogenic mechanisms in EAE and antagonize underlying autoimmune mechanisms.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23677190
[Neuropsychological assessment of patients with relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis prior to the use of immunomodulatory drugs].
The detection of cognitive changes (CC) and psychiatric disorders in relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis (MS-RR) contributes to patient clinical monitoring.
To assess the frequency and characteristics of CC and psychiatric disorders in Chilean patients with MS-RR, before starting immunomodulatory treatment.
Retrospective review of data that was obtained following a standard assessment protocol.
It consisted in the application of the Expanded Disability Status Scale of Kurtzke (EDSS), Multiple Sclerosis Functional Composite (MSFC), fatigue intensity scale of Krupp, brief repeatable battery of neuropsychological Rao (BRN-R) and Hamilton's depression and anxiety questionnaires.
We evaluated 129 patients aged between 12 and 60 years of age (69% women).
Ninety four percent of patients had eight or more years of schooling.
The average EDSS score was 2.83.
CC were detected in 62% of participants, in at least one subtest of the BRN-R.
The main changes were verbal memory and speed in the processing information.
The frequency of cognitive impairment (CI), defined as at least two BRN-R subtests altered, was 36%.
The figures decreased to 17% when significant major depression or associated fatigue were excluded.
Depressive symptoms were observed in 58% and anxiety in 76.7%.
The results are consistent with those described in the literature.
The type of instruments used in the investigation of CC and the definition of CI in MS should be standardized.
PMID: 23071757
Occupational attainment as a marker of cognitive reserve in multiple sclerosis.
Cognitive dysfunction affects half of MS patients.
Although brain atrophy generally yields the most robust MRI correlations with cognition, significant variance in cognition between individual MS patients remains unexplained.
Recently, markers of cognitive reserve such as premorbid intelligence have emerged as important predictors of neuropsychological performance in MS.
In the present study, we aimed to extend the cognitive reserve construct by examining the potential contribution of occupational attainment to cognitive decline in MS patients.
Brain atrophy, estimated premorbid IQ, and occupational attainment were assessed in 72 MS patients.
The Minimal Assessment of Cognitive Functioning in MS was used to evaluate indices of information processing speed, memory, and executive function.
Results showed that occupational attainment was a significant predictor of information processing speed, memory, and executive function in hierarchical linear regressions after accounting for brain atrophy and premorbid IQ.
These data suggest that MS patients with low occupational attainment fare worse cognitively than those with high occupational attainment after controlling for brain atrophy and premorbid IQ.
Occupation, like premorbid IQ, therefore may make an independent contribution to cognitive outcome in MS.
Information regarding an individual's occupation is easily acquired and may serve as a useful proxy for cognitive reserve in clinical settings.
PMID: 22029656
Chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency in multiple sclerosis: clinical correlates from a multicentre study.
Chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency (CCSVI) has recently been reported to be associated with multiple sclerosis (MS).
However, its actual prevalence, possible association with specific MS phenotypes, and potential pathophysiological role are debated.
We analysed the clinical data of 710 MS patients attending six centres (five Italian and one Canadian).
All were submitted to venous Doppler sonography and diagnosed as having or not having CCSVI according to the criteria of Zamboni et al.
Overall, CCSVI was diagnosed in 86% of the patients, but the frequency varied greatly between the centres.
Even greater differences were found when considering singly the five diagnostic criteria proposed by Zamboni et al.
Despite these differences, significant associations with clinical data were found, the most striking being age at disease onset (about five years greater in CCSVI-positive patients) and clinical severity (mean EDSS score about one point higher in CCSVI-positive patients).
Patients with progressive MS were more likely to have CCSVI than those with relapsing-remitting MS.
The methods for diagnosing CCSVI need to be refined, as the between-centre differences, particularly in single criteria, were excessively high.
Despite these discrepancies, the strong associations between CCSVI and MS phenotype suggest that the presence of CCSVI may favour a later development of MS in patients with a lower susceptibility to autoimmune diseases and may increase its severity.
PMID: 22171138
Neurogenic bowel dysfunction in patients with spinal cord injury, myelomeningocele, multiple sclerosis and Parkinson's disease.
Exciting new features have been described concerning neurogenic bowel dysfunction, including interactions between the central nervous system, the enteric nervous system, axonal injury, neuronal loss, neurotransmission of noxious and non-noxious stimuli, and the fields of gastroenterology and neurology.
Patients with spinal cord injury, myelomeningocele, multiple sclerosis and Parkinson's disease present with serious upper and lower bowel dysfunctions characterized by constipation, incontinence, gastrointestinal motor dysfunction and altered visceral sensitivity.
Spinal cord injury is associated with severe autonomic dysfunction, and bowel dysfunction is a major physical and psychological burden for these patients.
An adult myelomeningocele patient commonly has multiple problems reflecting the multisystemic nature of the disease.
Multiple sclerosis is a neurodegenerative disorder in which axonal injury, neuronal loss, and atrophy of the central nervous system can lead to permanent neurological damage and clinical disability.
Parkinson's disease is a multisystem disorder involving dopaminergic, noradrenergic, serotoninergic and cholinergic systems, characterized by motor and non-motor symptoms.
Parkinson's disease affects several neuronal structures outside the substantia nigra, among which is the enteric nervous system.
Recent reports have shown that the lesions in the enteric nervous system occur in very early stages of the disease, even before the involvement of the central nervous system.
This has led to the postulation that the enteric nervous system could be critical in the pathophysiology of Parkinson's disease, as it could represent the point of entry for a putative environmental factor to initiate the pathological process.
This review covers the data related to the etiology, epidemiology, clinical expression, pathophysiology, genetic aspects, gastrointestinal motor dysfunction, visceral sensitivity, management, prevention and prognosis of neurogenic bowel dysfunction patients with these neurological diseases.
Embryological, morphological and experimental studies on animal models and humans are also taken into account.
PMID: 22219359
C3-dependent mechanism of microglial priming relevant to multiple sclerosis.
Microglial priming predisposes the brain to neurodegeneration and affects disease progression.
The signal to switch from the quiescent to the primed state is unknown.
We show that deleting the C3 convertase regulator complement receptor 1-related protein y (Crry) induces microglial priming.
Mice that were double-knockout for Crry and either C3 or factor B did not show priming, demonstrating dependence on alternative pathway activation.
Colocalization of C3b/iC3b and CR3 implicated the CR3/iC3b interaction in priming.
Systemic lipopolysaccharide challenge overactivated primed microglia with florid expression of proinflammatory molecules, which were blocked by complement inhibition.
Relevance for neurodegenerative disease is exemplified by human multiple sclerosis (MS) and by experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), a model of MS.
In human MS, microglial priming was evident in perilesional white matter, in close proximity to C3b/iC3b deposits.
EAE was accelerated and exacerbated in Crry-deficient mice, and was dependent on C activation.
In summary, C3-dependent microglial priming confers susceptibility to other challenges.
Our observations are relevant to progression in MS and other neurological diseases exacerbated by acute insults.
PMID: 23262373
Analyses of haptoglobin level in the cerebrospinal fluid and serum of patients with neuromyelitis optica and multiple sclerosis.
Neuromyelitis optica (NMO), which was previously considered a variant of multiple sclerosis (MS), is characterized by recurrent optic neuritis and longitudinally extensive spinal cord lesions.
It has been shown that the level of haptoglobin in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is elevated in NMO.
However, it is uncertain whether this change is specific to NMO, or is also seen in MS and other neurological diseases.
We used an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to measure the haptoglobin levels in the CSF and serum in 25 NMO, 16 MS, and 15 Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients and 22 controls.
The CSF haptoglobin concentration of the NMO patients (0.309±0.074mg/dl, P&lt;0.001) was significantly higher than that of MS patients (0.081±0.016mg/dl) and AD patients (0.058±0.011mg/dl), and the controls (0.060±0.009mg/dl), whereas the serum haptoglobin and albumin concentrations in the serum and CSF did not differ significantly across groups.
NMO patients (0.59±0.15, P=0.001) demonstrated a higher haptoglobin index than MS patients (0.13±0.01), AD patients (0.12±0.03), and the controls (0.17±0.04).
Furthermore, the haptoglobin concentration and haptoglobin index in the CSF correlated significantly with the expanded disability scale score (EDSS) in NMO patients.
The high CSF haptoglobin concentration in NMO may be explained by increased intrathecal haptoglobin synthesis.
The correlation between CSF haptoglobin concentration/haptoglobin index and EDSS highlights the potential of haptoglobin as a biomarker of NMO.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22140475
'Multi-epitope-targeted' immune-specific therapy for a multiple sclerosis-like disease via engineered multi-epitope protein is superior to peptides.
Antigen-induced peripheral tolerance is potentially one of the most efficient and specific therapeutic approaches for autoimmune diseases.
Although highly effective in animal models, antigen-based strategies have not yet been translated into practicable human therapy, and several clinical trials using a single antigen or peptidic-epitope in multiple sclerosis (MS) yielded disappointing results.
In these clinical trials, however, the apparent complexity and dynamics of the pathogenic autoimmunity associated with MS, which result from the multiplicity of potential target antigens and epitope spread, have not been sufficiently considered.
Thus, targeting pathogenic T-cells reactive against a single antigen/epitope is unlikely to be sufficient; to be effective, immunospecific therapy to MS should logically neutralize concomitantly T-cells reactive against as many major target antigens/epitopes as possible.
We investigated such multi-epitope-targeting approach in murine experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) associated with a single (classical) or multiple (complex) anti-myelin autoreactivities, using cocktail of different encephalitogenic peptides vis-a-vis artificial multi-epitope-protein (designated Y-MSPc) encompassing rationally selected MS-relevant epitopes of five major myelin antigens, as multi-epitope-targeting agents.
Y-MSPc was superior to peptide(s) in concomitantly downregulating pathogenic T-cells reactive against multiple myelin antigens/epitopes, via inducing more effective, longer lasting peripheral regulatory mechanisms (cytokine shift, anergy, and Foxp3+ CTLA4+ regulatory T-cells).
Y-MSPc was also consistently more effective than the disease-inducing single peptide or peptide cocktail, not only in suppressing the development of classical or complex EAE or ameliorating ongoing disease, but most importantly, in reversing chronic EAE.
Overall, our data emphasize that a multi-epitope-targeting strategy is required for effective immune-specific therapy of organ-specific autoimmune diseases associated with complex and dynamic pathogenic autoimmunity, such as MS; our data further demonstrate that the multi-epitope-targeting approach to therapy is optimized through specifically designed multi-epitope-proteins, rather than myelin peptide cocktails, as multi-epitope-targeting agents.
Such artificial multi-epitope proteins can be tailored to other organ-specific autoimmune diseases.
PMID: 21615590
Aberrant upregulation of astroglial ceramide potentiates oligodendrocyte injury.
Oligodendroglial injury is a pathological hallmark of many human white matter diseases, including multiple sclerosis (MS) and periventricular leukomalacia (PVL).
Critical regulatory mechanisms of oligodendroglia destruction, however, remain incompletely understood.
Ceramide, a bioactive sphingolipid pivotal to sphingolipid metabolism pathways, regulates cell death in response to diverse stimuli and has been implicated in neurodegenerative disorders.
We report here that ceramide accumulates in reactive astrocytes in active lesions of MS and PVL, as well as in animal models of demyelination.
Serine palmitoyltransferase, the rate-limiting enzyme for ceramide de novo biosynthesis, was consistently upregulated in reactive astrocytes in the cuprizone mouse model of demyelination.
Mass spectrometry confirmed the upregulation of specific ceramides during demyelination, and revealed a concomitant increase of sphingosine and a suppression of sphingosine-1-phosphate, a potent signaling molecule with key roles in cell survival and mitogenesis.
Importantly, this altered sphingolipid metabolism during demyelination was restored upon active remyelination.
In culture, ceramide acted synergistically with tumor necrosis factor, leading to apoptotic death of oligodendroglia in an astrocyte-dependent manner.
Taken together, our findings implicate that disturbed sphingolipid pathways in reactive astrocytes may indirectly contribute to oligodendroglial injury in cerebral white matter disorders.
© 2011 The Authors; Brain Pathology © 2011 International Society of Neuropathology.
PMID: 22379365
Improving patient-physician dialog: commentary on the results of the MS Choices survey.
Achieving good long- and short-term adherence to treatment for chronic diseases is important if patients are to gain the full benefits of treatment.
Several barriers to adherence in multiple sclerosis (MS) have been identified and the healthcare team should work with patients to help them to overcome these obstacles.
The MS Choices survey explored patient and physician perspectives on key aspects of MS diagnosis, treatment adherence, and disease management with the aim of improving understanding of the factors that influence patient behavior regarding treatment adherence.
The survey found some important differences between patient and physician responses and here these findings are discussed in the context of personal clinical experience.
Further, the possible implications of these findings for routine practice have been considered, and strategies that should be employed by MS physicians and nurses to help patients to adhere to their prescribed treatment are suggested.
PMID: 23001217
Blood-brain barrier alterations in the cerebral cortex in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
The pathophysiology of cerebral cortical lesions in multiple sclerosis (MS) is not understood.
We investigated cerebral cortex microvessels during immune-mediated demyelination in the MS model chronic murine experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) by immunolocalization of the endothelial cell tight junction (TJ) integral proteins claudin-5 and occludin, a structural protein of caveolae, caveolin-1, and the blood-brain barrier-specific endothelial transporter, Glut 1.
In EAE-affected mice, there were areas of extensive subpial demyelination and well-demarcated lesions that extended to deeper cortical layers.
Activation of microglia and absence of perivascular inflammatory infiltrates were common in these areas.
Microvascular endothelial cells showed increased expression of caveolin-1 and a coincident loss of both claudin-5 and occludin normal junctional staining patterns.
At a very early disease stage, claudin-5 molecules tended to cluster and form vacuoles that were also Glut 1 positive; the initially preserved occludin pattern became diffusely cytoplasmic at more advanced stages.
Possible internalization of claudin-5 on TJ dismantling was suggested by its coexpression with the autophagosomal marker MAP1LC3A.
Loss of TJ integrity was confirmed by fluorescein isothiocyanate-dextran experiments that showed leakage of the tracer into the perivascular neuropil.
These observations indicate that, in the cerebral cortex of EAE-affected mice, there is a microvascular disease that differentially targets claudin-5 and occludin during ongoing demyelination despite only minimal inflammation.
PMID: 21163708
DNA-based vaccines for multiple sclerosis: current status and future directions.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory disease of the central nervous system that mainly affects young adults between 20 and 40 years of age and leads to significant disability.
Although MS is considered to be an immune-mediated disorder, current immunosuppressive therapies fail to inhibit disease progression, and some of them are associated with serious adverse reactions.
DNA vaccination is a strategy of immunization based on the injection of genes encoding for target proteins.
Depending on the route as well as the dosage of administration, exposure to certain molecules may either stimulate effector responses or induce immune tolerance.
A large body of data from the animal model, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), has demonstrated efficacy of DNA vaccination at inhibiting the disease through the induction of basic tolerizing mechanisms such as anergy, clonal deletion, immune deviation, or induction of regulatory cells.
Interestingly, recent phase I and II clinical trials in MS with DNA vaccines have shown positive results in reducing MRI-measured disease activity in patients with relapse-onset MS, and inducing antigen-specific tolerance to myelin-specific B and T cells.
Thus, DNA vaccines represent a promising therapeutic approach for MS which also seem to overcome the safety concerns raised by other currently tested therapeutic strategies.
Here, we will review existing data from MS and EAE studies on DNA vaccination and discuss on further optimization of the DNA technology in order to improve treatment efficacy.
Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21556863
Fractional anisotropy and mean diffusivity in the corpus callosum of patients with multiple sclerosis: the effect of physiotherapy.
Modulation of neurodegeneration by physical activity is an active topic in contemporary research.
The purpose of this study was to investigate changes in the brain's microstructure in multiple sclerosis (MS) after facilitation physiotherapy.
Eleven patients with MS were examined using motor and neuropsychological testing and multimodal MRI at the beginning of the study, with second baseline measurement after 1 month without any therapy, and after a 2-month period of facilitation physiotherapy.
Eleven healthy controls were examined at the beginning of the study and after 1 month.
Fractional anisotropy (FA), mean diffusivity (MD), axial diffusivity (λ (ax)), and radial diffusivity (λ (rad)) were calculated for the whole corpus callosum (CC) in the midsagittal slice of T1W 3D MPRAGE spatially normalized images.
Data were analyzed using linear mixed-effect models, paired, and two-sample tests.
At the baseline, patients with MS showed significantly lower values in FA (p &lt; 0.001), and significantly higher values in MD (p &lt; 0.001), λ (ax) (p = 0.003), and λ (rad) (p &lt; 0.001) compared to control subjects.
The FA, MD, λ (ax), and λ (rad) did not change between the first and second baseline examinations in either group.
Differences 2 months after initiating facilitation physiotherapy were in FA, MD, and in λ (rad) significantly higher than differences in healthy controls (p &lt; 0.001 for FA, p = 0.02 for MD, and p = 0.002 for λ (rad)).
In MS patients, FA in the CC significantly increased (p &lt; 0.001), MD and λ (rad) significantly decreased (p = 0.014 and p = 0.002), and thus approached the values in healthy controls.
The results of the study show that facilitation physiotherapy influences brain microstructure measured by DTI.
PMID: 21556869
Head tremor secondary to MS resolved with rituximab.
We describe the case of a 33-year-old woman who presented with a 2-month history of worsening head tremor.
The medical evaluation led to the new diagnosis of MS and the MRI of brain demonstrated prominently active disease.
Intravenous rituximab was started according to the HERMES trial, and significant improvement was noted.
She has received additional rituximab dosing approximately every 6 months, and at the 2-year follow-up the tremor has not recurred.
The resolution of head tremor likely resulted from the complete suppression of MS disease activity, which must have allowed restoration of normal neural circuitry.
In agreement with a growing body of evidence that supports early control of MS disease activity to prevent accumulation of fixed disability, this case advocates for aggressive immunological therapy at the onset of tremor in MS patients.
PMID: 22171574
Design, methodological issues and participation in a multiple sclerosis case-control study.
This study was conducted to determine whether the risk of developing multiple sclerosis (MS) was associated with certain environmental exposures or genetic factors previously reported to influence MS risk.
This paper describes the methodological issues, study design and characteristics of the study population.
Individuals with definite MS were identified from a prevalence study conducted in three geographic areas.
The target number of cases was not reached, so an additional study area was added.
Identifying clinic controls was inefficient, so controls were recruited using random digit dialing.
All study participants completed a detailed questionnaire regarding environmental exposures using computer-assisted telephone interviewing, and blood was collected for genetic analysis.
In total, 276 cases and 590 controls participated, but participation rates were low, ranging from 28.4% to 38.9%.
Only one-third (33.6%) of individuals identified in the prevalence study agreed to participate in the case-control study.
Cases were more likely to be non-Hispanic white and older than their source populations as identified in the preceding prevalence study (P &lt; 0.05).
Most participants provided a blood sample for genotyping (91%; n = 789).
Epidemiological studies play a key role in identifying genetic and environmental factors that are associated with complex diseases like MS.
Methodological issues arise in every study, and investigators need to be able to detect, respond to and correct problems in a timely and scientifically valid manner.
© 2011 John Wiley &amp; Sons A/S.
PMID: 22119771
Short-term stability of T1 and T2 relaxation measures in multiple sclerosis normal appearing white matter.
The presence of diffuse and widespread abnormalities within the 'normal appearing' white matter (NAWM) of multiple sclerosis (MS) brain has been established.
T(1) histogram analysis has revealed increased T(1) (related to water content) in segmented NAWM, while quantitative assessment of T(2) relaxation measures has demonstrated decreased myelin water fraction (MWF, related to myelin content) and increased geometric mean T(2) (GMT(2)) of the intra/extracellular water pool.
Previous studies with follow-up periods of 1-5 years have demonstrated longitudinal changes in T(1) histogram metrics over time; however, longitudinal changes in MWF and GMT(2) of segmented NAWM have not been examined.
We examined the short-term evolution of MWF, GMT(2) and T(1) in MS NAWM based on monthly scanning over 6 months in 18 relapsing remitting (RR) MS subjects.
Histogram metrics demonstrated short-term stability of T(1), MWF and remitting (RR) MS subjects.
We observed no change in MWF, GMT(2) or T(1) histogram metrics in NAWM in RRMS over the course of 6 months.
Longer follow-up periods may be required to establish demonstrable changes in NAWM based on of MWF, GMT(2) and T(1) metrics.
PMID: 22303525
The Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT) task force recommendations for the management of patients with mood disorders and select comorbid medical conditions.
Medical comorbidity in patients with mood disorders has become an increasingly important clinical and global public health issue.
Several specific medical conditions are associated with an increased risk of mood disorders, and conversely, mood disorders are associated with increased morbidity and mortality in patients with specific medical disorders.
To help understand the bidirectional relationship and to provide an evidence-based framework to guide the treatment of mood disorders that are comorbid with medical illness, we have reviewed relevant articles and reviews published in English-language databases (to April 2011) on the links between mood disorders and several common medical conditions, evaluating the efficacy and safety of pharmacologic and psychosocial treatments.
The medical disorders most commonly encountered in adult populations (ie, cardiovascular disease, cerebrovascular disease, cancer, human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis C virus, migraine, multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, and osteoporosis) were chosen as the focus of this review.
Emerging evidence suggests that depression comorbid with several medical disorders is treatable and failure to treat depression in medically ill patients may have a negative effect on medical outcomes.
This review summarizes the available evidence and provides treatment recommendations for the management of comorbid depression in medically ill patients.
PMID: 22670773
Alteration of CD1 expression in multiple sclerosis.
Studies of multiple sclerosis (MS) have concentrated mainly on antigen presentation of peptides derived from the myelin sheath, while the implication of lipid antigen has been less explored in this pathology.
As the extracellular environment regulates expression of the lipid antigen-presenting molecule CD1, we have examined whether sera from patients alters CD1 surface expression in monocyte-derived dendritic cells.
We have shown that: (i) CD1 group 1 proteins were highly expressed in the presence of MS sera; (ii) sera from MS patients differentially regulated CD1 group 1 versus CD1 group 2 molecular expression; and (iii) CD1 was expressed strongly in monocytes from MS patients under immunosuppressive treatment.
Overall, these results reveal that CD1 expression is modified in MS and provide novel information on the regulation of lipid antigen presentation in myeloid cells.
© 2012 The Authors.
Clinical and Experimental Immunology © 2012 British Society for Immunology.
PMID: 23318105
Immunosuppressive monoclonal antibody to CD64 from patients with long-term stable multiple sclerosis.
High intrathecal levels of anti-myelin basic protein (MBP) IgM were previously found to be significantly associated with early favorable course in a cohort of patients with multiple sclerosis (MS).
A mAb to MBP 105-120 recognizing the 222-228 epitope of the extracellular domain of high affinity immunoglobulin gamma Fc-receptor I (CD64) was isolated from EBV(+) B cell clones of long-term stable RRMS patients.
This mAb exerted immunosuppressive activity on MS-derived T cell lines through induction and release of high amounts of interleukin-10 and decreased levels of interleukin-12 from activated monocytes providing the biological basis for a potential new treatment for MS and other immune-mediated neurological disorders.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22921113
Galectin-1 for neuroprotection?
Classically activated microglia (M1) are believed to play a key role in neuronal degeneration in multiple sclerosis (MS).
In this issue of Immunity, Starossom et al.
(2012) show that Galectin-1 exerts a neuroprotective function through glycosylation-dependent inactivation with M1 cells.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22994884
Identification and quantification of oligodendrocyte precursor cells in multiple system atrophy, progressive supranuclear palsy and Parkinson's disease.
Multiple system atrophy is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized pathologically by abnormal accumulations of α-synuclein in the cytoplasm of oligodendrocytes, which are termed glial cytoplasmic inclusions (GCIs).
Oligodendrocytes are responsible for myelinating axons and providing neurotrophic support, but in MSA, myelin loss, axonal loss and gliosis are consistent features suggesting that GCIs play a central role in disease pathogenesis.
Oligodendroglial, myelin and axonal degeneration are also features of multiple sclerosis (MS) in which recent studies have highlighted the robust remyelination capacity of the central nervous system (CNS).
The cells responsible for remyelination are called oligodendroglial precursor cells (OPCs).
In this study, we investigated the role of OPCs in the pathogenesis of MSA and progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), a neurodegenerative disease in which neuropathological changes include oligodendroglial inclusions composed of microtubule-associated protein tau.
Despite the lability of OPC-specific antigens, we successfully identified OPCs and demonstrated that tau and α-synuclein do not accumulate in OPCs.
We also showed that the density of OPCs was increased in a white matter region of the MSA brain, which is also severely affected by GCIs and myelin degeneration.
These findings raise the possibility that OPCs could be available to repair disease-associated damage in MSA, consistent with their biological function.
© 2012 The Authors; Brain Pathology © 2012 International Society of Neuropathology.
PMID: 23650003
Evaluation of efficacy, safety and tolerability of fingolimod in patients with the relapsing form of multiple sclerosis - 12-month observation. A preliminary report.
Oral fingolimod 0.5 mg daily was approved in the European Union in 2011 for the treatment of relapsing multiple sclerosis in the aggressive form and as a second line treatment in patients with high disease activity despite interferon beta therapy.
The aim of this study was the evaluation of efficacy, safety and tolerance of fingolimod in patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) during a 12-month observation period.
The investigated group consisted of 11 patients aged between 23 and 63 years.
All patients underwent immunomodulatory treatment (disease modifying drugs - DMD) or immunomodulatory treatment in combination with mitoxantrone (Mx) without a positive effect for 3-5 years.
Patients received oral fingolimod 0.5 mg daily during 12 months.
Disability was evaluated with Kurtzke Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) scale.
Safety and tolerability of fingolimod were evaluated by adverse events monitoring, laboratory tests, and ophthalmological and skin assessment.
Before the initiation of fingolimod treatment all the patients progressed in disability and in MRI changes including five cases with gadolinium-enhancing lesions.
During fingolimod treatment there was no new relapse in any patient and no patient stopped the treatment because of any adverse event.
During the 12-month treatment, EDSS improvement was observed in seven patients, three patients were stable, and one patient progressed by 0.5 point in the EDSS.
In our study patients fingolimod was effective, safe and well tolerated independently of disease activity and previous treatment.
PMID: 23650000
Concentration of 25(OH)D₃ and calcium and phosphorus metabolism in patients suffering from relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. A pilot study.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the concentration of 25(OH)D₃ and the indices of calcium and phosphorus metabolism at different times of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (MS).
The relationships between the concentrations of 25(OH)D₃ and the indices of calcium-phosphate metabolism were determined, depending on the duration of disease and vitamin and unsaturated fatty acids supplementation.
Thirty patients (15 at the early stage and 15 at the advanced stage of MS) were enrolled.
Each patient underwent neurological examination; neurological motor disability was defined according to the Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS).
The results were compared to the values obtained in the control group (15 individuals) selected according to the age of subjects, their residence, ethnicity and gender.
Significantly lower serum concentrations of 25(OH)D₃ in MS patients compared to the control group were found.
MS patients at the advanced stage of the disease (duration of 5-6 years) had lower 25(OH)D₃ concentrations than patients at the early stage of MS.
Among patients in an advanced stage of MS, significantly lower levels of 25(OH)D₃ were found in women compared to men with a similar level of physical disability.
Lower serum concentrations of 25(OH)D₃ in MS patients compared to the control group were found.
The lowest concentrations of 25(OH)D₃ were found in female patients aged 20-40 and in patients with a longer disease duration without substantial impairment of calcium-phosphate metabolism.
PMID: 23057802
Interleukin-7 receptor blockade suppresses adaptive and innate inflammatory responses in experimental colitis.
Interleukin-7 (IL-7) acts primarily on T cells to promote their differentiation, survival, and homeostasis.
Under disease conditions, IL-7 mediates inflammation through several mechanisms and cell types.
In humans, IL-7 and its receptor (IL-7R) are increased in diseases characterized by inflammation such as atherosclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, multiple sclerosis, and inflammatory bowel disease.
In mice, overexpression of IL-7 results in chronic colitis, and T-cell adoptive transfer studies suggest that memory T cells expressing high amounts of IL-7R drive colitis and are maintained and expanded with IL-7.
The studies presented here were undertaken to better understand the contribution of IL-7R in inflammatory bowel disease in which colitis was induced with a bacterial trigger rather than with adoptive transfer.
We examined the contribution of IL-7R on inflammation and disease development in two models of experimental colitis: Helicobacter bilis (Hb)-induced colitis in immune-sufficient Mdr1a-/- mice and in T- and B-cell-deficient Rag2-/- mice.
We used pharmacological blockade of IL-7R to understand the mechanisms involved in IL-7R-mediated inflammatory bowel disease by analyzing immune cell profiles, circulating and colon proteins, and colon gene expression.
Treatment of mice with an anti-IL-7R antibody was effective in reducing colitis in Hb-infected Mdr1a-/- mice by reducing T-cell numbers as well as T-cell function.
Down regulation of the innate immune response was also detected in Hb-infected Mdr1a-/- mice treated with an anti-IL-7R antibody.
In Rag2-/- mice where colitis was triggered by Hb-infection, treatment with an anti-IL-7R antibody controlled innate inflammatory responses by reducing macrophage and dendritic cell numbers and their activity.
Results from our studies showed that inhibition of IL-7R successfully ameliorated inflammation and disease development in Hb-infected mice by controlling the expansion of multiple leukocyte populations, as well as the activity of these immune cells.
Our findings demonstrate an important function of IL-7R-driven immunity in experimental colitis and indicate that the therapeutic efficacy of IL-7R blockade involves affecting both adaptive and innate immunity.
PMID: 22150063
Organ donation after cardiac death from withdrawal of life support in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Donation after cardiac death (DCD) or donation of organs after removal of life support is an accepted means of organ retrieval that usually occurs in the setting of sudden illness but has not been described in people with progressive neurologic illness.
We report DCD in two people with progressive amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Case series at an academic medical center of two men with progressive ALS who underwent withdrawal of artificial life support, rapid cardiac death, and subsequent organ donation.
The primary outcome was donation of organs in concordance with patient and family wishes.
Both patients underwent peaceful withdrawal of life support in the presence of family, and multiple organs were donated.
Patients may legally and ethically refuse life-sustaining care.
These patients considered their lives to be more burdensome than beneficial near the end of their lives, both carefully planned the time and circumstance of their deaths, and both fulfilled a long-standing desire to donate their organs.
This study describes a potential opportunity for patients with progressive neurologic illness.
PMID: 22262103
Regulation of opioid and cannabinoid receptor genes in human neuroblastoma and T cells by the epigenetic modifiers trichostatin A and 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine.
The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of the epigenetic modifiers trichostatin A and 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine on the expression of the cannabinoid receptors CB1 and CB2 and μ-opioid receptors in human SH SY5Y neuroblastoma cells and human Jurkat T lymphocytes.
Using quantitative real-time RT-PCR, mRNA specific for the aforementioned receptors was determined.
The functionality of the induced receptors was determined by analyzing the effect of the ligands to regulate intracellular cAMP.
We demonstrated that treatment of SH SY5Y cells, which endogenously express μ-opioid receptors and CB1, but not CB2, resulted in de novo induction of CB2, while mRNA levels of CB1 and μ-opioid receptors were not significantly altered.
In contrast, treatment of Jurkat lymphocytes, which endogenously express CB2, but not CB1 and μ-opioid receptors, resulted in de novo induction of CB1 and μ-opioid receptors, while mRNA levels of CB2 were not significantly altered.
Furthermore, the functionality of the induced μ-opioid receptors and CB1 in the Jurkat cells was demonstrated.
Our data suggest an epigenetically regulated expression of cannabinoid receptors and μ-opioid receptors.
Their induction by epigenetic modifiers in distinct cells of the nervous and immune system might result in increased effects of the cognate drugs on neuronal and immune functions.
Such modifications might be useful for novel therapies for various disorders, e.g.
multiple sclerosis, where the elevated transmission of cannabinoid or opioid signals is beneficial.
Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.
PMID: 23029079
Only low frequency event-related EEG activity is compromised in multiple sclerosis: insights from an independent component clustering analysis.
Cognitive impairment (CI), often examined with neuropsychological tests such as the Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test (PASAT), affects approximately 65% of multiple sclerosis (MS) patients.
The P3b event-related potential (ERP), evoked when an infrequent target stimulus is presented, indexes cognitive function and is typically compared across subjects' scalp electroencephalography (EEG) data.
However, the clustering of independent components (ICs) is superior to scalp-based EEG methods because it can accommodate the spatiotemporal overlap inherent in scalp EEG data.
Event-related spectral perturbations (ERSPs; event-related mean power spectral changes) and inter-trial coherence (ITCs; event-related consistency of spectral phase) reveal a more comprehensive overview of EEG activity.
Ninety-five subjects (56 MS patients, 39 controls) completed visual and auditory two-stimulus P3b event-related potential tasks and the PASAT.
MS patients were also divided into CI and non-CI groups (n = 18 in each) based on PASAT scores.
Data were recorded from 128-scalp EEG channels and 4 IC clusters in the visual, and 5 IC clusters in the auditory, modality were identified.
In general, MS patients had significantly reduced ERSP theta power versus controls, and a similar pattern was observed for CI vs. non-CI MS patients.
The ITC measures were also significantly different in the theta band for some clusters.
The finding that MS patients had reduced P3b task-related theta power in both modalities is a reflection of compromised connectivity, likely due to demyelination, that may have disrupted early processes essential to P3b generation, such as orientating and signal detection.
However, for posterior sources, MS patients had a greater decrease in alpha power, normally associated with enhanced cognitive function, which may reflect a compensatory mechanism in response to the compromised early cognitive processing.
PMID: 22328681
High body mass index before age 20 is associated with increased risk for multiple sclerosis in both men and women.
In a Swedish population-based case-control study (1571 cases, 3371 controls), subjects with different body mass indices (BMIs) were compared regarding multiple sclerosis (MS) risk, by calculating odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (95% CI).
Subjects whose BMI exceeded 27 kg/m(2) at age 20 had a two-fold increased risk of developing MS compared with normal weight subjects.
Speculatively, the obesity epidemic may explain part of the increasing MS incidence as recorded in some countries.
Measures taken against adolescent obesity may thus be a preventive strategy against MS.
PMID: 22328682
Rising prevalence of vascular comorbidities in multiple sclerosis: validation of administrative definitions for diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia.
Despite the importance of comorbidity in multiple sclerosis (MS), methods for comorbidity assessment in MS are poorly developed.
We validated and applied administrative case definitions for diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia in MS.
Using provincial administrative data we identified persons with MS and a matched general population cohort.
Case definitions for diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia were derived using hospital, physician, and prescription claims, and validated in 430 persons with MS.
We examined temporal trends in the age-adjusted prevalence of these conditions from 1984-2006.
Agreement between various case definitions and medical records ranged from kappa (κ) =0.51-0.69 for diabetes, κ =0.21-0.71 for hyperlipidemia, and κ =0.52-0.75 for hypertension.
The 2005 age-adjusted prevalence of diabetes was similar in the MS (7.62%) and general populations (8.31%; prevalence ratio [PR] 0.91; 0.81-1.03).
The age-adjusted prevalence did not differ for hypertension (MS: 20.8% versus general: 22.5% [PR 0.91; 0.78-1.06]), or hyperlipidemia (MS: 13.8% versus general: 15.2% [PR 0.90; 0.67-1.22]).
The prevalence of all conditions rose in both populations over the study period.
Administrative data are a valid means of tracking diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia in MS.
The prevalence of these comorbidities is similar in the MS and general populations.
PMID: 22328685
Relating brain damage to brain plasticity in patients with multiple sclerosis.
Failure of adaptive plasticity with increasing pathology is suggested to contribute to progression of disability in multiple sclerosis (MS).
However, functional impairments can be reduced with practice, suggesting that brain plasticity is preserved even in patients with substantial damage.
.
Here, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was used to probe systems-level mechanisms of brain plasticity associated with improvements in visuomotor performance in MS patients and related to measures of microstructural damage.
23 MS patients and 12 healthy controls underwent brain fMRI during the first practice session of a visuomotor task (short-term practice) and after 2 weeks of daily practice with the same task (longer-term practice).
Participants also underwent a structural brain MRI scan.
Patients performed more poorly than controls at baseline.
Nonetheless, with practice, patients showed performance improvements similar to controls and independent of the extent of MRI measures of brain pathology.
Different relationships between performance improvements and activations were found between groups: greater short-term improvements were associated with lower activation in the sensorimotor, posterior cingulate, and parahippocampal cortices for patients, whereas greater long-term improvements correlated with smaller activation reductions in the visual cortex of controls.
Brain plasticity for visuomotor practice is preserved in MS patients despite a high burden of cerebral pathology.
Cognitive systems different from those acting in controls contribute to this plasticity in patients.
These findings challenge the notion that increasing pathology is accompanied by an outright failure of adaptive plasticity, supporting a neuroscientific rationale for recovery-oriented strategies even in chronically disabled patients.
PMID: 22685660
Benefits of whole-body vibration with an oscillating platform for people with multiple sclerosis: a systematic review.
The objective of this work was to investigate the effects of whole-body vibration on people with multiple sclerosis (MS).
PubMed, CINAHL and Scopus databases were systematically searched for studies on the use of whole-body vibration (WBV) exercise in people with MS.
These searches were supplemented with material identified in the references and in the authors' personal files.
A qualitative analysis was performed to summarize the findings.
Five studies with a total of seventy-one subjects were identified.
All of these studies had small numbers of subjects (3-25), and two of the studies had no control groups.
Some investigations have shown significant improvements of the muscle strength, of the functional mobility, and of the timed get up and go test in patients with MS.
The number of publications found in the databanks searched is small, and in general, they have limitations in the design of protocols with a weakness to the interpretation of the findings.
However, the analysis of the findings in these studies permits to conclude that some papers indicate that WBV exercises could benefit patients with MS.
In addition, we suggest further larger scale investigations with controlled parameters and well-designed protocols into the effects of WBV exercises in people with MS.
PMID: 22878595
Autophagy in immunity: implications in etiology of autoimmune/autoinflammatory diseases.
Autophagy is now emerging as a spotlight in trafficking events that activate innate and adaptive immunity.
It facilitates innate pathogen detection and antigen presentation, as well as pathogen clearance and lymphocyte homeostasis.
In this review, we first summarize new insights into its functions in immunity, which underlie its associations with autoimmunity.
As some lines of evidence are emerging to support its role in autoimmune and autoinflammatory diseases, we further discuss whether and how it affects autoimmune diseases including systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes mellitus and multiple sclerosis, as well as autoinflammatory diseases, such as Crohn disease and vitiligo.
PMID: 21613335
Progranulin expression in brain tissue and cerebrospinal fluid levels in multiple sclerosis.
Progranulin (PGRN) is a fundamental neurotrophic factor, and is also involved in inflammation and wound repair.
PGRN may have pro- or anti-inflammatory properties, depending upon proteolysis of the anti-inflammatory parent PGRN protein and the generation of pro-inflammatory granulin peptides.
Our objectives were as follows: (1) to evaluate the presence and distribution of PGRN in multiple sclerosis (MS) brain tissue, correlating it with demyelination and inflammation; (2) to evaluate cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) PGRN concentrations in patients with MS and controls, in relationship to the clinical features of the disease.
Our study involved the following: (1) neuropathological study of PGRN on post-mortem tissue of 19 MS and six control brains; (2) evaluation of PGRN CSF concentration in 40 MS patients, 15 non-inflammatory controls and five inflammatory controls (viral encephalitis).
In active demyelinating lesions, PGRN was expressed on macrophages/microglia.
In the normal-appearing white matter (NAWM), expression of PGRN was observed on activated microglia.
PGRN was expressed by neurons and microglia in cortical lesions and in normal-appearing cortex.
No expression of PGRN was observed in controls, except on neurons.
PGRN CSF concentrations were significantly higher in patients with relapsing-remitting MS during relapses and in progressive MS patients, compared with relapsing-remitting MS patients during remissions and with non-inflammatory controls.
PGRN is strongly expressed in MS brains, by macrophages/microglia in active lesions, and by activated microglia in the NAWM; PGRN CSF concentrations in MS are correspondingly increased in conditions of enhanced macrophage/microglia activation, such as during relapses and in progressive MS.
PMID: 21613334
The conditioned eyeblink reflex: a potential tool for the detection of cerebellar dysfunction in multiple sclerosis.
The delayed conditioned eyeblink reflex, in which an individual learns to close the eyelid in response to a conditioned stimulus (e.g. a tone) relies entirely on the functional integrity of a cerebellar motor circuitry that involves the contingent activation of Purkinje cells by parallel and climbing fibres.
Molecular changes that disrupt the function of this circuitry, in particular a loss of type-1 metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGlu1 receptors), occur in Purkinje cells of patients with multiple sclerosis and in mice with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis as a result of neuroinflammation.
mGlu1 receptors are required for cerebellar motor learning associated with the conditioned eyeblink reflex.
We propose that the delayed paradigm of the eyeblink conditioning might be particularly valuable for the detection of subtle abnormalities of cerebellar motor learning that are clinically silent and are not associated with demyelinating lesions or axonal damage.
In addition, the test might have predictive value following a clinically isolated syndrome, and might be helpful for the evaluation of the efficacy of drug treatment in multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 21613332
Evaluation of an adjustment group for people with multiple sclerosis and low mood: a randomized controlled trial.
Mood problems affect many people with multiple sclerosis (MS).
The aim was to evaluate the effectiveness of a group treatment based on cognitive behavioural principles.
People with MS were screened on the General Health Questionnaire 12 (GHQ-12) and Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HAD).
Those identified with low mood were invited to take part in a randomized trial comparing the effect of attending an adjustment group with a waiting list control.
Patients allocated to the adjustment group received six 2 h group treatment sessions.
Outcomes were assessed 4 and 8 months after randomization, blind to group allocation.
Of the 311 patients identified, 221 (71%) met the criteria for low mood and 151 (68%) agreed to take part.
Hierarchical regression analyses were conducted to compare the two groups, correcting for baseline mood and disability.
At 4 months, group allocation alone was a significant predictor of the primary outcome measure, the GHQ-12.
At 8 months, group allocation alone was no longer a significant predictor for GHQ-12 scores, but it was when baseline GHQ-12 and Guy's Neurological Disability Scale scores were controlled for.
Comparison of the area under the curve revealed significant differences between the groups for GHQ-12 (p = 0.003), HAD Anxiety (p = 0.013), HAD Depression (p = 0.004), Beck Depression Inventory (p = 0.001), MS Self-efficacy (p = 0.037) and MS Impact Scale Psychological (p = 0.012).
Patients receiving treatment were less distressed and had less depression and anxiety.
There was some evidence of improved self-efficacy and a reduction of the impact of MS on people's lives.
PMID: 23746391
Effects of antagonists of glutamate receptors on pro-inflammatory cytokines in the brain cortex of rats subjected to experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory demyelinating disease of the central nervous system (CNS).
Inflammatory cytokines and glutamate neurotoxicity have been proposed as major determinants accompanying the demyelination and axonal degeneration observed during the course of MS.
The present study using the animal model of MS known as experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) demonstrates that pharmacological inhibition of ionotropic NMDA glutamate receptors by their antagonists (amantadine and memantine) suppresses neurological symptoms of disease in EAE rats and reduces expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines in the brain.
Conversely, antagonists of group I metabotropic glutamate receptors, mGluRs (LY 367385 and MPEP), do not affect the inflammatory process and the neurological condition of EAE rats.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23209936
Effects of fatigue on balance and mobility in subjects with multiple sclerosis: a brief report.
Purpose.
People with Multiple Sclerosis (PwMS) tent to have increased levels of fatigue which can impact on their balance and increase risk of falls.
However, the relationship between fatigue and balance is poorly understood.
The aim of the present study was to assess if an experimentally induced fatigue had an immediate effect on balance.
Methods.
37 inpatients with multiple sclerosis were recruited; the mean age (standard deviation) was 48.7 (9.6) years.
The average onset of the pathology was 15.3 (9.8) years before the start of the study.
The median (1°-3° quartile) Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) score was 5.5 (4.5-6.0).
Before and after a fatiguing treadmill, session, subjects were assessed with the Berg Balance Scale and Dynamic Gait Index.
Results.
After the treadmill, no statistically significant differences were found in balance before and after a treadmill session (monopodalic stance: before 5.3s (10.3) and after 7.7s (13.9); walk with horizontal head turns: before 11.6 (6.9) seconds and after 11.3 (7.7)).
There was no correlation between the EDSS score and the difference in balance skills before and after treadmill.
Conclusion.
After treadmil PwMS were mentally and physically fatigued; however, their balance performance did not change, indicating no increase in risk of falling with fatigue.
PMID: 23209937
Predictors of Conversion to Multiple Sclerosis in Patients with Clinical Isolated Syndrome Using the 2010 Revised McDonald Criteria.
Background.
Clinically isolated syndrome (CIS) is the first neurologic episode of multiple sclerosis (MS).
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and clinical features are used to predict risk of conversion to MS.
Objectives.
The aim of this prospective study is to evaluate predictors of conversion of CIS to McDonald MS.
Method.
97 patients with CIS have been followed for 2 years.
Age of onset, gender, initial clinical presentation, and MRI brain and spine were assessed.
The 2010 revised McDonald criteria were applied.
Results.
Fifty-nine patients (60.8%) with CIS converted to McDonald MS after 10.1 + 4.2 months.
Thirty-seven (38.1%) of the convertors satisfied the diagnostic criteria based on the radiological parameters, while 21.7% sustained their second clinical events.
A multivariate regression analysis revealed that high number of lesions in MRI (P = 0.001) and earlier age of onset (P = 0.043) predicted the conversion of CIS to McDonald MS.
Gender (P = 0.5) and initial clinical presentation (optic pathway (P = 0.4), supratentorial (P = 0.91), brain stem/ cerebellum (P = 0.97), and spinal (P = 0.76)) were not statistically significant.
Conclusion.
Age of onset and MRI parameters can be used as predictors of CIS conversion to McDonald MS.
Application of the 2010 revised McDonald criteria allows an earlier MS diagnosis.
PMID: 22161819
Effect of oxidative stress on protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B in scleroderma dermal fibroblasts.
Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and its receptor, PDGFR, promote fibrosis in systemic sclerosis (SSc; scleroderma) dermal fibroblasts, and such cells in scleroderma skin lesions produce excessive reactive oxygen species (ROS).
PDGFR is phosphorylated upon PDGF stimulation, and is dephosphorylated by protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs), including PTP1B.
This study was undertaken to determine whether the thiol-sensitive PTP1B is affected by ROS in SSc dermal fibroblasts, thereby enhancing the phosphorylation of PDGFR and synthesis of type I collagen.
This study also sought to investigate the effect of a thiol antioxidant, N-acetylcysteine (NAC), in SSc.
Fibroblasts were isolated from the skin of patients with diffuse SSc and normal healthy donors for cell culture experiments and immunofluorescence analyses.
A phosphate release assay was used to determine the activity of PTP1B.
Levels of ROS and type I collagen were significantly higher and amounts of free thiol were significantly lower in SSc fibroblasts compared to normal fibroblasts.
After stimulation with PDGF, not only were PDGFR and ERK-1/2 phosphorylated to a greater extent, but also the ability to produce PTP1B was hampered in SSc fibroblasts.
The activity of PTP1B was significantly inactivated in SSc fibroblasts as a result of cysteine oxidation by the raised levels of ROS, which was confirmed by the oxidation of multiple PTPs, including PTP1B, in SSc fibroblasts.
Decreased expression of PTP1B in normal fibroblasts led to increased expression of type I collagen.
Treatment of the cells with NAC restored the activity of PTP1B, improved the profile of PDGFR phosphorylation, decreased the numbers of tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins and levels of type I collagen, and scavenged ROS in SSc fibroblasts.
This study describes a new mechanism by which ROS may promote a profibrotic phenotype in SSc fibroblasts through the oxidative inactivation of PTP1B, leading to pronounced activation of PDGFR.
The study also presents a novel molecular mechanism by which NAC may act on ROS and PTP1B to provide therapeutic benefit in SSc.
Copyright © 2012 by the American College of Rheumatology.
PMID: 23712361
Astrocytic vesicle mobility in health and disease.
Astrocytes are no longer considered subservient to neurons, and are, instead, now understood to play an active role in brain signaling.
The intercellular communication of astrocytes with neurons and other non-neuronal cells involves the exchange of molecules by exocytotic and endocytotic processes through the trafficking of intracellular vesicles.
Recent studies of single vesicle mobility in astrocytes have prompted new views of how astrocytes contribute to information processing in nervous tissue.
Here, we review the trafficking of several types of membrane-bound vesicles that are specifically involved in the processes of (i) intercellular communication by gliotransmitters (glutamate, adenosine 5'-triphosphate, atrial natriuretic peptide), (ii) plasma membrane exchange of transporters and receptors (EAAT2, MHC-II), and (iii) the involvement of vesicle mobility carrying aquaporins (AQP4) in water homeostasis.
The properties of vesicle traffic in astrocytes are discussed in respect to networking with neighboring cells in physiologic and pathologic conditions, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple sclerosis, and states in which astrocytes contribute to neuroinflammatory conditions.
PMID: 22810937
Motor vehicle operation in the setting of multiple sclerosis with myelopathy: assessment, adaptive equipment, counseling, and cessation of driving.
Many individuals with multiple sclerosis are safe drivers; others self-regulate their driving or cease driving altogether because of their own safety concerns.
When patients are unsafe to drive and have poor insight into their condition, they may ignore a provider's repeated communication to stop driving.
Addressing this issue when a person is initially diagnosed with multiple sclerosis and continuing the discussion over time when assessing other activities of daily living may ease the process of driving cessation.
Referral for a driving evaluation may be appropriate, in conjunction with referrals to a social worker for mobility counseling and to a psychologist for grief and loss issues associated with driving cessation.
When repeated recommendations to stop driving are ignored, notifying the appropriate government agencies should be considered.
PMID: 22168507
Computerised cognitive behavioural therapy for the treatment of depression in people with multiple sclerosis: external pilot trial.
People with multiple sclerosis (MS) are at high risk of depression.
We undertook a pilot trial of computerised cognitive behavioural therapy (CCBT) for the treatment of depression in people with MS to test the feasibility of undertaking a full trial.
Participants with a diagnosis of MS and clinical levels of depression were recruited through out-patient clinics and postal screening questionnaires at two UK centres and randomised to CCBT or usual care.
Clinical outcomes included the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II) and Multiple Sclerosis Impact Scale (MSIS-29) at baseline, 8 and 21 weeks.
Feasibility outcomes included: recruitment rate; reasons for refusal, withdrawal and dropout; feasibility and acceptability of the proposed outcome measures; sample size estimation and variation in and preferences for service delivery.
Twenty-four participants were recruited.
The recruitment rate, calculated as the proportion of those invited to fill in a screening questionnaire who were consented into the trial, was 4.1%.
Recruitment through out-patient clinics was somewhat slower than through screening questionnaire mail-out but the overall recruitment yield was similar.
Of the 12 patients in the CCBT arm, 9 (75%) completed at least four, and 6 completed all 8 CCBT sessions.
For completers, the median time (IQR) to complete all eight CCBT sessions was 15 (13 to 20) weeks.
Participants expressed concern about the face validity of the Beck Depression Inventory II for the measurement of self-reported depression in people with MS.
The MSIS-29 was the patient-reported outcome measure which participants felt best reflected their concerns.
The estimated sample size for a full trial is between 180 and 390 participants.
NHS partners were not delivering CCBT in community facilities and participants preferred to access CCBT at home, with no one expressing a preference for use of CCBT in an alternative location.
A definitive trial, with a recruitment window of one year, would require the participation of around 13 MS centres.
This number of centres could be reduced by expanding the eligibility criteria to include either other neurological conditions or people with more severe depression.
The MSIS-29 should be used as a patient-important outcome measurement.
ISRCTN: ISRCTN81846800.
PMID: 23984093
The effect of fluoxetine on progression in progressive multiple sclerosis: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial.
Preclinical studies suggest that fluoxetine may have neuroprotective properties.
In this pilot study forty-two patients with secondary or primary progressive MS were randomized to receive fluoxetine 20 mg twice daily or placebo for 2 years.
Every 3 months the Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS), 9-hole peg test (9-HPT) and ambulation index (AI) were assessed.
Brain MRI scans, Multiple Sclerosis Functional Composite, Fatigue Impact Scale, Guy's neurological disability Scale and SF-36 were performed at baseline, year 1 and year 2.
Seven out of 20 (35%) patients in the fluoxetine group and 7 out of 22 (32%) patients in the placebo group had sustained progression on the EDSS, 9-HPT, or AI at 2 years.
No differences were identified between the 2 treatment groups with respect to secondary clinical outcomes and T2 lesion load, grey matter volume and white matter volume.
An unanticipated low rate of disability progression in the placebo group decreased the statistical power.
At least 200 patients would have been needed to detect a 50% treatment effect.
This trial shows that fluoxetine was generally well tolerated, but no assumptions can be made about a possible treatment effect.
An adequately powered controlled trial of fluoxetine in progressive MS is still warranted.
This trial is registered with Current Controlled Trials ISRCTN38456328.
PMID: 23485854
Casting light on multiple sclerosis heterogeneity: the role of HLA-DRB1 on spinal cord pathology.
Clinical heterogeneity in multiple sclerosis is the rule.
Evidence suggests that HLA-DRB1*15 may play a role in clinical outcome.
Spinal cord pathology is common and contributes significantly to disability in the disease.
The influence of HLA-DRB1*15 on multiple sclerosis spinal cord pathology is unknown.
A post-mortem cohort of pathologically confirmed cases with multiple sclerosis (n = 108, 34 males) with fresh frozen material available for genetic analyses and fixed material for pathology was used.
HLA-DRB1 alleles were genotyped to select a subset of age- and sex-matched HLA-DRB1*15-positive (n = 21) and negative (n = 26) cases for detailed pathological analyses.
For each case, transverse sections from three spinal cord levels (cervical, thoracic and lumbar) were stained for myelin, axons and inflammation.
The influence of HLA-DRB1*15 on pathological outcome measures was evaluated.
Carriage of HLA-DRB1*15 significantly increased the extent of demyelination (global measure 15+: 23.7% versus 15-: 12.16%, P = 0.004), parenchymal (cervical, P &lt; 0.01; thoracic, P &lt; 0.05; lumbar, P &lt; 0.01) and lesional inflammation (border, P = 0.001; periplaque white matter, P &lt; 0.05) in the multiple sclerosis spinal cord.
HLA-DRB1*15 influenced demyelination through controlling the extent of parenchymal inflammation.
Meningeal inflammation correlated significantly with small fibre axonal loss in the lumbar spinal cord (r = -0.832, P = 0.003) only in HLA-DRB1*15-positive cases.
HLA-DRB1*15 significantly influences pathology in the multiple sclerosis spinal cord.
This study casts light on the role of HLA-DRB1*15 in disease outcome and highlights the powerful approach of using microscopic pathology to clarify the way in which genes and clinical phenotypes of neurological diseases are linked.
PMID: 22235993
Therapeutic potential of carbon monoxide in multiple sclerosis.
Carbon monoxide (CO) is produced during the catabolism of free haem, catalyzed by haem oxygenase (HO) enzymes, and its physiological roles include vasodilation, neurotransmission, inhibition of platelet aggregation and anti-proliferative effects on smooth muscle.
In vivo preclinical studies have shown that exogenously administered quantities of CO may represent an effective treatment for conditions characterized by a dysregulated immune response.
The carbon monoxide-releasing molecules (CORMs) represent a group of compounds capable of carrying and liberating controlled quantities of CO in the cellular systems.
This review covers the physiological and anti-inflammatory properties of the HO/CO pathway in the central nervous system.
It also discusses the effects of CORMs in preclinical models of inflammation.
The accumulating data discussed herein support the possibility that CORMs may represent a novel class of drugs with disease-modifying properties in multiple sclerosis.
© 2012 The Authors.
Clinical and Experimental Immunology © 2012 British Society for Immunology.
PMID: 21951011
Pharmacological tests of hypotheses for acquired pendular nystagmus.
Acquired pendular nystagmus (APN) occurs with multiple sclerosis (MS) and oculopalatal tremor (OPT); distinct features of the nystagmus have led to the development of separate models for their pathogenesis.
APN in MS has been attributed to instability in the neural integrator, which normally ensures steady gaze.
APN in OPT may result from electrotonic coupling between neurons in the hypertrophied inferior olivary nucleus, which induces maladaptive learning in cerebellar cortex.
We tested these two hypotheses by analyzing the effects of gabapentin, memantine, and baclofen on both forms of nystagmus.
No drug changed the dominant frequency of either form of APN, but the variability of frequency was affected with gabapentin and memantine in patients with OPT.
The amplitude of APN in both MS and OPT was reduced with gabapentin and memantine, but not baclofen.
Analyzing the effects of drug therapies on ocular oscillations provides a novel approach to test models of nystagmus.
© 2011 New York Academy of Sciences.
PMID: 21951010
Modeling the mechanisms of Uhthoff's phenomenon in MS patients with internuclear ophthalmoparesis.
Internuclear ophthalmoparesis (INO) is the most common saccadic eye movement disorder observed in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS).
It is characterized by slowing of the adducting eye during horizontal saccades, and most commonly results from a demyelinating lesion in the medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) within the midline tegmentum of the pons (ventral to the fourth ventricle) or midbrain (ventral to the cerebral aqueduct).
Recent research has demonstrated that adduction velocity in MS-related INO, as measured by infrared eye movement recording techniques, is further reduced by a systematic increase in core body temperature (utilizing tube-lined water infusion suits in conjunction with an ingestible temperature probe and transabdominal telemetry) and reversed to baseline with active cooling.
These results suggest that INO may represent a model syndrome by which we can carefully study the Uhthoff's phenomenon and objectively test therapeutic agents for its prevention.
© 2011 New York Academy of Sciences.
PMID: 22256380
Multiple sclerosis.
From April 2001 to March 2011 in BEACH, multiple sclerosis(MS) was managed at a rate of 0.9 per 1000 general practice encounters, suggesting an average 98 000 multiple sclerosis general practice patient encounters per year nationally.
PMID: 21838960
Immune monitoring of Trichuris suis egg therapy in multiple sclerosis patients.
Initial clinical trials using Trichuris suis eggs (TSO) in autoimmune diseases such as inflammatory bowel disease, revealed a striking suppressive effect on the autoimmune response.
Here, we analysed the effect of TSO therapy on the course of multiple sclerosis (MS), as a Th1/Th17-associated autoimmune disease.
Different immunological parameters in four patients with secondary progressive MS were surveyed during a 6-month therapy with TSO, focusing on the modulation of T-cell Th1-Th2 balance as well as on the innate immune response.
We are able to show a slight downregulation of the Th1-associated cytokine pattern, especially relevant in interleukin (IL)-2 (P &lt; 0.05 after 2 months of therapy), with a temporary increase of Th2-associated cytokines such as IL-4.
Furthermore, mild eosinophily and changes in CD4+ and CD8+T cells and natural killer (NK) CD56 bright cell numbers were observed.
The findings observed in this group of patients suggest that TSO therapy has a moderate immunomodulatory impact in MS.
PMID: 22336698
Detecting cognitive fatigue in multiple sclerosis: method matters.
Fatigue is a frequently reported and debilitating symptom in multiple sclerosis (MS).
Cognitive fatigue (CF) can be defined as decreased performance with sustained cognitive effort.
The effectiveness of the Paced Auditory Serial Addition Task (PASAT) and the Computerized Test of Information Processing (CTIP) at detecting CF was examined, as was the impact of methodology.
Subjective fatigue was measured using the Fatigue Impact Scale (FIS).
The relationship between objective and subjective fatigue was examined.
70 MS and 72 healthy controls (HC) completed the PASAT (3″ and 2″), CTIP, and FIS as part of a larger battery.
The MS and HCs performed worse on cognitively demanding tasks.
Depending on methodology, PASAT performance varied between groups at the 3″ inter-stimulus interval (ISI) and the MS group showed greater susceptibility to CF as their ability to meet task demands declined as the task progressed.
CTIP performance for both groups varied differently over time depending on task.
The relationship between subjective and objective measures of fatigue varied depending on methodology, with PASAT generally correlating well with the Cognitive Dimension of the FIS.
The PASAT is a sensitive measure of CF in MS.
Additional information is obtained with different scoring methods, with percent dyad scoring method being most sensitive to CF.
The ability to detect a relationship between objective and subjective measures varied with methodology.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23454769
2-photon imaging of phagocyte-mediated T cell activation in the CNS.
Autoreactive T cells can infiltrate the CNS to cause disorders such as multiple sclerosis.
In order to visualize T cell activation in the CNS, we introduced a truncated fluorescent derivative of nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) as a real-time T cell activation indicator.
In experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, a rat model of multiple sclerosis, we tracked T cells interacting with structures of the vascular blood-brain barrier (BBB).
2-photon imaging documented the cytoplasmic-nuclear translocation of fluorescent NFAT, indicative of calcium-dependent activation of the T cells in the perivascular space, but not within the vascular lumen.
The activation was related to contacts with the local antigen-presenting phagocytes and was noted only in T cells with a high pathogenic potential.
T cell activation implied the presentation of an autoantigen, as the weakly pathogenic T cells, which remained silent in the untreated hosts, were activated upon instillation of exogenous autoantigen.
Activation did not cogently signal long-lasting arrest, as individual T cells were able to sequentially contact fresh APCs.
We propose that the presentation of local autoantigen by BBB-associated APCs provides stimuli that guide autoimmune T cells to the CNS destination, enabling them to attack the target tissue.
PMID: 23017732
Increase of complement fragment C5a in cerebrospinal fluid during exacerbation of neuromyelitis optica.
Complement is thought to play a pivotal role in neuromyelitis optica (NMO) pathogenesis.
Anaphylatoxins (C3a, C4a, and C5a), produced in complement activation, have proinflammatory potential, and thereby may play an important role.
We measured concentrations of anaphylatoxins in CSF and sera, obtained from patients with NMO (n=15), multiple sclerosis (MS) (n=15), and other neurological disease (OND) (n=12), and evaluated their clinical implications.
The CSF-C5a levels were elevated significantly in NMO patients, especially in patients with multiple enhanced lesions on MRI.
The CSF-C5a levels correlated with the severity of exacerbation.
Our results may provide a rationale for anti-complement therapies of NMO.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21840619
IL-12 inhibits glucocorticoid-induced T cell apoptosis by inducing GMEB1 and activating PI3K/Akt pathway.
Interleukin (IL)-12 is an important pro-inflammatory cytokine that has been shown to play a role in T cell survival, at least in part by activating the PI3K/Akt pathway.
Glucocorticoid modulatory element binding protein (GMEB)1 and 2 are closely related proteins that modify the glucocorticoid receptor binding locus and thus modulate glucocorticoid-mediated gene induction effects, including apoptosis.
GMEB1 associates with caspases and prevents apoptosis of cells in the nervous system.
We have observed, in preliminary studies, that IL-12 up-regulates GMEB mRNA in human T cells, and postulated that this may contribute to the anti-apoptotic effect of IL-12 on T cells, in particular with regard to glucocorticoid induced apoptosis.
Here, we confirm that IL-12 rescue of dexamethasone induced T cell apoptosis involves the PI3K/Akt pathway and that IL-12 induces GMEB1 and GMEB2.
A siRNA knockdown of GMEB1 reverses the protective effect of IL-12 on dexamethasone induced T cell apoptosis.
Thus, IL-12 protects T cells from glucocorticoid induced apoptosis via PI3K/Akt pathway and via induction of GMEB1, which is likely to reduce transactivation of the glucocorticoid receptor and induction of apoptotic genes.
As glucocorticoid induced apoptosis occurs both in physiological and pathological/therapeutic situations, and IL-12 is actively involved in a variety of inflammatory and immune responses, the ability of IL-12 to inhibit steroid responses and increase T cell survival through GMEB1 has wide ranging implications.
Manipulating GMEB may be used therapeutically to enhance the resistance or the sensitivity to steroids.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier GmbH.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23291310
Cognitive impairment has a strong relation to nonsomatic symptoms of depression in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
It is unclear how cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis (MS) is influenced by physical disability, fatigue, and depression.
Our aim was to identify the strongest clinical predictors for cognitive impairment in relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) patients.
The clinical risk factors included in the analysis were physical disability (EDSS), fatigue (FSS), the somatic and nonsomatic components of depression (BDI), disease progression rate [Multiple Sclerosis Severity Score (MSSS)], and psychotropic medication.
Cognitive impairment had a prevalence of 30.5% in patients affecting preferentially attention, executive functions, processing speed and visual perception/organization.
MSSS was not associated with cognitive impairment, depression, or fatigue.
In regression models, cognitive performance was best predicted by the nonsomatic symptoms of depression alone or in combination with physical disability.
Exclusion of patients with any psychotropic medication did not influence the results.
Our results underscore the importance of evaluating depressive symptoms when suspecting cognitive impairment in patients with RRMS.
PMID: 21898674
Functional adaptive changes within the hippocampal memory system of patients with multiple sclerosis.
Memory deficits are highly prevalent in multiple sclerosis (MS).
As the hippocampus is crucial to memory processing, a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) task was used to investigate changes in hippocampal function in MS patients with and without cognitive decline.
Fifty patients with MS, (34 cognitively preserved (CP) and 16 cognitively impaired (CI)) and 30 healthy controls completed an episodic memory fMRI task (encoding and retrieval) that was used to specifically activate the hippocampus.
During encoding of correctly remembered items, increased brain activation was seen in the parahippocampal areas bilaterally and in the left anterior cingulate gyrus in the CP patients compared to the controls (unclustered, Z ≥ 3.1, P ≤ 0.001).
No brain areas showed less activation.
In CI patients the right (para)hippocampal areas and the prefrontal cortex showed less brain activation compared to controls (cluster-corrected, P &lt; 0.05).
The posterior cingulate gyrus and the left precuneus showed increased activation in CI patients when compared to controls (unclustered Z ≥ 3.1, P ≤ 0.001).
No significant differences were found on structural MRI measures between the CP and CI patients.
These results suggest the presence of functional adaptation in the memory network before cognitive decline becomes evident in MS, as displayed by the increased brain activation in the hippocampal-cingulate memory system in CP patients.
Interestingly, CI patients showed less activation in the hippocampal network during correct encoding.
These findings are important for future cognitive therapeutic studies, since cognitive intervention might be most effective before cognitive impairment is present and when adaptive changes of the brain are most prominent.
Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 23836941
Mortality in patients with multiple sclerosis.
Mortality in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) is significantly increased compared with the general population.
Many questions concerning survival in MS are still unanswered due to the difficulty of comparing information collected at different times and in different geographic areas.
The increasing incidence of MS, the improvement in care of the chronically disabled, and different methodologies may explain the lack of coherence among studies' results.
Reported times to death from birth and from disease onset/diagnosis are highly variable.
Patients older at onset or with primary progressive course have shorter survival; however, data on sex and mortality are contradictory.
Changes in sex ratio in MS over time represent one possible explanation.
MS is the main cause of death in ≥50% of patients and the incidence of deaths not due to MS varies among countries.
Particularly, suicide is substantially increased in patients with MS, and, despite its varying incidence, mainly due to cultural bias, it should be considered an MS-related cause of death.
Recent results of the long-term follow-up study of interferon-β-1b demonstrated a significant reduction of mortality among treated patients.
Notwithstanding its long latency, mortality is therefore an unambiguously valid long-term outcome in randomized controlled trials.
It usefully combines the net impact of treatment efficacy on longevity and adverse events, which may reduce it.
PMID: 22432421
Object working memory performance depends on microstructure of the frontal-occipital fasciculus.
Re-entrant circuits involving communication between the frontal cortex and other brain areas have been hypothesized to be necessary for maintaining the sustained patterns of neural activity that represent information in working memory, but evidence has so far been indirect.
If working memory maintenance indeed depends on such temporally precise and robust long-distance communication, then performance on a delayed recognition task should be highly dependent on the microstructural integrity of white-matter tracts connecting sensory areas with prefrontal cortex.
This study explored the effect of variations in white-matter microstructure on working memory performance in two separate groups of participants: patients with multiple sclerosis and age- and sex-matched healthy adults.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging was performed to reveal cortical regions involved in spatial and object working memory, which, in turn, were used to define specific frontal to extrastriate white-matter tracts of interest via diffusion tensor tractography.
After factoring out variance due to age and the microstructure of a control tract (the corticospinal tract), the number of errors produced in the object working memory task was specifically related to the microstructure of the inferior frontal-occipital fasciculus.
This result held for both groups, independently, providing a within-study replication with two different types of white-matter structural variability: multiple sclerosis-related damage and normal variation.
The results demonstrate the importance of interactions between specific regions of the prefrontal cortex and sensory cortices for a nonspatial working memory task that preferentially activates those regions.
PMID: 22499213
Lipocalin 2 is a novel immune mediator of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis pathogenesis and is modulated in multiple sclerosis.
Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) is a widely used animal model of multiple sclerosis (MS), an inflammatory, demyelinating disease of the central nervous system (CNS).
EAE pathogenesis involves various cell types, cytokines, chemokines, and adhesion molecules.
Given the complexity of the inflammatory response in EAE, it is likely that many immune mediators still remain to be discovered.
To identify novel immune mediators of EAE pathogenesis, we performed an Affymetrix gene array screen on the spinal cords of mice at the onset stage of disease.
This screening identified the gene encoding lipocalin 2 (Lcn2) as being significantly upregulated.
Lcn2 is a multi-functional protein that plays a role in glial activation, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) stabilization, and cellular iron flux.
As many of these processes have been implicated in EAE, we characterized the expression and role of Lcn2 in this disease in C57BL/6 mice.
We show that Lcn2 is significantly upregulated in the spinal cord throughout EAE and is expressed predominantly by monocytes and reactive astrocytes.
The Lcn2 receptor, 24p3R, is also expressed on monocytes, macrophages/microglia, and astrocytes in EAE.
In addition, we show that EAE severity is increased in Lcn2(-/-) mice as compared with wild-type controls.
Finally, we demonstrate that elevated levels of Lcn2 are detected in the plasma and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in MS and in immune cells in CNS lesions in MS tissue sections.
These data indicate that Lcn2 is a modulator of EAE pathogenesis and suggest that it may also play a role in MS.
Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 23328079
Meningeal and choroid plexus cells--novel drug targets for CNS disorders.
The meninges and choroid plexus perform many functions in the developing and adult human central nervous system (CNS) and are composed of a number of different cell types.
In this article I focus on meningeal and choroid plexus cells as targets for the development of drugs to treat a range of traumatic, ischemic and chronic brain disorders.
Meningeal cells are involved in cortical development (and their dysfunction may be involved in cortical dysplasia), fibrotic scar formation after traumatic brain injuries (TBI), brain inflammation following infections, and neurodegenerative disorders such as Multiple Sclerosis (MS) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) and other brain disorders.
The choroid plexus regulates the composition of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) as well as brain entry of inflammatory cells under basal conditions and after injuries.
The meninges and choroid plexus also link peripheral inflammation (occurring in the metabolic syndrome and after infections) to CNS inflammation which may contribute to the development and progression of a range of CNS neurological and psychiatric disorders.
They respond to cytokines generated systemically and secrete cytokines and chemokines that have powerful effects on the brain.
The meninges may also provide a stem cell niche in the adult brain which could be harnessed for brain repair.
Targeting meningeal and choroid plexus cells with therapeutic agents may provide novel therapies for a range of human brain disorders.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22917609
Neuroprotection of lipoic acid treatment promotes angiogenesis and reduces the glial scar formation after brain injury.
After trauma brain injury, a large number of cells die, releasing neurotoxic chemicals into the extracellular medium, decreasing cellular glutathione levels and increasing reactive oxygen species that affect cell survival and provoke an enlargement of the initial lesion.
Alpha-lipoic acid is a potent antioxidant commonly used as a treatment of many degenerative diseases such as multiple sclerosis or diabetic neuropathy.
Herein, the antioxidant effects of lipoic acid treatment after brain cryo-injury in rat have been studied, as well as cell survival, proliferation in the injured area, gliogenesis and angiogenesis.
Thus, it is shown that newborn cells, mostly corresponded with blood vessels and glial cells, colonized the damaged area 15 days after the lesion.
However, lipoic acid was able to stimulate the synthesis of glutathione, decrease cell death, promote angiogenesis and decrease the glial scar formation.
All those facts allow the formation of new neural tissue.
In view of the results herein, lipoic acid might be a plausible pharmacological treatment after brain injury, acting as a neuroprotective agent of the neural tissue, promoting angiogenesis and reducing the glial scar formation.
These findings open new possibilities for restorative strategies after brain injury, stroke or related disorders.
Copyright © 2012 IBRO.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22677677
[The role of dopamine in the regulation of the interaction between nervous and immune systems in multiple sclerosis].
A complex neurological and neuropsychological examination, including the detection of depression, was conducted in 71 patients with multiple sclerosis aged from 23 to 62 years (mean age 43 ± 9 years).
An immunobiochemical study included the analysis of expression of CD80 and CD86 on monocytes and B-cells, expression of TLR2 and TLR4 on monocytes, expression of D3 and D5 dopamine receptors on monocytes and B-cells, using flow cytometry, and the determination of Il-6, Il-10, IL-12p40 and dopamine plasma levels as well as vanillylmandelic acid (VMA, dopamine metabolite) urine levels measured with immunoenzyme assay.
The results suggest the involvement of dopamine in the pathogenesis of depression in MS as assessed by dopamine and its metabolites levels.
The role of dopamine and monocyte activation (by TLR2) in the pathogenesis of cognitive disturbances was specified as well.
PMID: 22100760
Sera from neuromyelitis optica patients disrupt the blood-brain barrier.
In neuromyelitis optica (NMO), the destruction of the blood-brain barrier (BBB) has been considered to be the first step of the disease process.
It is unclear whether sera from patients with NMO can open the BBB, and which component of patient sera is most important for this disruption.
The effects of sera from antiaquaporin4 (AQP4) antibody positive NMO patients, multiple sclerosis patients and control subjects were evaluated for expression of tight junction proteins and for transendothelial electrical resistance (TEER) of human brain microvascular endothelial cells (BMECs).
Whether antibodies against human BMECs as well as anti-AQP4 antibodies exist in NMO sera was also examined using western blot analysis.
Expression of tight junction proteins and TEER in BMECs was significantly decreased after exposure to NMO sera.
However, this effect was reversed after application of an antivascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) neutralising antibody.
Antibodies against BMECs other than anti-AQP4 antibodies were found in the sera of NMO patients whereas no specific bands were detected in the sera of healthy and neurological controls.
These antibodies apparently disrupt the BBB by increasing the autocrine secretion of VEGF by BMECs themselves.
Absorption of the anti-AQP4 antibody by AQP4 transfected astrocytes reduced AQP4 antibody titres but was not associated with a reduction in BBB disruption.
Sera from NMO patients reduce expression of tight junction proteins and disrupt the BBB.
Autoantibodies against BMECs other than anti-AQP4 antibodies may disrupt the BBB through upregulation of VEGF in BMECs.
PMID: 23733930
Gene flow from North Africa contributes to differential human genetic diversity in southern Europe.
Human genetic diversity in southern Europe is higher than in other regions of the continent.
This difference has been attributed to postglacial expansions, the demic diffusion of agriculture from the Near East, and gene flow from Africa.
Using SNP data from 2,099 individuals in 43 populations, we show that estimates of recent shared ancestry between Europe and Africa are substantially increased when gene flow from North Africans, rather than Sub-Saharan Africans, is considered.
The gradient of North African ancestry accounts for previous observations of low levels of sharing with Sub-Saharan Africa and is independent of recent gene flow from the Near East.
The source of genetic diversity in southern Europe has important biomedical implications; we find that most disease risk alleles from genome-wide association studies follow expected patterns of divergence between Europe and North Africa, with the principal exception of multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 21909659
Anti-aquaporin-4 antibody-positive familial neuromyelitis optica in mother and daughter.
Cases of anti-aquaporin (AQP)-4 antibody-positive familial neuromyelitis optica (NMO) in mothers and daughters are described.
The demographic, clinical, neuroimaging, and anti-AQP-4 antibody status were investigated in four patients from two Asian families with anti-AQP-4 antibody-positive NMO.
NMO was diagnosed in both mothers and daughters using the latest diagnostic criteria.
All patients were anti-AQP-4 antibody-positive, and only one had an autoimmune background.
The Japanese family presented with a poor visual outcome due to multiple occurrences of optic neuritis, whereas the Korean family presented with a good visual outcome.
Disease onset occurred at different ages, even within the same family.
These cases may enhance the understanding of the genetic contribution to NMO.
Our findings suggest that familial history must be carefully examined in patients with NMO.
PMID: 22844681
Review of subcutaneous interferon β-1a, delivered via the electronic self-injection device RebiSmart™, for the treatment of multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis is a chronic disease requiring lifelong treatment with disease-modifying drugs that aim to prevent relapses and slow the progression of disability.
The established first-line treatments for multiple sclerosis all require regular injections, and real-world observations suggest that long-term adherence to treatment is low.
Indeed, poor adherence to disease-modifying drug treatment has been associated with poorer clinical outcomes.
Autoinjectors have been developed to improve the success of self-injection, whilst also making injections more comfortable for patients, with the aim of minimizing obstacles to treatment adherence.
RebiSmart™ is a new electronic autoinjector for subcutaneous administration of interferon β-1a (Rebif®) that includes several unique features designed to further reduce barriers to adherence, including a dosing log and adjustable comfort settings.
PMID: 22691759
MRI in multiple sclerosis:  a review of the current literature.
This review summarizes the recent data pertaining to the use of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in assessing brain and spinal cord involvement in multiple sclerosis (MS).
Using MRI as a tool, investigators have made progress recently in understanding the substrate and mechanisms underlying the development and evolution of focal lesions and diffuse damage in MS.
The application of refined MRI sequences has markedly improved the characterization of focal lesions, in particular cortical lesions.
Promising improvements have been made to clarify the pathological specificity and sensitivity of MRI techniques by performing combined histopathologic-MRI correlation studies.
The use of high-field (3 T) and ultra-high-field (UHF; &gt;3 T) MRI has further facilitated the detection of both gray matter and white matter microstructural damage, and elucidated the topographic relationship of overt damage to venous blood vessels.
The development of advanced MRI postprocessing tools has led to additional progress in detecting clinically relevant regional gray matter and white matter damage.
MRI continues to play a pivotal role in the investigation of MS.
Ongoing advances in MRI technology should further expand the current understanding of pathologic disease mechanisms and improve diagnostic, prognostic, and monitoring ability in patients with MS.
PMID: 22465972
Autoimmune hepatitis/primary biliary cirrhosis overlap syndrome and associated extrahepatic autoimmune diseases.
To assess the prevalence of concurrent extrahepatic autoimmune diseases in patients with autoimmune hepatitis (AIH)/primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) overlap syndrome and applicability of the 'mosaic of autoimmunity' in these patients.
The medical data of 71 AIH/PBC overlap patients were evaluated for associated autoimmune diseases.
In the study population, 31 (43.6%) patients had extrahepatic autoimmune diseases, including autoimmune thyroid diseases (13 patients, 18.3%), Sjögren syndrome (six patients, 8.4%), celiac disease (three patients, 4.2%), psoriasis (three patients, 4.2%), rheumatoid arthritis (three patients, 4.2%), vitiligo (two patients, 2.8%), and systemic lupus erythematosus (two patients, 2.8%).
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia, antiphospholipid syndrome, multiple sclerosis, membranous glomerulonephritis, sarcoidosis, systemic sclerosis, and temporal arteritis were identified in one patient each (1.4%).
A total of 181 autoimmune disease diagnoses were found in our patients.
Among them, 40 patients (56.4%) had two, 23 (32.3%) had three, and eight (11.3%) had four diagnosed autoimmune diseases.
A large number of autoimmune diseases were associated with AIH/PBC overlap patients.
Therefore, extended screening for existing autoimmune diseases during the routine assessment of these patients is recommended.
Our study suggests that the concept of 'mosaic of autoimmunity' is a valid clinical entity that is applicable to patients with AIH/PBC overlap syndrome.
PMID: 21512739
Progressive ascending myelopathy: atypical forms of multiple sclerosis or what else?
The spinal cord can be affected by multiple heterogeneous disorders often difficult to diagnose.
We describe ten patients affected by a progressive ascending myelopathy with a poor prognosis.
The patients, during the follow-up period, underwent neurological examinations, cerebrospinal fluid analysis, hematological, microbiological, auto-antibodies screening, brain and spinal cord magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and electroneurophysiological study.
At disease onset spinal cord MRI showed ≥1 myelopathic lesions extended for &lt;2 segments and then evidenced a progressive spinal cord atrophy without any new lesion.
All patients showed an increase of the visual evoked potential P100 latency.
All of them showed two or more clinical recurrences of myelitis and then, after a period ranging from 3 to 5 years from the disease onset, a progressive course.
Five patients became unresponsive to intravenous high-dose steroid treatments and/or intravenous immunoglobulins and to any other therapeutic attempts, developed a progressive ascending myelopathy to tetraplegia and died from respiratory failure.
The other five patients are in progressive phase of the disease with an initial involvement of the upper limbs and show mild cervical spinal cord atrophy at MRI, configuring the early stage of an ascending progressive myelopathy.
In our opinion, the more suitable diagnosis is an atypical form of MS although is not possible to exclude a new nosological entity that could be included in the expanding range of spinal cord diseases.
PMID: 23208410
Axial 3D gradient-echo imaging for improved multiple sclerosis lesion detection in the cervical spinal cord at 3T.
In multiple sclerosis (MS), spinal cord imaging can help in diagnosis and follow-up evaluation.
However, spinal cord magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is technically challenging, and image quality, particularly in the axial plane, is typically poor compared to brain MRI.
Because gradient-recalled echo (GRE) images might offer improved contrast resolution within the spinal cord at high magnetic field strength, both without and with a magnetization transfer prepulse, we compared them to T2-weighted fast-spin-echo (T2-FSE) images for the detection of MS lesions in the cervical cord at 3T.
On a clinical 3T MRI scanner, we studied 62 MS cases and 19 healthy volunteers.
Axial 3D GRE sequences were performed without and with off-resonance radiofrequency irradiation.
To mimic clinical practice, all images were evaluated in conjunction with linked images from a sagittal short tau inversion recovery scan, which is considered the gold standard for lesion detection in MS.
Two experienced observers recorded image quality, location and size of focal lesions, atrophy, swelling, and diffuse signal abnormality independently at first and then in consensus.
The number and volume of lesions detected with high confidence was more than three times as high on both GRE sequences compared to T2-FSE (p &lt; 0.0001).
Approximately 5 % of GRE scans were affected by artifacts that interfered with image interpretation, not significantly different from T2W-FSE.
Axial 3D GRE sequences are useful for MS lesion detection when compared to 2D T2-FSE sequences in the cervical spinal cord at 3T and should be considered when examining intramedullary spinal cord lesions.
PMID: 24156060
Local assessment of myelin health in a multiple sclerosis mouse model using a 2D Fourier transform approach.
We present an automated two-dimensional Fourier transform (2D-FT) approach to analyze the local organization of myelinated axons in the spinal cord.
Coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering (CARS) microscopy was used to observe lesions in a commonly used animal model of multiple sclerosis (MS), experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE).
A 2D-FT was applied on the CARS images to find the average orientation and directional anisotropy of the fibers within contiguous image domains.
We introduce the corrected correlation parameter (CCP), a measure of the correlation between orientations of adjacent domains.
We show that in the EAE animal model of MS, the CCP can be used to quantify the degree of organization/disorganization in the myelin structure.
This analysis was applied to a large image dataset from animals at different clinical scores and we show that some descriptors of the CCP probability density function are strongly correlated with the clinical scores.
This procedure, compatible with live animal imaging, has been developed to perform local in situ evaluation of myelinated axons afflicted by EAE.
PMID: 22949158
Jelly Belly trans-synaptic signaling to anaplastic lymphoma kinase regulates neurotransmission strength and synapse architecture.
In Drosophila, the secreted signaling molecule Jelly Belly (Jeb) activates anaplastic lymphoma kinase (Alk), a receptor tyrosine kinase, in multiple developmental and adult contexts.
We have shown previously that Jeb and Alk are highly enriched at Drosophila synapses within the CNS neuropil and neuromuscular junction (NMJ) and postulated a conserved intercellular signaling function.
At the embryonic and larval NMJ, Jeb is localized in the motor neuron presynaptic terminal whereas Alk is concentrated in the muscle postsynaptic domain surrounding boutons, consistent with anterograde trans-synaptic signaling.
Here, we show that neurotransmission is regulated by Jeb secretion by functional inhibition of Jeb-Alk signaling.
Jeb is a novel negative regulator of neuromuscular transmission.
Reduction or inhibition of Alk function results in enhanced synaptic transmission.
Activation of Alk conversely inhibits synaptic transmission.
Restoration of wild-type postsynaptic Alk expression in Alk partial loss-of-function mutants rescues NMJ transmission phenotypes and confirms that postsynaptic Alk regulates NMJ transmission.
The effects of impaired Alk signaling on neurotransmission are observed in the absence of associated changes in NMJ structure.
Complete removal of Jeb in motor neurons, however, disrupts both presynaptic bouton architecture and postsynaptic differentiation.
Nonphysiologic activation of Alk signaling also negatively regulates NMJ growth.
Activation of Jeb-Alk signaling triggers the Ras-MAP kinase cascade in both pre- and postsynaptic compartments.
These novel roles for Jeb-Alk signaling in the modulation of synaptic function and structure have potential implications for recently reported Alk functions in human addiction, retention of spatial memory, cognitive dysfunction in neurofibromatosis, and pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22745911
Overall Memory Impairment Identification with Mathematical Modeling of the CVLT-II Learning Curve in Multiple Sclerosis.
The CVLT-II provides standardized scores for each of the List A five learning trials, so that the clinician can compare the patient's raw trials 1-5 scores with standardized ones.
However, frequently, a patient's raw scores fluctuate making a proper interpretation difficult.
The CVLT-II does not offer any other methods for classifying a patient's learning and memory status on the background of the learning curve.
The main objective of this research is to illustrate that discriminant analysis provides an accurate assessment of the learning curve, if suitable predictor variables are selected.
Normal controls were ninety-eight healthy volunteers (78 females and 20 males).
A group of MS patients included 365 patients (266 females and 99 males) with clinically defined multiple sclerosis.
We show that the best predictor variables are coefficients B3 and B4 of our mathematical model B3 ∗ exp(-B2  ∗  (X - 1)) + B4  ∗  (1 - exp(-B2  ∗  (X - 1))) because discriminant functions, calculated separately for B3 and B4, allow nearly 100% correct classification.
These predictors allow identification of separate impairment of readiness to learn or ability to learn, or both.
PMID: 23489746
Effect of interferon beta-1a on B7.1 and B7.2 B-cell expression and its impact on T-cell proliferation.
The effect of pharmacologically relevant doses of interferon (IFN) β-1a on B-cell expression of B7.1 and B7.2 was investigated.
Culture of peripheral blood mononuclear cells with IFN β-1a 100 IU/mL decreased B-cell expression of B7.1 and increased B7.2 expression.
Interleukin-10 in B cells was significantly enhanced by IFN β-1a.
Anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 monoclonal antibody-mediated T-cell proliferations were partially suppressed in the presence of B cells pretreated with IFN β-1a.
These data suggest that IFN β-1a and B cells can interact to play a beneficial role in the treatment of multiple sclerosis.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23051967
Antibody transfection into neurons as a tool to study disease pathogenesis.
Antibodies provide the ability to gain novel insight into various events taking place in living systems.
The ability to produce highly specific antibodies to target proteins has allowed for very precise biological questions to be addressed.
Importantly, antibodies have been implicated in the pathogenesis of a number of human diseases including systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), paraneoplastic syndromes, multiple sclerosis (MS) and human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP).
How antibodies cause disease is an area of ongoing investigation, and data suggests that interactions between antibodies and various intracellular molecules results in inflammation, altered cellular messaging, and apoptosis.
It has been shown that patients with MS and HAM/TSP produce autoantibodies to the intracellular RNA binding protein heterogeneous ribonuclear protein A1 (hnRNP A1).
Recent data indicate that antibodies to both intra-neuronal and surface antigens are pathogenic.
Thus, a procedure that allows for the study of intracellular antibody:protein interactions would lend great insight into disease pathogenesis.
Genes are commonly transfected into primary cells and cell lines in culture, however transfection of antibodies into cells has been hindered by alteration of antibody structure or poor transfection efficiency.
Other methods of transfection include antibody transfection based on cationic liposomes (consisting of DOTAP/DOPE) and polyethylenimines (PEI); both of which resulted in a ten-fold decrease in antibody transfection compared to controls.
The method performed in our study is similar to cationic lipid-mediated methods and uses a lipid-based mechanism to form non-covalent complexes with the antibodies through electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions.
We utilized Ab-DeliverIN reagent, which is a lipid formulation capable of capturing antibodies through non-covalent electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions and delivering them inside cells.
Thus chemical and genetic couplings are not necessary for delivery of functional antibodies into living cells.
This method has enabled us to perform various antibody tracing and protein localization experiments, as well as the analyses of the molecular consequences of intracellular antibody:protein interactions.
In this protocol, we will show how to transfect antibodies into neurons rapidly, reproducibly and with a high degree of transfection efficiency.
As an example, we will use anti-hnRNP A1 and anti-IgG antibodies.
For easy quantification of transfection efficiency we used anti-hnRNP A1 antibodies labelled with Atto-550-NHS and FITC-labeled IgG.
Atto550 NHS is a new label with high molecular absorbtion and quantum yield.
Excitation source and fluorescent filters for Atto550 are similar to Cy3 (Ex.
556 Em.
578).
In addition, Atto550 has high photostability.
FITC-labeled IgG were used as a control to show that this method is versatile and not dye dependent.
This approach and the data that is generated will assist in understanding of the role that antibodies to intracellular target antigens might play in the pathogenesis of human diseases.
PMID: 22343386
Targeted therapeutic strategies for the management of renal cell carcinoma.
This article reviews recent developments in the use of systemic targeted therapies for the treatment of advanced clear and nonclear cell renal cell carcinoma (RCC).
The genetic/molecular basis of each form of RCC is discussed and current treatments and clinical trials are described.
The treatment of advanced RCC continues to be a major challenge for uro-oncologists.
The rapid growth in therapeutic options has brought much needed improvements in overall and progression-free survival, although durable complete responses remain elusive.
The recent identification of mutations in genes involved in chromatin remodeling will likely lead to the investigation of whether components of this critical process can also be valid therapeutic targets in clear cell RCC.
Similarly, efforts to decipher the molecular mechanisms underlying nonclear cell variants of RCC are beginning to engender novel therapeutic strategies directed against these rarer forms of kidney cancer.
Despite the availability of multiple treatment options, several challenges remain: selecting the best first-line or subsequent therapy for a given patient, the optimal sequencing of the various agents available, designing trials with appropriate comparison arms and endpoints, and identifying well tolerated and effective drug combinations.
Agents targeting the vascular endothelial growth factor and mammalian target of rapamycin pathways remain the mainstay in the management of metastatic RCC.
Ongoing and future studies are expected to facilitate the development of therapeutic regimens that incorporate agents with improved tolerability and enhanced efficacy by continuing to capitalize on the strides made by basic and translational scientists in uncovering the mechanisms underlying the various forms of RCC.
PMID: 21327771
Brain atrophy and lesion load are related to CSF lipid-specific IgM oligoclonal bands in clinically isolated syndromes.
The objective of this work is to study the relationship between the presence of lipid-specific oligoclonal IgM bands (LS-OCMB) in CSF, with both T2 lesion volume (T2LV) accumulation and brain atrophy (percentage change of brain volume-PCBV-and brain parenchyma fraction-BPF) in patients with clinically isolated syndromes (CIS) suggestive of demyelination.
Twenty-four CIS patients were included in this prospective study.
IgG oligoclonal bands (OCGB) and LS-OCMB were determined in paired serum and CSF samples within 3 months since clinical onset.
Brain MRI studies were scheduled at baseline, 3 months, first and second years after CIS onset.
Differences in T2LV, PCBV and BPF between CIS patients according to the type of OCB were studied.
Nine patients had no OCB; 15 had only OCGB, and seven had OCGB + LS-OCMB present in the CSF.
LS-OCMB were associated with greater T2LV in all scheduled MRI studies.
At the end of follow-up (year 2), it was threefold higher in patients with these antibodies than in those without LS-OCMB (3.95 cm(3) vs.
1.36 cm(3), p = 0.001).
At that point, brain atrophy was also higher in patients with LS-OCMB (BPF, 0.73 in LS-OCMB+ patients vs. 0.76 in negative ones, p = 0.03).
The rate in brain atrophy was higher in the first group of patients as well.
Considering only patients with OCGB, the presence of LS-OCMB was also related to greater T2LV, T2LV increase and a trend towards higher atrophy rate.
The presence of LS-OCMB in the first event suggestive of demyelination is related to an early increase in lesion load and brain atrophy.
These data are in line with prospective studies showing the clinical prognostic value of LS-OCMB.
PMID: 22672939
A corrected version of the Timed-25 Foot Walk Test with a dynamic start to capture the maximum ambulation speed in multiple sclerosis patients.
No clinical test is currently available and validated to measure the maximum walking speed (WS) of multiple sclerosis (MS) patients.
Since the Timed 25-Foot Walk Test (T25FW) is performed with a static start, it takes a significant proportion of the distance for MS patients to reach their maximum pace.
In order to capture the maximum WS and to quantify the relative impact of the accelerating phase during the first meters, we compared the classical T25FW with a modified version (T25FW(+)allowing a dynamic start after a 3 meters run-up.
Sixty-four MS patients and 30 healthy subjects performed successively the T25FW and the T25FW(+).
The T25FW(+)was performed faster than the T25FW for the vast majority of MS and healthy subjects.
In the MS population, the mean relative gain of speed due to the dynamic start on T25FW(+) was independent from the EDSS and from the level of ambulation impairment.
Compared to healthy subjects, the relative difference between dynamic versus static start was more important in the MS population even in patients devoid of apparent gait impairment according to the T25FW.
The T25FW(+)allows a more accurate measurement of the maximum WS of MS patients, which is a prerequisite to reliably evaluate deceleration over longer distance tests.
Indirect arguments suggest that the time to reach the maximum WS may be partially influenced by the cognitive impairment status.
The maximum WS and the capacity of MS patients to accelerate on a specific distance may be independently regulated and assessed separately in clinical trials and rehabilitation programs.
PMID: 22236888
Postural control in multiple sclerosis: effects of disability status and dual task.
Persons with Multiple Sclerosis (PwMS) have postural control impairments.
The simultaneous performance of a cognitive task while maintaining an upright posture (i.e. dual task) negatively influences postural control in PwMS with mild disability.
This investigation compares the effect of simultaneous cognitive task performance on postural control in PwMS with mild and moderate disability.
Forty-five PwMS were divided into groups based on Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) scores: mild (EDSS: 2.0-3.5) and moderate (EDSS: 4.0-6.5) disbaility.
Each participant underwent posturography testing during a quiet baseline condition and a cognitive task condition (i.e. dual task).
The cognitive task was a word list generation (WLG) task.
Median sway velocity, root mean square displacement, and sway area were calculated for each condition.
The moderate disability group had significantly worse postural control than the mild disability group.
There was an increase in postural sway in the dual task condition.
There were no significant task-by-group interactions on postural control.
Postural control declines with disability status and is negatively affected by a concurrent cognitive task in PwMS.
The dual task cost during a balance task is not different between disability levels and this conflicts with findings for the effect of dual tasking during walking in PwMS.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23480183
Anti-high mobility group box 1 monoclonal antibody ameliorates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
High mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) is an established inflammatory mediator when released from cells.
Recent studies have implicated extracellular HMGB1 in the pathogenesis of various autoimmune diseases.
The objective of this study was to determine whether HMGB1 could be a therapeutic target for experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE).
In this study, an anti-HMGB1 monoclonal antibody was injected intraperitoneally into a mouse model of EAE.
We also measured serum cytokines levels in EAE and anti-HMGB1 monoclonal antibody-treated EAE.
As a result, intraperitoneal injection of an anti-HMGB1 monoclonal antibody ameliorated the clinical and pathological severity of EAE and attenuated interleukin-17 up-regulation in serum.
In conclusion, HMGB1 is involved in EAE pathogenesis and could trigger inflammation in the central nervous system.
The novel aspect of this study is the demonstration that anti-HMGB1 ameliorates EAE.
HMGB1 may be a novel therapeutic strategy for multiple sclerosis.
© 2012 British Society for Immunology.
PMID: 24179729
Mimotopic peptide immunotherapy for the treatment of multiple sclerosis, an inflammatory autoimmune disease.
Several lines of evidence suggest that mast cells play a key role in the pathogenesis of Multiple Sclerosis (MS).
The contribution of mast cells likely depends upon specific adherence to myelin surface-bound IgE, which triggers degranulation and the release of enzymes that damage central nervous system (CNS) neurons.
To block mast cell degranulation, a peptide-based system was developed to neutralize endogenous, myelin-targeting autoantibodies, thus halting the pathological autoimmune process.
Development of the MS therapeutic involved: (1) identification of relevant myelin epitopes; (2) estimation of endogenous autoantibody quantities to be neutralized; (3) synthesis of epitope mimicking/autoantibody-neutralizing peptides; (4) subcutaneous administration of the peptides; and (5) assessment, over time, of clinical presentation together with matching, residual autoantibody levels.
An open label, interventional study was performed involving a single MS patient and five control subjects as a first step towards a potentially larger, more elaborate investigation.
The study encompassed serological testing to confirm the IgE-positive status of the MS patient and negative status of the controls, an eight month course of peptide-based immunotherapy, and assessment of therapeutic efficacy and potentially adverse effects.
Treatment of the MS patient with the peptide-based therapy resulted in a reduction in myelin-specific IgE titers and marked clinical improvement.
No subjects experienced adverse effects.
Thus, peptide-based immunotherapy could provide improved clinical status or life-long remission to MS patients.
Substantiation of this premise requires a follow-up examination by other investigators and institutions with larger and more extensive clinical trials.
PMID: 22267202
Fumarates promote cytoprotection of central nervous system cells against oxidative stress via the nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 pathway.
Oxidative stress is central to the pathology of several neurodegenerative diseases, including multiple sclerosis, and therapeutics designed to enhance antioxidant potential could have clinical value.
The objective of this study was to characterize the potential direct neuroprotective effects of dimethyl fumarate (DMF) and its primary metabolite monomethyl fumarate (MMF) on cellular resistance to oxidative damage in primary cultures of central nervous system (CNS) cells and further explore the dependence and function of the nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (Nrf2) pathway in this process.
Treatment of animals or primary cultures of CNS cells with DMF or MMF resulted in increased nuclear levels of active Nrf2, with subsequent up-regulation of canonical antioxidant target genes.
DMF-dependent up-regulation of antioxidant genes in vivo was lost in mice lacking Nrf2 [Nrf2(-/-)].
DMF or MMF treatment increased cellular redox potential, glutathione, ATP levels, and mitochondrial membrane potential in a concentration-dependent manner.
Treating astrocytes or neurons with DMF or MMF also significantly improved cell viability after toxic oxidative challenge in a concentration-dependent manner.
This effect on viability was lost in cells that had eliminated or reduced Nrf2.
These data suggest that DMF and MMF are cytoprotective for neurons and astrocytes against oxidative stress-induced cellular injury and loss, potentially via up-regulation of an Nrf2-dependent antioxidant response.
These data also suggest DMF and MMF may function through improving mitochondrial function.
The clinical utility of DMF in multiple sclerosis is being explored through phase III trials with BG-12, which is an oral therapeutic containing DMF as the active ingredient.
PMID: 23407618
Apply Awaji-shima Consensus Conference Criteria Before Diagnosing Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
ALS may be diagnosed although affection of other organs suggests another pathogenetic back-ground.
In a 72yo non-smoking male progressive gait disturbance with recurrent falls since 2y was initially attributed to axonal polyneuropathy.
Additionally, he had arterial hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, hyperuricemia, hyper-CK-emia, hepatopathy, atrial fibrillation, recurrent heart-failure, pulmonary hypertension, mitral insufficiency, and restrictive cardiomyopathy.
Possible causes of polyneuropathy were diabetes, long-standing alcoholism, folate-deficiency, or hereditary disease.
Later the patient was re-diagnosed as ALS despite absence of upper motor-neuron or bulbar signs, the presence of multiple risk factors for polyneuropathy, of stocking-type sensory disturbances, and of cardiac abnormalities, which could explain dyspnea.
Misdiagnosing polyneuropathy as ALS stigmatized the patient and prevented him from further diagnostic work-up for cardiac disease and adequate treatment for heart-failure.
Though the diagnosis of ALS was withdrawn, he was put on comfort care and opiates were given when dyspnea acutely deteriorated to death without further cardiac or pulmonary investigations or specific cardiac treatment.
ALS should be diagnosed only if the Awaji-shima criteria are fulfilled and if all differential diagnoses were profoundly excluded.
Respiratory insufficiency should not be attributed to bulbar involvement in ALS as long as cardiac, pulmonary, or myopathic causes were excluded.
PMID: 23895517
MicroRNA regulate immune pathways in T-cells in multiple sclerosis (MS).
MicroRNA are small noncoding RNA molecules that are involved in the control of gene expression.
To investigate the role of microRNA in multiple sclerosis (MS), we performed genome-wide expression analyses of mRNA and microRNA in T-cells from MS patients and controls.
Heparin-anticoagulated peripheral blood was collected from MS-patients and healthy controls followed by isolation of T-cells.
MicroRNA and RNA from T-cells was prepared and hybridized to Affymetrix miR 2.0 array and Affymetrix U133Plus 2.0 Human Genome array (Santa Clara, CA), respectively.
Verifications were performed with real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
We identified 2,452 differentially expressed genes and 21 differentially expressed microRNA between MS patients and controls.
By Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, 20 of 21 differentially expressed microRNA were shown to affect the expression of their target genes, many of which were involved in the immune system.
Tumor necrosis factor ligand superfamily member 14 (TNFSF14) was a microRNA target gene significantly decreased in MS.
The differential expression of mir-494, mir-197 and the predicted microRNA target gene TNFSF14 was verified by real-time PCR and ELISA.
These findings indicate that microRNA may be important regulatory molecules in T-cells in MS.
PMID: 22197033
A cross-sectional MRI study of brain regional atrophy and clinical characteristics of temporal lobe epilepsy with hippocampal sclerosis.
Applying a cross-sectional design, we set out to further characterize the significance of extrahippocampal brain atrophy in a large sample of 'sporadic' mesial temporal lobe epilepsy with hippocampal sclerosis (MTLE+HS).
By evaluating the influence of epilepsy chronicity on structural atrophy, this work represents an important step towards the characterization of MRI-based volumetric measurements as genetic endophenotypes for this condition.
Using an automated brain segmentation technique, MRI-based volume measurements of several brain regions were compared between 75 patients with 'sporadic' MTLE+HS and 50 healthy controls.
Applying linear regression models, we examined the relationship between structural atrophy and important clinical features of MTLE+HS, including disease duration, lifetime number of partial and generalized seizures, and history of initial precipitating insults (IPIs).
Significant volume loss was detected in ipsilateral hippocampus, amygdala, thalamus, and cerebral white matter (WM).
In addition, contralateral hippocampal and bilateral cerebellar grey matter (GM) volume loss was observed in left MTLE+HS patients.
Hippocampal, amygdalar, and cerebral WM volume loss correlated with duration of epilepsy.
This correlation was stronger in patients with prior IPIs history.
Further, cerebral WM, cerebellar GM, and contralateral hippocampal volume loss correlated with lifetime number of generalized seizures.
Our findings confirm that multiple brain regions beyond the hippocampus are involved in the pathogenesis of MTLE+HS.
IPIs are an important factor influencing the rate of regional atrophy but our results also support a role for processes related to epilepsy chronicity.
The consequence of epilepsy chronicity on candidate brain regions has important implications on their application as genetic endophenotypes.
Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22134193
A mind surrounded by a moat: a first-person account of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis.
This is a first-person account of the cognitive impairments--in speaking, writing, and thinking-caused by multiple sclerosis in a professional writer.
The patient explains how she has worked around her deficits in rebuilding her life over the 18 years since her diagnosis.
Her personal account is woven together with her clinical history, including her neuropsychological testing and magnetic resonance imaging results.
A companion article giving perspectives on the case was written by a cognitive neuroscientist who has been studying some of the types of deficits reported by the patient.
PMID: 22284064
Acute demyelinating disorders: emergencies and management.
Central nervous system (CNS) inflammatory demyelinating diseases are a group of disorders that include multiple sclerosis, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, and neuromyelitis optica.
These conditions may result in emergencies because of severe inflammatory destruction of CNS tissues or complications thereof.
Most of these conditions are responsive to appropriate therapy and early diagnosis and treatment leads to better outcomes.
We discuss the spectrum of emergencies associated with these disorders, as well as clinical features, investigations, and management.
Copyright © 2012.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
PMID: 21041051
Comparison of MRI sequences for evaluation of multiple sclerosis of the cervical spinal cord at 3 T.
Debate remains regarding the utility of the traditional STIR (short inversion time recovery) sequence in aiding MRI diagnosis of spinal cord lesions in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) and this sequence is not included in the current imaging guidelines.
A recent study proposed a T1 weighted STIR as a superior alternative to the traditional STIR and T2 fast spin echo (FSE).
Thus, the aim of this study was to compare the sensitivity of T2, standard STIR and T1 weighted STIR sequences in the evaluation of MS plaques on our 3 T system.
A retrospective analysis of patients with multiple sclerosis who presented to our institution over a period of 5 months and who had cervical cord lesions was undertaken.
Patients had been examined with our institutional protocol which included T2 FSE, STIR and the recommended T1 STIR.
Quantitative analysis of the lesions versus background cord using sample T-tests was performed for each sequence, and comparative analysis of the lesion contrast:background cord ratios of the 3 sequences (using two-way ANOVA tests) was performed.
The T2 sequence was not as sensitive in detecting lesions versus the traditional STIR and T1 weighted STIR, with 10% of lesions not detected using statistical analysis (p&lt;0.05).
The traditional STIR also demonstrated greater contrast ratios than the T2 sequence (p&lt;0.05) suggesting increased sensitivity.
However, the T1 STIR demonstrated even greater contrast ratios than both the traditional STIR and T2 sequences (p&lt;0.05).
This study confirms earlier findings of the traditional STIRs increased sensitivity versus the T2 sequence.
However, the new T1 weighted STIR appears to be even more sensitive than both these sequences showing potential promise as an alternative method to monitor demyelinating plaques of MS.
Crown Copyright © 2010.
Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23908710
Neuromyelitis optica mimicking intramedullary tumor.
Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) is considered to be a rarer autoimmune disease than multiple sclerosis.
It is very difficult to make a diagnosis of MNO for doctors who are not familiar with its clinical features and diagnostic criteria.
We report a case of a young female patient who had been suffering motor weakness and radiating pain in both upper extremities.
Cervical MRI showed tumorous lesion in spinal cord and performed surgery to remove lesion.
We could not find a tumor mass in operation field and final diagnosis was NMO.
NMO must be included in the differential diagnosis of lesions to rescue the patient from invasive surgical interventions.
More specific diagnostic tools may be necessary for early diagnosis and proper treatment.
PMID: 22576891
No association between conventional brain MR imaging and chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency in multiple sclerosis.
CCSVI has been reported to occur at high frequency in MS.
Its significance in relation to MR imaging parameters also needs to be determined, both in patients with MS and HCs.
Therefore, this study determined the associations of CCSVI and conventional MR imaging outcomes in patients with MS and in HCs.
T2, T1, and gadolinium lesion number, LV, and brain atrophy were assessed on 3T MR imaging in 301 subjects, of whom 162 had RRMS, 66 had secondary-progressive MS subtype, and 73 were HCs.
CCSVI was assessed using extracranial and transcranial Doppler evaluation.
The MR imaging measure differences were explored with 27 borderline cases for CCSVI, added to both the negative and positive CCSVI groups to assess sensitivity of the results of these cases.
No significant differences between subjects with and without CCSVI were found in any of the individual diagnostic subgroups or MS disease subtypes for lesion burden and atrophy measures, independently of the CCSVI classification criteria used, except for a trend for higher T2 lesion number (irrespective of how borderline cases were classified) and lower brain volume (when borderline cases were included in the positive group) in patients with RRMS with CCSVI.
No CCSVI or MR imaging differences were found between 26 HCs with, or 47 without, a familial relationship.
CCSVI is not associated with more severe lesion burden or brain atrophy in patients with MS or in HCs.
PMID: 23118540
Can a physician predict the clinical response to first-line immunomodulatory treatment in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis?
Decreased relapse rate and slower disease progression have been reported with long-term use of immunomodulatory treatments (IMTs, interferon beta or glatiramer acetate) in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
There are, however, patients who do not respond to such treatments, and they can be potential candidates for alternative therapeutic approaches.
To identify clinical factors as possible predictors of poor long-term response.
A 9-year prospective, continuous follow-up at a single center in Hungary to assess clinical efficacy of IMT.
In a patient group of 81 subjects with mean IMT duration of 54 ± 33 months, treatment efficacy expressed as annual relapse rate and change in clinical severity from baseline did not depend on the specific IMT (any of the interferon betas or glatiramer acetate), and on mono- or multifocal features of the initial appearance of the disease.
Responders had shorter disease duration and milder clinical signs at the initiation of treatment.
Relapse-rate reduction in the initial 2 years of treatment predicted clinical efficacy in subsequent years.
Based on these observations, we suggest that a 2-year trial period is sufficient to decide on the efficacy of a specific IMT.
For those with insufficient relapse reduction in the first 2 years of treatment, a different IMT or other therapeutic approaches should be recommended.
PMID: 22802629
Peripheral inflammatory disease associated with centrally activated IL-1 system in humans and mice.
During peripheral immune activation caused by an infection or an inflammatory condition, the innate immune response signals to the brain and causes an up-regulation of central nervous system (CNS) cytokine production.
Central actions of proinflammatory cytokines, in particular IL-1β, are pivotal for the induction of fever and fatigue.
In the present study, the influence of peripheral chronic joint inflammatory disease in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) on CNS inflammation was investigated.
Intrathecal interleukin (IL)-1β concentrations were markedly elevated in RA patients compared with controls or with patients with multiple sclerosis.
Conversely, the anti-inflammatory IL-1 receptor antagonist and IL-4 were decreased in RA cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
Tumor necrosis factor and IL-6 levels in the CSF did not differ between patients and controls.
Concerning IL-1β, CSF concentrations in RA patients were higher than in serum, indicating local production in the CNS, and there was a positive correlation between CSF IL-1β and fatigue assessments.
Next, spinal inflammation in experimental arthritis was investigated.
A marked increase of IL-1β, IL-18, and tumor necrosis factor, but not IL-6 mRNA production, in the spinal cord was observed, coinciding with increased arthritis scores in the KBxN serum transfer model.
These data provide evidence that peripheral inflammation such as arthritis is associated with an immunological activation in the CNS in both humans and mice, suggesting a possible therapeutic target for centrally affecting conditions as fatigue in chronic inflammatory diseases, for which to date there are no specific treatments.
PMID: 23983847
The development of primary central nervous system B-cell lymphoma in multiple sclerosis.
When coupled with classical clinical signs and symptoms, magnetic resonance imaging can significantly aid in the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis (MS).
However, the differential diagnosis of multiple sclerosis is large and, in the absence of pathognomonic clinical features, can be challenging to diagnose initially.
Some conditions, such as primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL) and progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), can mimic clinically some of the symptoms prominent in multiple sclerosis.
Early treatment with corticosteroids can dramatically improve patient symptoms in MS and PCNSL.
We report a case of a man diagnosed with histologically confirmed relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis who subsequently developed histologically confirmed primary central nervous system lymphoma.
Immunosuppressant therapy in the treatment of multiple sclerosis may be a potential catalyst in the development of central nervous system lymphoma.
The course of his disease and treatment are presented and the current literature reviewed.
PMID: 22509264
White matter atrophy and cognitive dysfunctions in neuromyelitis optica.
Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) is an inflammatory disease of central nervous system characterized by optic neuritis and longitudinally extensive acute transverse myelitis.
NMO patients have cognitive dysfunctions but other clinical symptoms of brain origin are rare.
In the present study, we aimed to investigate cognitive functions and brain volume in NMO.
The study population consisted of 28 patients with NMO and 28 healthy control subjects matched for age, sex and educational level.
We applied a French translation of the Brief Repeatable Battery (BRB-N) to the NMO patients.
Using SIENAx for global brain volume (Grey Matter, GM; White Matter, WM; and whole brain) and VBM for focal brain volume (GM and WM), NMO patients and controls were compared.
Voxel-level correlations between diminished brain concentration and cognitive performance for each tests were performed.
Focal and global brain volume of NMO patients with and without cognitive impairment were also compared.
Fifteen NMO patients (54%) had cognitive impairment with memory, executive function, attention and speed of information processing deficits.
Global and focal brain atrophy of WM but not Grey Matter (GM) was found in the NMO patients group.
The focal WM atrophy included the optic chiasm, pons, cerebellum, the corpus callosum and parts of the frontal, temporal and parietal lobes, including superior longitudinal fascicle.
Visual memory, verbal memory, speed of information processing, short-term memory and executive functions were correlated to focal WM volumes.
The comparison of patients with, to patients without cognitive impairment showed a clear decrease of global and focal WM, including brainstem, corticospinal tracts, corpus callosum but also superior and inferior longitudinal fascicles.
Cognitive impairment in NMO patients is correlated to the decreased of global and focal WM volume of the brain.
Further studies are needed to better understand the precise origin of cognitive impairment in NMO patients, particularly in the WM.
PMID: 22509268
HLA-DRB1-DQB1 haplotypes confer susceptibility and resistance to multiple sclerosis in Sardinia.
Genetic predisposition to multiple sclerosis (MS) in Sardinia (Italy) has been associated with five DRB1*-DQB1* haplotypes of the human leukocyte antigen (HLA).
Given the complexity of these associations, an in-depth re-analysis was performed with the specific aims of confirming the haplotype associations; establishing the independence of the associated haplotypes; and assessing patients' genotypic risk of developing MS.
A transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) of the DRB1*-DQB1* haplotypes in 943 trio families, confirmed a higher than expected transmission rate (over-transmission) of the *13:03-*03:01 (OR = 2.9, P = 7.6×10(-3)), *04:05-*03:01 (OR = 2.4, P = 4.4×10(-6)) and *03:01-*02:01 (OR = 2.1, P = 1.0×10(-15)) haplotype.
In contrast, the *16:01-*05:02 (OR = 0.5, P = 5.4×10(-11)) and the *15:02-*06:01 (OR = 0.3, P = 1.5×10(-3)) haplotypes exhibited a lower than expected transmission rate (under-transmission).
The independence of the transmission of each positively and negatively associated haplotype was confirmed relative to all positively associated haplotypes, and to the negatively associated *16:01-*05:02 haplotype.
In patients, carriage of two predisposing haplotypes, or of protective haplotypes, respectively increased or decreased the patient's risk of developing MS.
The risk of MS followed a multiplicative model of genotypes, which was, in order of decreasing ORs: *04:05-*0301/*03:01-*02:01 (OR = 4.5); *03:01-*02:01/*03:01-*02:01 (OR = 4.1); and the *16:01-*05:02/*16:01-*0502 (OR = 0.2) genotypes.
Analysis of DRB1 and DQB1 protein chain residues showed that the Val/Gly residue at position 86 of the DRB1 chain was the only difference between the protective *16:01- *15:02 alleles and the predisposing *15:01 one.
Similarly, the Ala/Val residue at position 38 of the DQB1 chain differentiated the positively associated *06:02 allele and the negatively associated *05:02, *06:01 alleles.
These findings show that the association of specific, independent DRB1*-DQB1* haplotypes confers susceptibility or resistance to MS in the MS-prone Sardinian population.
The data also supports a functional role for specific residues of the DRB1 and DQB1 proteins in predisposing patients to MS.
PMID: 21956376
Psychometric performance of a generic walking scale (Walk-12G) in multiple sclerosis and Parkinson's disease.
Walking difficulties are common in neurological and other disorders, as well as among the elderly.
There is a need for reliable and valid instruments for measuring walking difficulties in everyday life since existing gait tests are clinician rated and focus on situation specific capacity.
The Walk-12G was adapted from the 12-item multiple sclerosis walking scale as a generic patient-reported rating scale for walking difficulties in everyday life.
The aim of this study is to examine the psychometric properties of the Walk-12G in people with multiple sclerosis (MS) and Parkinson's disease (PD).
The Walk-12G was translated into Swedish and evaluated qualitatively among 25 people with and without various neurological and other conditions.
Postal survey (MS, n = 199; PD, n = 189) and clinical (PD, n = 36) data were used to test its psychometric properties.
Respondents considered the Walk-12G relevant and easy to use.
Mean completion time was 3.5 min.
Data completeness was good (&lt;5% missing item responses) and tests of scaling assumptions supported summing item scores to a total score (corrected item-total correlations &gt;0.6).
Coefficient alpha and test-retest reliabilities were &gt;0.9, and standard errors of measurement were 2.3-2.8.
Construct validity was supported by correlations in accordance with a priori expectations.
Results are similar to those with previous Walk-12G versions, indicating that scale adaptation was successful.
Data suggest that the Walk-12G meets rating scale criteria for clinical trials, making it a valuable complement to available gait tests.
Further studies involving other samples and application of modern psychometric methods are warranted to examine the scale in more detail.
PMID: 22255632
Fuzzy approach toward reducing false positives in the detection of small multiple sclerosis lesions in magnetic resonance images.
The large number of false positives that result when automatic algorithms are considered for segmenting small multiple sclerosis lesions in magnetic resonance imaging hampers the posterior evaluation of lesion load.
To address this problem we propose a fuzzy system which can improve the differentiation between true and false positive detections in proton density- and T2-weighted images.
On the basis of an earlier work, which was focused on the detection of hyperintense regions in MR brain images, the system here presented introduces fuzzy restrictions derived from the regional analysis of the main features in such regions.
Results show a reduction to a 3.6% in the number of false detections while preserving most of the true detections obtained using previous algorithm.
PMID: 22084176
Sclerosing bone dysplasias: review and differentiation from other causes of osteosclerosis.
Sclerosing bone dysplasias are skeletal abnormalities of varying severity with a wide range of radiologic, clinical, and genetic features.
Hereditary sclerosing bone dysplasias result from some disturbance in the pathways involved in osteoblast or osteoclast regulation, leading to abnormal accumulation of bone.
Several genes have been discovered that, when disrupted, result in specific types of hereditary sclerosing bone dysplasia (osteopetrosis, pyknodysostosis, osteopoikilosis, osteopathia striata, progressive diaphyseal dysplasia, hereditary multiple diaphyseal sclerosis, hyperostosis corticalis generalisata), many of which exhibit similar pathologic mechanisms involving endochondral or intramembranous ossification and some of which share similar underlying genetic defects.
Nonhereditary dysplasias include intramedullary osteosclerosis, melorheostosis, and overlap syndromes, whereas acquired syndromes with increased bone density, which may simulate sclerosing bone dysplasias, include osteoblastic metastases, Paget disease of bone, Erdheim-Chester disease, myelofibrosis, and sickle cell disease.
Knowledge of the radiologic appearances, distribution, and associated clinical findings of hereditary and nonhereditary sclerosing bone dysplasias and acquired syndromes with increased bone density is crucial for accurate diagnosis.
PMID: 23421098
[Marihuana and cannobinoids as medicaments].
Biological activity of cannabinoids is caused by binding to two cannabinoid receptors CB1 and CB2.
Psychoactive is not only tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) but also: cannabidiol, cannabigerol or cannabichromen.
Formerly, the usefulness of hemp was assessed in the relation to temporary appeasement of the symptoms of some ailments as nausea or vomiting.
Present discoveries indicates that cannabis-based drugs has shown ability to alleviate of autoimmunological disorders such as: Multiple sclerosis (MS), Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) or inflammatory bowel disease.
Another studies indicates that cannabinoids play role in treatment of neurological disorders like Alzheimer disease or Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) or even can reduce spreading of tumor cells.
Cannabinoids stand out high safety profile considering acute toxicity, it is low possibility of deadly overdosing and side-effects are comprise in range of tolerated side-effects of other medications.
In some countries marinol and nabilone are used as anti vomiting and nausea drug.
First cannabis-based drug containg naturally occurring cannabinoids is Sativex.
Sativex is delivered in an mucosal spray for patients suffering from spasticity in MS, pain relevant with cancer and neuropathic pain of various origin.
Despite the relatively low acute toxicity of cannabinoids they should be avoid in patients with psychotic disorders, pregnant or breastfeeding woman.
Cannabinoids prolong a time of reaction and decrease power of concentration that's why driving any vehicles is forbidden.
Cannabis side-effects varies and depend from several factors like administrated dose, rout of administration and present state of mind.
After sudden break from long-lasting use, withdrawal symptoms can appear, although they entirely disappear after a week or two.
PMID: 22695538
Increased plasma 8,12-iso-iPF2alpha- VI levels in relapsing multiple sclerosis patients are not predictive of disease progression.
Oxidative stress plays an important role in multiple sclerosis (MS).
Isoprostanes are biomarkers for oxidative stress and have been related to neurological disease progression.
To study whether plasma isoprostane levels were related to disease progression in MS.
Plasma levels of 8,12-iso-iPF2alpha-VI were determined in 17 patients with clinically isolated syndrome (CIS), 41 relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) patients and 5 primary progressive MS (PPMS) patients and related to MRI and clinical disease parameters.
Isoprostane levels were similar in CIS (60.9, interquartile range (IQR): 47.7-77.7 pg/ml) and RRMS patients (65.3, IQR: 51.9-82.8 pg/ml).
The plasma levels were lower in PPMS patients (42.5, IQR: 37.1-49.9) pg/ml, p&lt;0.05) compared to CIS and RRMS patients in this cohort, which was not confirmed in a second cohort.
Baseline isoprostane levels were not related to clinical progression defined by conversion form CIS to RRMS or change in Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) or MS Functional Composite (MSFC) scores during six years of follow-up (CIS + RRMS), nor to change in volume of gadolinium enhancing lesions, T2 lesion load or T1 hypointense lesion load during 2.8 years of follow-up (CIS + RRMS).
These results do not support a strong role of 8,12-iso-iPF2alpha-VI in the prediction of disease progression in MS.
PMID: 23487294
Polymorphisms of paraoxonase 1 and 2 genes and the risk of multiple sclerosis in the Polish population.
The aim of this study was to test the hypothesis that polymorphisms of the paraoxonase genes PON1 and PON2 may be associated with increased risk of developing multiple sclerosis (MS) in the Polish population.
We studied the significance of the PON gene polymorphisms C311S, A162G, Q192R and L55M in 221 patients (including 145 women) with MS and in 661 healthy controls.
In the MS population, mean Expanded Disability Status Scale score was 2.92, mean age was 36.8 years, and mean disease duration was 7.7 years.
PON genotyping was determined using polymerase chain reaction and restriction enzyme digestion.
According to our results, the PON1 and PON2 genotypes distribution did not differ between the MS patients and the controls.
The polymorphisms of the PON genes studied are not related to increased risk of MS in the Polish population.
PMID: 23610432
Soluble IL7Rα potentiates IL-7 bioactivity and promotes autoimmunity.
Human soluble interleukin-7 receptor (sIL7R)α circulates in high molar excess compared with IL-7, but its biology remains unclear.
We demonstrate that sIL7Rα has moderate affinity for IL-7 but does not bind thymic stromal lymphopoietin.
Functionally, sIL7Rα competes with cell-associated IL-7 receptor to diminish excessive IL-7 consumption and, thus, enhances the bioactivity of IL-7 when the cytokine is limited, as it is presumed to be in vivo.
IL-7 signaling in the presence of sIL7Rα also diminishes expression of CD95 and suppressor of cytokine signaling 1, both regulatory molecules.
Murine models confirm diminished consumption of IL-7 in the presence of sIL7Rα and also demonstrate a potentiating effect of sIL7Rα on IL-7-mediated homeostatic expansion and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis exacerbation.
In multiple sclerosis and several other autoimmune diseases, IL7R genotype influences susceptibility.
We measured increased sIL7Rα levels, as well as increased IL-7 levels, in multiple sclerosis patients with the predisposing IL7R genotype, consistent with diminished IL-7 consumption in vivo.
This work demonstrates that sIL7Rα potentiates IL-7 bioactivity and provides a basis to explain the increased risk of autoimmunity observed in individuals with genotype-induced elevations of sIL7Rα.
PMID: 23730262
mTOR Inhibitors in Tuberous Sclerosis Complex.
Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is a genetic multiple organ system disorder that is characterized by the development of tumor-like lesions (hamartomas) and neurodevelopmental disorders.
Mutations in the TSC1 and TSC2 tumor suppressor genes occur in the majority of patients with TSC, resulting in hyperactivation of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway and subsequent abnormalities in numerous cell processes.
As a result, mTOR inhibitors such as sirolimus and everolimus have the potential to provide targeted therapy for patients with TSC.
Everolimus is the first mTOR inhibitor approved as a treatment option in the USA and in Europe for patients with subependymal giant-cell astrocytomas (SEGAs) associated with TSC.
The clinical evidence to date supports the use of mTOR inhibitors in a variety of TSC-associated disease manifestations, including SEGAs, renal angiomyolipoma, skin manifestations, and epilepsy.
Furthermore, ongoing clinical trials evaluating mTOR inhibitors in TSC are underway, and the results of these studies are expected to provide further evidence that will firmly establish their role in this setting.
This article will discuss the role of the mTOR pathway in TSC and review the pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, clinical efficacy, and tolerability of mTOR inhibitors, along with their current place in clinical practice.
PMID: 23056220
Chronic cladribine administration increases amyloid beta peptide generation and plaque burden in mice.
The clinical uses of 2-chloro-2'-deoxyadenosine (2-CDA) or cladribine which was initially prescribed to patients with hematological and lymphoid cancers is now extended to treat patients with multiple sclerosis (MS).
Previous data has shown that 2-CDA has high affinity to the brain and readily passes through the blood brain barrier reaching CSF concentrations 25% of that found in plasma.
However, whether long-term administration of 2-CDA can lead to any adverse effects in patients or animal models is not yet clearly known.
Here we show that exposure of 2-CDA to CHO cells stably expressing wild-type APP751 increased generation and secretion of amyloid β peptide (Aβ) in to the conditioned medium.
Interestingly, increased Aβ levels were noticed even at non-toxic concentrations of 2-CDA.
Remarkably, chronic treatment of APdE9 mice, a model of Alzheimer's disease with 2-CDA for 60 days increased amyloid plaque burden by more than 1-fold.
Increased Aβ generation appears to result from increased turnover of APP as revealed by cycloheximide-chase experiments.
Additionally, surface labeling of APP with biotin and immunoprecipitation of surface labeled proteins with anti-biotin antibody also indicated increased APP at the cell surface in 2-CDA treated cells compared to controls.
Increased turnover of APP by 2-CDA in turn might be a consequence of decreased protein levels of PIN 1, which is known to regulate cis-trans isomerization and phosphorylation of APP.
Most importantly, like many other oncology drugs, 2-CDA administration led to significant delay in acquiring a reward-based learning task in a T maze paradigm.
Taken together, these data provide compelling evidence for the first time that chronic 2-CDA administration can increase amyloidogenic processing of APP leading to robustly increased plaque burden which may be responsible for the observed deficits in learning skills.
Thus chronic treatment of mice with 2-CDA can have deleterious effects in vivo.
PMID: 22048931
Measuring fatigue in persons with multiple sclerosis: creating a crosswalk between the Modified Fatigue Impact Scale and the PROMIS Fatigue Short Form.
To create cross-walk tables to associate scores for the Modified Fatigue Impact Scale (MFIS) with scores for the Patient Reported Outcome Measurement Information System (PROMIS) Fatigue Short Form (SF) in persons with Multiple Sclerosis (MS).
Cross-walk tables were created using equipercentile linking and based on data collected at one time point in a longitudinal study of persons with MS (N = 458).
Validation of the tables was conducted using data collected at a subsequent time point (N = 444).
Deviations between estimates and actual scores were compared across levels of fatigue.
The impact of sample size on the precision of sample mean estimates was evaluated using bootstrapping.
Correlations between deviations and fatigue level for the PROMIS Fatigue SF and MFIS were (-0.31) and (-0.30), respectively, indicating moderately greater deviations with lower fatigue scores.
Estimated sample means were impacted by sample size.
Cross-walk tables allow data from studies using different measures of fatigue to be combined to achieve larger sample sizes and to compare results.
These tables are valid for group-level analyses with sample sizes of 150 or greater.
PMID: 22975388
Melanoma cell adhesion molecule identifies encephalitogenic T lymphocytes and promotes their recruitment to the central nervous system.
In multiple sclerosis, encephalitogenic CD4(+) lymphocytes require adhesion molecules to accumulate into central nervous system inflammatory lesions.
Using proteomic techniques, we identified expression of melanoma cell adhesion molecule (MCAM) on a subset of human effector memory CD4(+) lymphocytes and on human blood-brain barrier endothelium.
Herein, we demonstrate that MCAM is a stable surface marker that refines the identification of interleukin 17(+), interleukin 22(+), RAR-related orphan receptor γ and interleukin 23 receptor(+) cells within the CD161(+)CCR6(+) subset of memory CD4(+) lymphocytes.
We also show that MCAM(+) lymphocytes express significantly more granulocyte/macrophage colony stimulating factor and granzyme B than MCAM(-) lymphocytes.
Furthermore, the proportion of MCAM(+) CD4(+) lymphocytes is significantly increased in the blood and in the central nervous system of patients with multiple sclerosis and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis animals compared with healthy controls or other neurological diseases, and MCAM expression is upregulated at the blood-brain barrier within inflammatory lesions.
Moreover, blockade of MCAM or depletion of MCAM(+) CD4(+) T lymphocytes both restrict the migration of T(H)17 lymphocytes across blood-brain barrier endothelial cells and decrease the severity of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Our findings indicate that MCAM could serve as a potential biomarker for multiple sclerosis and represents a valuable target for the treatment of neuroinflammatory conditions.
PMID: 23228515
Vitamin B12 in neurology and ageing; clinical and genetic aspects.
The classic neurological and psychiatric features associated with vitamin B12 deficiency have been well described and are the subject of many excellent review articles.
The advent of sensitive diagnostic tests, including homocysteine and methylmalonic acid assays, has revealed a surprisingly high prevalence of a more subtle 'subclinical' form of B12 deficiency, particularly within the elderly.
This is often associated with cognitive impairment and dementia, including Alzheimer's disease.
Metabolic evidence of B12 deficiency is also reported in association with other neurodegenerative disorders including vascular dementia, Parkinson's disease and multiple sclerosis.
These conditions are all associated with chronic neuro-inflammation and oxidative stress.
It is possible that these clinical associations reflect compromised vitamin B12 metabolism due to such stress.
Physicians are also increasingly aware of considerable inter-individual variation in the clinical response to B12 replacement therapy.
Further research is needed to determine to what extent this is attributable to genetic determinants of vitamin B12 absorption, distribution and cellular uptake.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22984406
Exogenous schwann cells migrate, remyelinate and promote clinical recovery in experimental auto-immune encephalomyelitis.
Schwann cell (SC) transplantation is currently being discussed as a strategy that may promote functional recovery in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) and other inflammatory demyelinating diseases of the central nervous system (CNS).
However this assumes they will not only survive but also remyelinate demyelinated axons in the chronically inflamed CNS.
To address this question we investigated the fate of transplanted SCs in myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG)-induced experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) in the Dark Agouti rat; an animal model that reproduces the complex inflammatory demyelinating immunopathology of MS.
We now report that SCs expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP-SCs) allografted after disease onset not only survive but also migrate to remyelinate lesions in the inflamed CNS.
GFP-SCs were detected more frequently in the parenchyma after direct injection into the spinal cord, than via intra-thecal delivery into the cerebrospinal fluid.
In both cases the transplanted cells intermingled with astrocytes in demyelinated lesions, aligned with axons and by twenty one days post transplantation had formed Pzero protein immunoreactive internodes.
Strikingly, GFP-SCs transplantation was associated with marked decrease in clinical disease severity in terms of mortality; all GFP-SCs transplanted animals survived whilst 80% of controls died within 40 days of disease.
PMID: 22396239
[Use of alternative and complementary therapies in clinical practice using multiple sclerosis as an example].
The discrimination between complementary and alternative medicine / therapies                     (CAM) at one hand and conventional treatment at the other hand is vague and                     still under controversial discussion.
Furthermore, most CAM lacks evidence for                     effectiveness, and in some cases for some CAM potential health risks or high                     costs are reported.
The countless methods and treatments of CAM have been                     categorized by National Center of Complementary and Alternative Medicine into                     five groups: alternative medical systems, mind-body-interventions,                     biologically-based therapies, manipulating and body-based therapies, and energy                     therapies.
CAM are known and used cross-cultural and are applied to a variety of                     different medical conditions.
Patients report manifold reasons for using CAM,                     which will be discussed on the sample of patients with multiple sclerosis.
It                     was shown often, that patients use CAM without informing their attending                     physician.
Applying CAM is essentially affected by wishes of patients for active                     therapy attendance, dissatisfaction with conventional treatment and negative                     patient-physician-relation.
Therefore, the attending physician should be well                     informed about CAM and should be open to talk about CAM to advice the patient to                     his best knowledge.
Otherwise the patient may move synchronously or serial into                     two separated therapy settings without informing his attending physician, which                     may cause health or financial damage.
© Georg  Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.
PMID: 22848712
Cognitive dysfunction in early multiple sclerosis: altered centrality derived from resting-state functional connectivity using magneto-encephalography.
Cognitive dysfunction in multiple sclerosis (MS) is frequent.
Insight into underlying mechanisms would help to develop therapeutic strategies.
To explore the relationship of cognitive performance to patterns of nodal centrality derived from magneto-encephalography (MEG).
34 early relapsing-remitting MS patients (median EDSS 2.0) and 28 age- and gender-matched healthy controls (HC) had a MEG, a neuropsychological assessment and structural MRI.
Resting-state functional connectivity was determined by the synchronization likelihood.
Eigenvector Centrality (EC) was used to quantify for each sensor its connectivity and importance within the network.
A cognition-score was calculated, and normalized grey and white matter volumes were determined.
EC was compared per sensor and frequency band between groups using permutation testing, and related to cognition.
Patients had lower grey and white matter volumes than HC, male patients lower cognitive performance than female patients.
In HC, EC distribution showed highest nodal centrality over bi-parietal sensors (hubs).
In patients, nodal centrality was even higher bi-parietally (theta-band) but markedly lower left temporally (upper alpha- and beta-band).
Lower cognitive performance correlated to decreased nodal centrality over left temporal (lower alpha-band) and right temporal (beta-band) sensors, and to increased nodal centrality over right parieto-temporal sensors (beta-band).
Network changes were most pronounced in male patients.
Partial functional disconnection of the temporal regions was associated with cognitive dysfunction in MS; increased centrality in parietal hubs may reflect a shift from temporal to possibly less efficient parietal processing.
To better understand patterns and dynamics of these network changes, longitudinal studies are warranted, also addressing the influence of gender.
PMID: 22848713
IFN-γ signaling to astrocytes protects from autoimmune mediated neurological disability.
Demyelination and axonal degeneration are determinants of progressive neurological disability in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS).
Cells resident within the central nervous system (CNS) are active participants in development, progression and subsequent control of autoimmune disease; however, their individual contributions are not well understood.
Astrocytes, the most abundant CNS cell type, are highly sensitive to environmental cues and are implicated in both detrimental and protective outcomes during autoimmune demyelination.
Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) was induced in transgenic mice expressing signaling defective dominant-negative interferon gamma (IFN-γ) receptors on astrocytes to determine the influence of inflammation on astrocyte activity.
Inhibition of IFN-γ signaling to astrocytes did not influence disease incidence, onset, initial progression of symptoms, blood brain barrier (BBB) integrity or the composition of the acute CNS inflammatory response.
Nevertheless, increased demyelination at peak acute disease in the absence of IFN-γ signaling to astrocytes correlated with sustained clinical symptoms.
Following peak disease, diminished clinical remission, increased mortality and sustained astrocyte activation within the gray matter demonstrate a critical role of IFN-γ signaling to astrocytes in neuroprotection.
Diminished disease remission was associated with escalating demyelination, axonal degeneration and sustained inflammation.
The CNS infiltrating leukocyte composition was not altered; however, decreased IL-10 and IL-27 correlated with sustained disease.
These data indicate that astrocytes play a critical role in limiting CNS autoimmune disease dependent upon a neuroprotective signaling pathway mediated by engagement of IFN-γ receptors.
PMID: 21975206
A phase III study evaluating the efficacy and safety of MBP8298 in secondary progressive MS.
To evaluate the efficacy and safety of MBP8298 in subjects with secondary progressive multiple sclerosis (SPMS) who express human leukocyte antigen (HLA) haplotype DR2 or DR4 (DR2(+) or DR4(+)).
This multicenter randomized 2-year, double-blind, placebo-controlled study included 612 subjects with a diagnosis of SPMS and an Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) score of 3.5-6.5, stratified according to baseline EDSS score (3.5-5.0, or 5.5-6.5) and HLA haplotype (DR2(+) or DR4(+), or DR2(-)/DR4(-)).
Upon entry of 100 DR2(-)/DR4(-) subjects, further study enrollment was limited to DR2(+) or DR4(+) subjects.
Subjects were randomly assigned to either 500 mg MBP8298 or placebo, given by IV injection once every 6 months for 2 years.
The primary outcome measure was time to progression by ≥1.0 EDSS point (or 0.5 point if baseline EDSS was 5.5 or higher), confirmed 6 months later.
Secondary outcomes included mean change in EDSS, mean change in Multiple Sclerosis Functional Composite, MRI changes, annualized relapse rate, and quality of life.
There were no significant differences between treatment groups in either the primary or secondary endpoints.
MBP8298 was well tolerated in all treated subjects with no safety issues identified.
In the population studied, treatment with MBP8298 did not provide a clinical benefit compared to placebo.
Classification of evidence: This study provides Class 1 evidence that MBP8298 is not effective in patients with SPMS who are HLA DR2(+) or DR4(+).
PMID: 22266343
Cued motor imagery in patients with multiple sclerosis.
Motor imagery (MI) is a promising practice tool in neurorehabilitation.
However, in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS), impairments in MI accuracy and temporal organization were found during clinical assessment, which may limit the benefits of MI practice.
Therefore, we investigated whether the MI quality of MS patients could be optimized by means of external cueing.
Fourteen patients with MS and 14 healthy control patients physically executed and visually imagined a goal-directed upper limb task in the presence and absence of added visual and auditory cues.
MI quality was assessed by means of eye-movement registration.
As main results, it was found that MS patients had significant higher eye-movement times than controls during both execution and imagery, and overestimated the to-be-imagined movement amplitude when no external information was provided during imagery.
External cues, however, decreased patients' MI duration and increased the spatial accuracy of their imagined movements.
In sum, our results indicate that MS patients imagine movements in a better way when they are provided with external cues during MI.
These findings are important for developing rehabilitation strategies based on MI in patients with MS.
Copyright © 2012 IBRO.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21975205
Hypereosinophilia in patients with multiple sclerosis treated with natalizumab.
To report asymptomatic hypereosinophilia as a potential side effect in patients treated with natalizumab, an α-4 integrin blocking agent.
A case series of 3 patients treated with natalizumab for relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis including functional and phenotypic characterization of their peripheral blood lymphocytes and eosinophils is presented.
Marked peripheral blood eosinophilia with more than 2,000 cells/mm(3) emerged in all 3 patients after the fourth natalizumab infusion and was asymptomatic.
Hypereosinophilia was associated with enhanced Th2 activity, ceased with drug discontinuation, and in 2 of 3 patients recurred with drug resumption.
Despite persistently high eosinophil counts, there were no signs of end-organ damage.
Hypereosinophilia may occur during treatment with natalizumab.
It seems to reflect enhanced Th2 activity and recedes with systemic corticosteroids.
If the patient is asymptomatic, natalizumab may be continued, provided that other causes of eosinophilia are excluded and the patient is carefully monitored.
PMID: 22722621
Contribution of major amyotrophic lateral sclerosis genes to the etiology of sporadic disease.
To quantify the overall contribution of mutations in the currently known amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) genes in a large cohort of sporadic patients and to make genotype-phenotype correlations.
Screening for SOD1, TARDBP, FUS, ANG, ATXN2, OPTN, and C9ORF72 was carried out in 480 consecutive patients with sporadic ALS (SALS) and in 48 familial ALS (FALS) index patients admitted to a single Italian referral center.
Mutations were detected in 53 patients, with a cumulative frequency of 11.
Seven of them were novel.
The highest frequencies of positive cases were obtained in TARDBP (2.7%), C9ORF72 (2.5%), and SOD1 (2.1%).
The overall group of mutated patients was indistinguishable from that without mutations as no significant differences were observed with regard to age and site of onset, frequency of clinical phenotypes, and survival.
However, by separately evaluating genotype-phenotype correlation in single genes, clinical differences were observed among different genes.
Duration of disease was significantly shorter in patients harboring the C9ORF72 expansion and longer in the SOD1 group.
A high frequency of predominant upper motor neuron phenotype was observed among patients with TARDBP mutations.
Two patients, 1 with C9ORF72 and 1 with SOD1 mutation, had concurrent ANG mutations.
Mutations were detected in 43.7% of patients with FALS.
A considerable proportion of patients with SALS harbored mutations in major ALS genes.
This result has relevant implications in clinical practice, namely in genetic counseling.
The detection of double mutations in 2 patients raises the hypothesis that multiple mutations model may explain genetic architecture of SALS.
PMID: 21975200
Combined MRI lesions and relapses as a surrogate for disability in multiple sclerosis.
In multiple sclerosis (MS), the aim of therapies is to prevent the accumulation of irreversible disability.
This is difficult to assess given the short time course of clinical trials.
MRI markers and relapses are often used as surrogate of disability in MS studies, but their validity remains controversial.
We sought to validate, at the individual patient level, MRI lesions and relapses as surrogates for disability progression over the course of MS trials.
Individual patient data from a large, placebo-controlled trial of interferon β-1a in relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) were analyzed.
The Prentice criteria were applied to evaluate surrogacy of 1-year MRI active lesions and relapses for disability worsening (Expanded Disability Status Scale [EDSS]) over the 2-year follow-up.
All Prentice criteria were satisfied.
Treatment reduced by 31% the odds of having EDSS worsening over 2 years, reducing the mean number of MRI lesions by 61% and the mean number of relapses by 36% over 1 year.
Both 1-year MRI lesion activity and relapses, when considered independently, accounted for more than 60% of the treatment effect on 2-year EDSS worsening.
A combination of 1-year MRI lesion activity and relapses explained 100% of the treatment effect on EDSS worsening over 2 years.
A combined measure of 1-year changes in MRI lesions and relapses after interferon therapy fully estimated the corresponding effect on 2-year EDSS worsening.
This short-term combined measure appears to be a surrogate for disability progression over a longer term when evaluating the effect of interferon in RRMS.
PMID: 22364929
Biological sex and menstrual cycle phase modulation of cortisol levels and psychiatric symptoms in a non-clinical sample of young adults.
Prior research examined the complex, bidirectional interplay of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) and hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axes and their roles in (clinical) cognitive/behavioral functions.
Less well understood are contemporaneous relationships in non-clinical samples.
This pilot study explored cortisol in relation to psychiatric symptoms/personality as a function of self-reported menstrual cycle phase and sex differences in a non-clinical, young adult sample.
Consistent with literature and hypotheses, cortisol levels were lowest during early-follicular, intermediary during late-follicular, and highest during mid-luteal phases (not significant), and greater among males than early-follicular females.
An acute stressor uniformly affected cortisol across phases and sex, though magnitude and time course differed.
Psychiatric symptoms were greater among early-follicular/late-follicular females versus males, and early-follicular and/or late-follicular versus mid-luteal.
Contrary to hypotheses, positive psychotic-like symptoms were greater among males than (mid-luteal) females.
Cortisol inversely related to early-follicular symptoms, and directly related to late-follicular/mid-luteal symptoms.
Results suggest menstrual cycle phase modulates non-clinical psychiatric symptomatology and HPA activity.
Findings tentatively bolster a dimensional/continuum model of psychopathology with implications for understanding neurobiological underpinnings and risk/protective factors for mental/physical health conditions, particularly those marked by sex differences and neuroendocrine dysfunction (depression/schizophrenia/Alzheimer's/multiple sclerosis).
We speculate a dose-response cortisol effect on symptoms, modulated by endogenous gonadal hormones via gene expression.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22428845
Early predictors of non-response to interferon in multiple sclerosis.
To identify early clinical and MRI predictors of non-response to interferon (IFN) treatment in multiple sclerosis (MS).
In 172 patients with relapsing-remitting MS treated with IFNβ, we evaluated prediction of future treatment non-response.
Candidate predictors comprised disability and its sustained progression, relapse score (combining frequency and severity of relapses), brain volume change, brain parenchymal fraction, number of new T2 lesions, and T2 and T1 lesion volume within the initial year of treatment.
Treatment non-response was evaluated as confirmed disability progression or overall average annual relapse score exceeding 1 over the following 5 years.
Logistic regression model was adjusted for patient age, gender, disease duration and changes in treatment.
Ninety patients (52%) reached the status of IFN non-responders in years 2-6.
Patients with ≥1 new T2 lesion and relapse score ≥2 (odds ratio ≥5.7) or those with ≥3 new T2 lesions regardless of the relapse score (odds ratio = 3) were in a significantly higher risk of future treatment non-response.
In patients with MS treated with IFNβ for 1 year, number of new T2 lesions and annualized relapse score predict individual risk of treatment non-response over the following 5 years.
© 2012 John Wiley &amp; Sons A/S.
PMID: 21840425
Evaluation of genetic association between an ITGAM non-synonymous SNP (rs1143679) and multiple autoimmune diseases.
Many autoimmune diseases (ADs) share similar underlying pathology and have a tendency to cluster within families, supporting the involvement of shared susceptibility genes.
To date, most of the genetic variants associated with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) susceptibility also show association with others ADs.
ITGAM and its associated 'predisposing' variant (rs1143679, Arg77His), predicted to alter the tertiary structures of the ligand-binding domain of ITGAM, may play a key role for SLE pathogenesis.
The aim of this study is to examine whether the ITGAM variant is also associated with other ADs.
We evaluated case-control association between rs1143679 and ADs (N=18,457) including primary Sjögren's syndrome, systemic sclerosis, multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, celiac disease, and type-1 diabetes.
We also performed meta-analyses using our data in addition to available published data.
Although the risk allele 'A' is relatively more frequent among cases for each disease, it was not significantly associated with any other ADs tested in this study.
However, the meta-analysis for systemic sclerosis was associated with rs1143679 (p(meta)=0.008).
In summary, this study explored the role of ITGAM in general autoimmunity in seven non-lupus ADs, and only found association for systemic sclerosis when our results were combined with published results.
Thus ITGAM may not be a general autoimmunity gene but this variant may be specifically associated with SLE and systemic sclerosis.
Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23347601
Visualizing iron in multiple sclerosis.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) protocols that are designed to be sensitive to iron typically take advantage of (1) iron effects on the relaxation of water protons and/or (2) iron-induced local magnetic field susceptibility changes.
Increasing evidence sustains the notion that imaging iron in brain of patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) may add some specificity toward the identification of the disease pathology.
The present review summarizes currently reported in vivo and post mortem MRI evidence of (1) iron detection in white matter and gray matter of MS brains, (2) pathological and physiological correlates of iron as disclosed by imaging and (3) relations between iron accumulation and disease progression as measured by clinical metrics.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
PMID: 23618467
Dynamic cross-regulation of antigen-specific effector and regulatory T cell subpopulations and microglia in brain autoimmunity.
Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is considered a T-cell-mediated autoimmune disease with a prototypical oscillatory behavior, as evidenced by the presence of clinical relapses.
Understanding the dynamics of immune cells governing the course of MS, therefore, has many implications for immunotherapy.
Here, we used flow cytometry to analyze the time-dependent behavior of antigen-specific effector (T(eff)) and regulatory (T(reg)) T cells and microglia in mice model of MS, Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis (EAE), and compared the observations with a mathematical cross-regulation model of T-cell dynamics in autoimmune disease.
We found that T(eff) and T(reg) cells specific to myelin olygodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) developed coupled oscillatory dynamics with a 4- to 5-day period and decreasing amplitude that was always higher for the T(eff) populations, in agreement with the mathematical model.
Microglia activation followed the oscillations of MOG-specific T(eff) cells in the secondary lymphoid organs, but they were activated before MOG-specific T-cell peaks in the CNS.
Finally, we assessed the role of B-cell depletion induced by anti-CD20 therapy in the dynamics of T cells in an EAE model with more severe disease after therapy.
We observed that B-cell depletion decreases T(eff) expansion, although its oscillatory behavior persists.
However, the effect of B cell depletion was more significant in the T(reg) population within the CNS, which matched with activation of microglia and worsening of the disease.
Mathematical modeling of T-cell cross-regulation after anti-CD20 therapy suggests that B-cell depletion may influence the dynamics of T cells by fine-tuning their activation.
The oscillatory dynamics of T-cells have an intrinsic origin in the physiological regulation of the adaptive immune response, which influences both disease phenotype and response to immunotherapy.
PMID: 23291812
Histological diagnosis of cardiac lipoma in an adult with tuberous sclerosis.
Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is an autosomal dominant multisystem disorder caused by mutations in either of the two genes, TSC1 or TSC2, which code for the proteins hamartin and tuberin, respectively.
These proteins act as tumour-growth suppressors with mutations in their genes leading to multiple hamartomatous growths throughout the central nervous system, lungs, heart, kidneys, eyes and skin.
There have been reports of patients with TSC having an increased incidence of cardiac neoplasms, especially rhabdomyomas.
A much smaller proportion of TSC patients have also been reported to have either, angiomyolipomas or lipomas, the diagnosis in these cases being made via CT.
We present the first case of an adult with TSC, where a histological diagnosis of cardiac lipoma was made and discuss its implications.
PMID: 23126555
Risk of fractures in patients with multiple sclerosis: record-linkage study.
Patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) have been reported to be at higher risk of fracture than other people.
We sought to test this hypothesis in a large database of hospital admissions in England.
We analysed a database of linked statistical records of hospital admissions and death certificates for the whole of England (1999-2010).
Rate ratios for fractures were determined, comparing fracture rates in a cohort of all people in England admitted with MS and rates in a comparison cohort.
Significantly elevated risk for all fractures was found in patients with MS (rate ratio (RR) = 1.99, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.93-2.05)).
Risks were particularly high for femoral fractures (femoral neck fracture RR = 2.79 (2.65-2.93); femoral shaft fracture RR 6.69 (6.12-7.29)), and fractures of the tibia or ankle RR = 2.81 (2.66-2.96).
Patients with MS have an increased risk of fractures.
Caregivers should aim to optimize bone health in MS patients.
PMID: 22964310
Serum antibodies to 25 myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein epitopes in multiple sclerosis and neuromyelitis optica: clinical value for diagnosis and disease activity.
Whether antibody to myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) can be a diagnostic marker for multiple sclerosis (MS) is still controversial.
Recent studies suggested that serum specific anti-MOG epitope antibody might be an MS specific marker.
However, these studies did not include neuromyelitis optica (NMO) which might be proven to also have anti-MOG antibody.
Hence, the present study was undertaken to investigate the clinical value of serum antibodies to 25 MOG epitopes in conventional MS (CMS) and NMO.
Serum anti-MOG epitope IgG was detected in 61 CMS patients, 54 NMO patients, and 77 healthy controls, using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
Anti-MOG(27-38) IgG levels in both CMS and NMO patients were significantly higher than that in healthy controls (optical density (OD): 0.64 ± 0.38, 0.48 ± 0.23 vs. 0.19 ± 0.09; P = 0.000).
CMS and NMO patients in relapse stage had significantly higher anti-MOG(27-38) IgG level than patients in remission stage (OD: 0.55 ± 0.14 vs. 0.24 ± 0.09, P = 0.027).
Although serum anti-MOG epitope IgG could not differentiate MS from NMO, it may be a useful marker for monitoring disease activity.
PMID: 22311611
Mimicry between mitochondrial disorder and multiple sclerosis.
Under certain conditions or at certain stages of the disease course, multiple sclerosis (MS) and mitochondrial disorder (MID) may be differential diagnoses and thus may be confused with each other.
In a 30 years old female MS was diagnosed at age 16 year upon recurrent sensory disturbances of the right lower leg, an inflammatory cerebrospinal fluid, and a cerebral MRI with multiple non-enhancing white matter lesions.
Steroids were repeatedly given but because of rapid deterioration treatment was switched to interferon and mitoxantrone, without improvement.
Fourteen years after onset the patient additionally presented with a history of rhabdomyolysis, hypothyroidism, ophthalmoparesis, anarthria, tetraspasticity, tetraparesis, and joint contractures.
After MID had been diagnosed in her mother she was re-evaluated and elevated resting lactate, axonal polyneuropathy, and empty sella were additionally found.
Muscle biopsy revealed myophagy, fat deposition, and type-II predominance, and biochemical investigations showed a deficiency of complex I and IV of the respiratory chain.
MID was diagnosed also in the index patient.
It is concluded that even if CSF investigations or imaging studies suggest MS, differentials such as MIDs need to be excluded before prescribing medication possibly toxic to a MID.
An inflammatory CSF may also occur in MIDs.
PMID: 22653056
Astrocyte-derived VEGF-A drives blood-brain barrier disruption in CNS inflammatory disease.
In inflammatory CNS conditions such as multiple sclerosis (MS), current options to treat clinical relapse are limited, and more selective agents are needed.
Disruption of the blood-brain barrier (BBB) is an early feature of lesion formation that correlates with clinical exacerbation, leading to edema, excitotoxicity, and entry of serum proteins and inflammatory cells.
Here, we identify astrocytic expression of VEGF-A as a key driver of BBB permeability in mice.
Inactivation of astrocytic Vegfa expression reduced BBB breakdown, decreased lymphocyte infiltration and neuropathology in inflammatory and demyelinating lesions, and reduced paralysis in a mouse model of MS.
Knockdown studies in CNS endothelium indicated activation of the downstream effector eNOS as the principal mechanism underlying the effects of VEGF-A on the BBB.
Systemic administration of the selective eNOS inhibitor cavtratin in mice abrogated VEGF-A-induced BBB disruption and pathology and protected against neurologic deficit in the MS model system.
Collectively, these data identify blockade of VEGF-A signaling as a protective strategy to treat inflammatory CNS disease.
PMID: 23181153
Jekyll and Hide:  The two faces of amyloid β.
Neurodegenerative diseases are a burden of our century.
Although significant efforts were made to find a cure or relief to this scourge, their pathophysiology remains vague and the cellular function of the key involved proteins is still unclear.
However, in the case of amyloid β (Aβ), a key protein concerned in Alzheimer disease, we are now a step closer in the unscrambling of its cellular functions.
Interestingly, whereas the exact role of Aβ in the pathophysiology of Alzheimer disease is still unresolved, a recent study revealed a neuroprotective function of Aβ in multiple sclerosis with possibly promising therapeutic benefits.
PMID: 22067621
Antioxidant status of bilirubin and uric acid in patients with myasthenia gravis.
Oxidative stress and changes in antioxidant status have been implicated in the pathogenesis of inflammatory and autoimmune diseases, and free radicals can cause considerable damage to the acetylcholine receptors.
388 individuals, including 97 patients with myasthenia gravis (MG), 135 patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) and 156 healthy controls, were assessed for serum levels of bilirubin and uric acid (UA), in order to determine the levels of these natural antioxidants in the serum.
We found that serum UA levels in patients with MG were significantly lower (266.03 ± 93.09 μmol/l) compared with those of the healthy control group (338.87 ± 107.10 μmol/l, p = 0.001).
However, there was no significant difference of serum UA levels between patients with MG and those with MS (p = 0.071).
We also found that serum levels of total, direct and indirect bilirubin in patients with MG were significantly lower, compared with those in the healthy control group, whether male or female.
From this study, we conclude that serum levels of bilirubin and UA are lower in MG patients.
Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.
PMID: 23398365
Distinct serum cytokine profiles in neuromyelitis optica and multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most common prototypic inflammatory demyelinating disease.
Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) is another inflammatory demyelinating disease of the central nervous system that exhibits clinical symptoms mainly associated with optic neuritis and myelopathy.
The inflammatory reaction in MS is associated with an upregulation of a variety of T helper 1 (Th1)- or Th17-mediated cytokines.
However, NMO and MS are intertwined both clinically and pathologically, which complicates their diagnosis and treatment.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the differences in serum cytokine levels in patients with NMO and MS.
We collected peripheral serum from patients with these central nervous system demyelinating diseases for the study.
A cytometric bead array was used to assess the cytokine levels using flow cytometry.
We found more inflammatory [interleukin (IL)-2 and interferon-γ) and anti-inflammatory (IL-4 and IL-10) cytokines in NMO than in MS.
The differences in the optimal cutoff points of serum cytokines, including IL-2 ≥5 pg/mL, can differentiate NMO from MS.
In conclusion, patients with NMO had an increased Th1-mediated inflammatory response, but similar Th17-mediated inflammation changes compared to patients with MS.
Serum cytokine studies can differentiate NMO cases from MS.
PMID: 23565270
Decision-making in multiple sclerosis consultations in Italy: third observer and patient assessments.
To assess decision-making in multiple sclerosis (MS) from third observer and patient perspectives.
Audio recordings of first-ever consultations with a participating physician (88 outpatients, 10 physicians) at four tertiary MS care clinics in Italy, were rated by a third observer using the Observing Patient Involvement in Shared Decision Making (OPTION) and by patients using the Perceived Involvement in Care Scale (PICS).
Mean patient age was 37.5, 66% were women, 72% had MS, and 28% had possible MS or other disease.
Mean PICS subscale scores (range 0 poor, 100 best possible) were 71.9 (SD 24.3) for physician facilitation (PICS-F); 74.6 (SD 22.9) for patient information exchange (PICS-I); and only 22.5 (SD 16.2) for patient decision making (PICS-DM).
Mean OPTION total score (0 poor, 100 best possible) was 29.6 (SD 10.3).
Poorest OPTION scores were found for items assessing preferred patient approach to receiving information and preferred patient level of involvement.
Highest scores were for clinician drawing attention to identified problem, indicating need for decision making, and need to review the decision.
Consultation time, woman physician, patient-physician gender concordance and PICS-F were associated with higher OPTION total score; older physician and second opinion consultation were associated with lower OPTION score.
In line with findings in other settings, our third observer findings indicated limited patient involvement abilities of MS physicians during first consultations.
Patient perceptions of physician skills were better than third observers', although they correlated.
Consultations with women physicians, and younger physicians, were associated with higher third observer and patient-based scores.
Our findings reveal a need to empower Italian MS physicians with better communication and shared decision-making skills, and show in particular that attention to MS patient preferences for reception of information and involvement in health decisions, need to be improved.
PMID: 23748638
[Chronic cough and worsening dyspnea: a case of idiopathic tracheal stenosis].
We report a case of idiopathic tracheal stenosis in a 75-year-old woman, who presented to our observation with a diagnosis of asthmatic bronchitis characterized by cough and exertional dyspnea, later complicated by the appearance of tirage.
Biopsy of the lesion showed focal squamous metaplasia of the epithelium lining, multiple sclerosis and chronic inflammatory infiltration of the corium.
The patient was treated with endoscopic destruction via rigid bronchoscopy, through the combined action of YAG laser and mechanical debulking.
PMID: 21777015
Molecular imaging of brain lipid environment of lymphocytes in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis using magnetic resonance imaging and SECARS microscopy.
This paper highlights some of the key technologies of using two innovative molecular imaging modalites, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and nonlinear optical microscopy, for imaging intravenously injected ultra small paramagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles cross linked with antibodies (CLUSPIO) in the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) experimental model in vivo or ex vivo, respectively.
Intensive efforts have been made in investigating the causes of abnormalities in lipid metabolism, monitored in some neurodegenerative disorders systems.
It has been shown that an abnormal accumulation of some common lipids in motor nerve cells may play a critical role in the development of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The presented experiments were performed on brain specimens from the transgenic rat model expressing multiple copies of mutated (G93A) human SOD-1 gene, after CD4+ lymphocytes were magnetically labeled with i.v.i.
CLUSPIO antibodies.
In vivo MRI revealed marked signal intensity enhancements in specific pathological regions of the ALS rat brain as compared to the wild type.
Surface-enhanced coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering (SECARS) microscopy indicated cellular interactions based on lipids association to anti-CD4 CLUSPIO.
PMID: 21820640
[Electrophysiological characterisation of envelope-following responses].
The auditory ability to discriminate rapid changes in the envelope of language sounds is essential for speech comprehension.
This ability is deteriorated in some neurological diseases such as multiple sclerosis, auditory neuropathy, sensorineural hearing loss, presbycusis and primary developmental language disorder.
Envelope-following responses (EFRs) in humans are useful in objective measurement of temporal processing in the auditory nervous system.
To evaluate EFRs in healthy younger subjects and to investigate the effects of subject states on the EFRs recorded.
Eleven young subjects were included; six of them were awake and five were asleep.
EFRs were evoked by white noise carrier stimuli with a sweep of modulation frequencies from 20 to 200Hz presented at 50dB HL.
The EFRs we recorded were similar in all subjects.
There were two principal components.
During both subject sleep and wakefulness, the first component (located between 30-50Hz) was significantly larger than the second component (located between 80-110Hz).
There was also a significant effect of sleep on the EFR amplitude for the modulation frequencies between 88-110, 155-165 and 190-200Hz.
However, there were no significant effects of sleep on the principal EFR components.
These results corroborate the usefulness of the EFR technique for objective measurement of human auditory temporal processing.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier España, S.L.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22351849
Multiple sclerosis lesions and irreversible brain tissue damage: a comparative ultrahigh-field strength magnetic resonance imaging study.
In current clinical practice, T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is commonly applied to quantify the accumulated multiple sclerosis (MS)lesion load, whereas T1-weighted sequences are used to differentiate edema, blood-brain barrier breakdown by contrast enhancement, and irreversible brain tissue damage(commonly called “black holes” owing to the loss of signal intensity in T1-weighted sequences).
Black holes are histopathologically associated with axonal loss and severe tissue destruction.
In addition, double inversion recovery techniques were developed to improve the sensitivity to cortical lesions.
To demonstrate the potential of ultrahigh-field 3-dimensional T1-weighted imaging using magnetization-prepared rapid acquisition and multiple gradient echoes(MPRAGE) to detect and characterize white and gray matter pathology in MS.
Comparative study.
The patients with MS were recruited from the outpatient clinics of the Neuro Cure Clinical Research Center and underwent 7-T brain MRI at the Berlin Ultrahigh Field Facility, both of which are in Berlin, Germany.
Twenty patients with relapsing-remitting MS and 14 healthy controls underwent 7-T brain MRI, using a 24-channel receive head coil, and a subgroup of 18 patients with relapsing-remitting MS also underwent 1.5-T brain MRI.
The imaging protocol included 2-dimensional T2-weighted fast low-angle shot (FLASH) and turbo inversion recovery magnitude (TIRM) sequences.
For 3-dimensional T1-weighted imaging, the MPRAGE sequence was used.
Each sequence was initially examined independently in separate analyses by an investigator blinded to all other data.
In a second study, all detected lesions were retrospectively analyzed in a side-by-side comparison of all sequences.
By use of 7-T T2-weighted FLASH imaging, 604 cerebral lesions were detected in the patients with relapsing-remitting MS (mean, 30.2 lesions per patient[range, 2-107 lesions per patient]), but none were detected in healthy controls.
Cortical pathology was visible in 10 patients (6 cortical lesions and 37 leukocortical lesions).
Within the 7-T acquisitions, each lesion detected at T2-weighted sequences and/or double inversion recovery sequences was also clearly delineated on corresponding MPRAGE sequences in side-by-side analysis.However, at 1.5 T, the MPRAGE images depicted only 452 of 561 lesions visualized in T2-weighted sequences and/or double inversion recovery sequences.
In contrast,when analyzing each sequence separately, we found that the 7-T MPRAGE depicted more lesions than the 7-TFLASH (728 lesions vs 584 lesions), and almost twice as many as the 1.5-T MPRAGE (399 lesions).
The 7-TMPRAGE also improved the detection of cortical and leukocortical lesions (15 lesions vs 58 lesions).
At ultrahigh-field strength, T1-weighted MPRAGE is highly sensitive in detecting MS plaques within the white and the gray brain parenchyma.
Our results indicate structural damage beyond demyelination in every lesion depicted, which is in accordance with postmortem histopathological studies.
The 7-T MPRAGE clearly delineated every cortical lesion that was visualized by any other MRI sequence at 1.5 or 7 T.
PMID: 23123001
Clinical overview of dalfampridine: an agent with a novel mechanism of action to help with gait disturbances.
Medication used to treat multiple sclerosis (MS) can be categorized as disease-modifying therapies, symptomatic therapies, or treatment of acute exacerbations.
Dalfampridine is the first symptomatic therapy approved by the Food and Drug Administration to improve walking in patients with MS.
This article reviews the pharmacology, pharmacodynamic properties, and pharmacokinetic properties of dalfampridine, as well as its clinical efficacy, safety profile, pharmacoeconomic considerations, and place in therapy.
Three PubMed searches were conducted for original articles published in English between 1966 and August 2012 with human study participants.
Articles concerning the pharmacology, pharmacokinetic properties, pharmacodynamic properties, efficacy, and safety profile of dalfampridine were evaluated.
Dalfampridine theoretically works to improve conduction and enhance walking by inhibiting potassium channels in the axonal membrane and by prolonging action potentials in demyelinated neurons.
The efficacy of dalfampridine has been reported in 2 Phase III clinical trials in patients with MS.
When comparing dalfampridine 10 mg twice daily with placebo, these studies found a statistically significant improvement in walking (42.9% vs 9.3% and 35% vs 8%; P &lt; 0.001).
However, clinical trials and postmarketing surveillance have shown an increased risk of seizures with dalfampridine use that appears to be dose related [corrected].
Dalfampridine has a unique mechanism of action, leading to its approval as the first symptomatic therapy for MS to improve walking speed.
The increased risk of seizures can be a safety concern and will require health care providers to be diligent in monitoring patients and to ensure adequate patient education [corrected].
The addition of dalfampridine as symptomatic therapy for MS may lead to additional novel products in the future.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier HS Journals, Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22987455
Neuromyelitis optica IgG does not alter aquaporin-4 water permeability, plasma membrane M1/M23 isoform content, or supramolecular assembly.
Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) is thought to be caused by immunoglobulin G autoantibodies (NMO-IgG) against astrocyte water channel aquaporin-4 (AQP4).
A recent study (Hinson et al. (2012) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109:1245-1250) reported that NMO-IgG inhibits AQP4 water permeability directly and causes rapid cellular internalization of the M1 but not M23 isoform of AQP4, resulting in AQP4 clustering, enhanced complement-dependent cytotoxicity, and tissue swelling.
Here, we report evidence challenging this proposed mechanism of NMO-IgG-mediated pathology.
We measured osmotic water permeability by stopped-flow light scattering on plasma membrane vesicles isolated from AQP4-expressing CHO cells, an approach that can detect changes in water permeability as small as 5% and is not confounded by internalization effects.
We found similar single-molecule water permeability for M1-AQP4 tetramers and M23-AQP4 clusters (orthogonal arrays of particles, OAPs).
Exposure of AQP4 to high concentrations of NMO-IgG from six seropositive NMO patients, and to high-affinity recombinant monoclonal NMO antibodies, did not reduce AQP4 water permeability.
Also, NMO-IgG did not reduce water permeability in AQP4-reconstituted proteoliposomes.
In transfected cells expressing M1- or M23-AQP4 individually, NMO-IgG caused more rapid internalization of M23- than M1-AQP4.
In cells coexpressing both isoforms, M1- and M23-AQP4 comingled in OAPs that were internalized together in response to NMO-IgG.
Super-resolution imaging and native gel electrophoresis showed that the size of AQP4 OAPs was not altered by NMO sera or recombinant NMO antibodies.
We conclude that NMO-IgG does not: (i) inhibit AQP4 water permeability, (ii) cause preferential internalization of M1-AQP4, or (iii) cause intramembrane AQP4 clustering.
Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 23859234
Comparison of double inversion recovery and conventional magnetic resonance brain imaging in patients with multiple sclerosis and relations with disease disability.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory demyelinating disease of the central nervous system, predominantly affecting the white matter, but also the grey matter.
Aim of this study was to detect MS lesions with double inversion recovery (DIR), fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and T2-weighted magnetic resonance (MR) techniques and determine the sensitivity of these techniques, and the correlation between the number of lesions and expanded disability state scale (EDSS) scores.
Thirty-four patients with MS (20 females and 14 males) were included in this study.
DIR and conventional MR (T2-A, FLAIR) sequences were obtained.
Lesions were counted and classified as belonging to one of seven anatomical regions: cortical, juxtacortical, deep grey matter, deep white matter, mixed white matter-grey matter, periventricular white matter and infratentorial.
The correlation between lesion number and EDSS scores was investigated.
DIR images showed more intracortical and mixed white matter-grey matter lesions in comparison with both FLAIR and T2 sequences (p=0, p=0 respectively).
There was a significant difference between mean lesion numbers at the juxtacortical region, obtained with DIR and T2-weighted images (p = 0.002).
The total number of lesions obtained with all methods was similar.
DIR brain imaging had the highest sensitivity in the detection of cortical and mixed white matter - grey matter lesions, compared with FLAIR and T2 sequences.
In addition, the lesions obtained with DIR images were more easily visualized.
PMID: 23859235
Multiple sclerosis: identification of temporal changes in brain lesions with computer-assisted detection software.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic disease with a progressing and evolving course.
Serial imaging with MRI is the mainstay in monitoring and managing MS patients.
In this work we demonstrate the performance of a locally developed computer-assisted detection (CAD) software used to track temporal changes in brain MS lesions.
CAD tracks changes in T2-bright MS lesions between two time points on a 3D high-resolution isotropic FLAIR MR sequence of the brain acquired at 3 Tesla.
The program consists of an image-processing pipeline, and displays scrollable difference maps used as an aid to the neuroradiologist for assessing lesional change.
To assess the value of the software we have compared diagnostic accuracy and duration of interpretation of the CAD-assisted and routine clinical interpretations in 98 randomly chosen, paired MR examinations from 88 patients (68 women, 20 men, mean age 43.5, age range 21-75) with a diagnosis of definite MS.
The ground truth was determined by a three-expert panel.
In case-wise analysis, CAD interpretation showed higher sensitivity than a clinical report (87% vs 77%, respectively).
Lesion-wise analysis demonstrated improved sensitivity of CAD over a routine clinical interpretation of 40%-48%.
Mean software-assisted interpretation time was 2.7 min.
Our study demonstrates the potential of including CAD software in the workflow of neuroradiology practice for the detection of MS lesional change.
Automated quantification of temporal change in MS lesion load may also be used in clinical research, e.g., in drug trials.
PMID: 23468871
Walking performance: correlation between energy cost of walking and walking participation. new statistical approach concerning outcome measurement.
Walking ability, though important for quality of life and participation in social and economic activities, can be adversely affected by neurological disorders, such as Spinal Cord Injury, Stroke, Multiple Sclerosis or Traumatic Brain Injury.
The aim of this study is to evaluate if the energy cost of walking (CW), in a mixed group of chronic patients with neurological diseases almost 6 months after discharge from rehabilitation wards, can predict the walking performance and any walking restriction on community activities, as indicated by Walking Handicap Scale categories (WHS).
One hundred and seven subjects were included in the study, 31 suffering from Stroke, 26 from Spinal Cord Injury and 50 from Multiple Sclerosis.
The multivariable binary logistical regression analysis has produced a statistical model with good characteristics of fit and good predictability.
This model generated a cut-off value of.40, which enabled us to classify correctly the cases with a percentage of 85.0%.
Our research reveal that, in our subjects, CW is the only predictor of the walking performance of in the community, to be compared with the score of WHS.
We have been also identifying a cut-off value of CW cost, which makes a distinction between those who can walk in the community and those who cannot do it.
In particular, these values could be used to predict the ability to walk in the community when discharged from the rehabilitation units, and to adjust the rehabilitative treatment to improve the performance.
PMID: 23188981
The effect of vitamin A supplementation on stimulated T-cell proliferation with myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein in patients with multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease whereby myelin sheath of the central nervous system is destroyed.
Vitamin A is known to play a role in the immune system.
It has been recognized that some metabolites of vitamin A can be used effectively to treat experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE).
The effect of vitamin A as retinyl palmitate on T-cell proliferation in MS patients.
This study is a double blind clinical trial of two test groups over a period of 6 months.
Thirty five multiple sclerosis (MS) patients were divided into two groups.
One group received 25,000 IU/day vitamin A (as retinyl palmitate) and the other group were administered a placebo.
The peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were separated and stimulated with myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) and phytohemagglutinin (PHA) before and after the trial period.
BrdU calorimetric assay was performed to measure cell proliferation.
Analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) and paired t-test were used to analyze the data.
Observations showed statistical significant differences in the reduction of cell proliferation in the presence of MOG and fetal calf serum (FCS) in the culture medium, between patients receiving vitamin A and the placebo (P = 0.046).
Although, this difference was not significant between the two vitamin A and placebo groups in MOG treatment with human serum, a decrease was observed in the group of patients taking vitamin A supplements (P = 0.019).
Phytohemagglutinin did not cause any change in cell proliferation between the two groups.
The results suggest supplementation with retinyl palmitate in patients with MS reduce MOG stimulatory effects on T-cells.
PMID: 23202972
Interleukin-6 gene promoter-572 C allele may play a role in rate of disease progression in multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory demyelinating disease affecting the central nervous system.
Although the exact pathogenesis of MS is unknown, it is generally considered to be an autoimmune disease, with numerous genetic and environmental factors determining disease susceptibility and severity.
One important mediator of immune responses and inflammation is interleukin-6 (IL-6).
Previously, elevated levels of IL-6 in mononuclear cells in blood and in brain tissue from MS patients have been reported.
Various polymorphisms in the promoter region of the IL6 gene have also been linked with IL-6 protein levels.
In MS, several small studies have investigated whether two IL6 promoter polymorphisms (-597 G&gt;A and -174 G&gt;C) correlate with MS susceptibility, but with varying results.
In the present study, we analyzed these polymorphisms, together with an additional polymorphism (-572 G&gt;C) in 279 healthy controls and 509 patients with MS.
We found no significant differences between MS patients and healthy controls for the different -597 or -174 IL6 promoter alleles or genotypes.
There was a slight reduction in the percentage of individuals with MS who carried a C allele at position -572, although this was not significant after correction for multiple comparisons.
Interestingly, however, the -572 C allele showed a significant correlation with the MS severity score, suggesting a possible role in disease progression.
PMID: 22410258
Serum GFAP levels in optic neuropathies.
Complement mediated autoimmunity against aquaporin-4 results in astrocytic damage in neuromyelitis optica (NMO).
There is evidence for increased CSF glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and S100B levels in acute NMO.
Here we tested whether the CSF finding also holds true for the diagnostic value of serum GFAP and S100B levels in NMO.
A multicentre study included 322 patients from London (n=160), Nijmegen (n=95), Pecs (n=44), and Lyon (n=24).
Patients were classified into the following diagnostic categories: neurological control patients (n=45), MS optic neuritis (MSON, n=38), isolated optic neuritis (ION, n=11), relapsing isolated optic neuritis (RION, n=48), chronic relapsing isolated optic neuropathy (CRION, n=18), unclassified optic neuritis (UCON, n=39), NMO (n=77) and relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS, n=47).
Serum GFAP and S100B levels were quantified using ELISA.
Median serum GFAP but not S100B levels were significantly higher (p&lt;0.0001, general linear model) in patients with NMO (4.83 pg/mL) if compared to MSON (1.5 pg/mL, p=0.0001), UCON (1.92 pg/mL, p&lt;0.01), ION (0.0 ng/mL, p&lt;0.05), RION (1.3 pg/mL, p&lt;0.0001) and CRION (2.2 pg/mL, p=0.01).
Serum GFAP levels in the control cohort (3.6 pg/mL) were not significantly different to NMO.
There was no relationship between serum GFAP levels and any other clinical or demographic parameter.
Serum S100B concentrations correlated with the number of relapses in MSON (R=0.83, p=0.005).
In contrast to the CSF, neither serum GFAP nor S100B levels were of major diagnostic value for the laboratory supported differential diagnosis between optic neuritis in the context of NMO and other optic neuropathies.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22517095
Two-year serial whole-brain N-acetyl-L-aspartate in patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
To test the hypotheses that 1) patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RR-MS) exhibit a quantifiable decline in their whole-brain concentration of the neural marker N-acetyl-L-aspartate (WBNAA), that is 2) more sensitive than clinical changes and 3) may provide a practical outcome measure for proof-of-concept and larger phase III clinical trials.
Nineteen patients (5 men and 14 women) with clinically definite RR-MS, who were 33 ± 5 years old (mean ± SD), had a disease duration of 47 ± 28 months, and had a median Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) score of 1.0 (range 0-5.5), underwent MRI and proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy ((1)H-MRS) semiannually for 2 years (5 time points).
Eight matched control subjects underwent the protocol annually (3 time points).
Their global N-acetyl-L-aspartate (1)H-MRS signal was converted into absolute amounts by phantom replacement and into WBNAA by dividing with the brain parenchymal volume, V(B), from MRI segmentation.
The baseline WBNAA of the patients (10.5 ± 1.7 mM) was significantly lower than that of the controls (12.3 ± 1.3 mM; p &lt; 0.002) and declined significantly (5%/year, p &lt; 0.002) vs that for the controls who did not show a decline (0.4%/year, p &gt; 0.7).
Likewise, V(B) values of the patients also declined significantly (0.5%/year, p &lt; 0.0001), whereas those of the controls did not (0.2%/year, p = 0.08).
The mean EDSS score of the patients increased insignificantly from 1.0 to 1.5 (range 0-6.0) and did not correlate with V(B) or WBNAA.
WBNAA of patients with RR-MS declined significantly at both the group and individual levels over a 2-year time period common in clinical trials.
Because of the small sample sizes required to establish power, WBNAA can be incorporated into future studies.
PMID: 23202976
The role of neurotrophins in multiple sclerosis-pathological and clinical implications.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory demyelinating and neurodegenerative disease of the central nervous system (CNS) with unknown etiology.
It was recently suggested that autoimmunity, which had long been considered to be destructive in MS, might also play a protective role in the CNS of MS patients.
Neurotrophins are polypeptides belonging to the neurotrophic factor family.
While neurotrophins mediate cell survival and proliferation in the nervous system, they are also expressed within peripheral blood mononuclear cells fraction (PBMCs) of immunological system.
In MS additional neurotrophic support from PBMCs might compensate relative neurotrophins deficiency in the damaged CNS tissue that needs to be repaired.
Failure to produce the adequate neurotrophins concentrations might result in decreased protection of the CNS, consequently leading to increased atrophy, which is the main determinant of MS patients' end-point disability.
There are several lines of evidence, both from clinical research and animal models, suggesting that neurotrophins play a pivotal role in neuroprotective and neuroregenerative processes that are often defective in the course of MS.
It seems that neuroprotective strategies might be used as potentially valuable add-on therapies, alongside traditional immunomodulatory treatment in multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 23527649
Changes in cognitive performance over a 1-year period in children and adolescents with multiple sclerosis.
Cognitive impairment is a core symptom of pediatric-onset multiple sclerosis (MS), although relatively little is known regarding the rate of cognitive decline.
This study examined the extent, pattern, and correlates of change in cognitive functioning in youth with MS.
Changes in cognitive performance in 28 patients with pediatric-onset MS and 26 age-matched controls were ascertained through repeat comprehensive neuropsychological assessment conducted over a 1-year period.
Change was evaluated by using a mixed factorial design with repeated measures to determine the interaction between group and time and using the Reliable Change Index (RCI) to determine individual differences on test scores over time.
Participants were classified as showing decline or improvement if change scores exceeded the RCI on three or more tests.
The pattern of change over time differed by group.
At the group level, healthy controls were more likely to show improvement across multiple domains of function relative to the MS group.
Using the RCI, 7 of 28 patients (25%) showed cognitive deterioration compared with only 1 of 26 controls (3.8%; p &lt; .05).
Performance on measures of attention and processing speed, visuomotor integration, verbal fluency, visual memory, and calculation and spelling ability were most responsive to deterioration in functioning over time.
Longer disease duration was associated with greater deterioration in visuomotor integration.
Increased lesion volume was associated with slower psychomotor speed over time.
Lower rates of improvement in the pediatric MS group may be suggestive of a lack of age-appropriate cognitive development and warrant further evaluation over time.
PsycINFO Database Record (c) 2013 APA, all rights reserved.
PMID: 22322149
Interferon modulates central nervous system function.
The interferons (IFNs) are an endogenous pleiotropic family of cytokines that perform fundamental physiological functions as well as protecting host organisms from disease and in maintaining homeostasis.
This review covers the effects of endogenous IFN on the nervous system.
It starts with the description of its receptors, followed how it modulate neuronal activity, mood, sleep, temperature, the endocrine system, the opioid system and how it regulate food consumption and the immune system.
Similar to other multifunctional cytokines, an excessive or inappropriate activity of IFNs can cause toxicity and even death.
Furthermore, IFNs are currently the major treatment modality for several malignant and non-malignant diseases such as chronic hepatitis C and B, multiple sclerosis, hematological malignancies, malignant melanoma, renal cell carcinoma, etc.
Published by Elsevier B.V.
PMID: 22808081
HLA associations in classical Hodgkin lymphoma: EBV status matters.
The pathogenesis of classical Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL) involves environmental and genetic factors.
To explore the role of the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genes, we performed a case-control genotyping study in 338 Dutch cHL patients using a PCR-based sequence-specific oligonucleotide probe (SSOP) hybridization approach.
The allele frequencies were compared to HLA typings of more than 6,000 controls.
The age of the cHL patients varied between 13 and 81 years with a median of 35 years.
Nodular sclerosis subtype was the most common subtype (87%) and EBV was detected in 25% of the cHL patients.
HLA-B5 was significantly increased and HLA-DR7 significantly decreased in the total cHL patient population as compared to controls.
Two class II associations were observed to be specific for the EBV- cHL population with an increase of HLA-DR2 and HLA-DR5.
Allele frequencies of HLA-A1, HLA-B37 and HLA-DR10 were significantly increased in the EBV+ cHL population; these alleles are in strong linkage disequilibrium and form a common haplotype in Caucasians.
The allele frequency of HLA-A2 was significantly decreased in the EBV+ cHL population.
Analysis of haplotypes with a frequency of &gt;1% revealed a significant increase of HLA-A2-B7-DR2 in EBV- cHL as compared to controls.
SSOP association analysis revealed significant differences between EBV+ and EBV- cHL patients for 19 probes that discriminate between HLA-A*01 and HLA-A*02.
In conclusion, the HLA-A1 and HLA-A2 antigens and not specific single nucleotide variants shared by multiple alleles are responsible for the association with EBV+ cHL.
Furthermore several new protective and predisposing HLA class I and II associations for the EBV+, the EBV- and the entire cHL population were identified.
PMID: 22336483
[The specialist-referred patients represent 42% of the activity of an academic memory clinic].
Evaluate demographic and aetiological characteristics of patients referred by specialist doctors (neurologists, geriatricians and psychiatrists) to an Academic Memory Clinic in Lyon, for the year 2008.
These specialist-referred patients (SRP) constitute a specific mission of the French Academic Memory Clinics.
The outpatients consecutively referred in 2008 to our memory clinic by any persons (patients, families, general practitioners, specialist doctors) were all evaluated using clinical, neuropsychological and imaging information.
We examined the distribution of patients diagnosis and differences in gender, education, and cognitive severity (MMSE).
For each patient, diagnoses used clinical criteria at the first visit, and ranged from normal subjects to cognitive impaired patients with or without dementia.
Among 384 patients, 160 (41.7%; 68 men and 92 women) were referred by specialist doctors.
These 160 SRP were younger (P&lt;0.0001) but did not differ from other patients on gender (P=0.55) nor Mini Mental State Examination (P=0.15).
SRP were more often demented than the non-referred patients (respectively, 64.4% vs 39.7%; P=0.0001), and the demented SRP had less often Alzheimer's disease (AD) (30.1% vs 65.6%; P=0,0001).
Dementia was present in 64.4% of the 160 SRP: among the 160, AD was the most frequent cause (19.4%), followed by Lewy body dementia (11.3%), neurological diseases (12.5% - multiple sclerosis, vascular cognitive impairment, epilepsy) and Mild Cognitive Impairment (10%).
Normal subjects were present in 8.1% of the SRP.
As compared to non-SRP, SRP are younger, more demented (64,4%) and more prone to have non-AD dementia (69,9%).
However, AD represented the most frequent diagnosis (19.4% of SRP).
SRP are an important part of the activity of an Academic Memory Clinic in Lyon.
As compared to GPs, young and demented patients are more likely to be sent in a specialized referral center by specialist doctors.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23555057
Assessment of definitions of sustained disease progression in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
Sustained progression on the expanded disability status scale (EDSS) is a common outcome measure of disease progression in clinical studies of MS.
Unfortunately, this outcome may not accurately measure long-term and irreversible disease progression.
To assess the performance of definitions of sustained progression, patients with relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) or a clinically isolated syndrome with evidence of lesions on a brain MRI were included in our study.
Fifteen definitions of sustained progression using both the EDSS and the functional system (FS) scales were investigated.
The impact of both relapses and changes in provider on the probability of maintaining progression was also evaluated.
Although the provider scoring the EDSS sometimes changed during followup, the provider had access to previous EDSS scores.
Between 15.8% and 42.2% of patients experienced sustained progression based on the definitions using EDSS as the outcome, but nearly 50% of these patients failed to maintain sustained progression for the duration of followup.
When FS scales were used, progression was most common on the pyramidal and sensory scales.
Unfortunately, progression on specific FS scales failed to be more sensitive to irreversible disability.
Relapses or changes in provider did not explain the poor performance of the measures.
Short-term changes in the EDSS or FS scores may not be an accurate marker of irreversible change in RRMS.
PMID: 22570021
Tuberous sclerosis complex.
Tuberous Sclerosis Complex, also known as Epiloia or Bourneville-Pringle disease is an autosomal dominant neurocutaneous syndrome with variable clinical expression.
It is a multisystem disorder that may be associated with hamartomas in multiple organs in an unpredictable manner.
The dermatologist plays an essential role in the history of the disease, since skin manifestations represent the most prevalent clinical features, enabling early diagnosis and intervention in its natural course.
This article aims to inform the scientific community about advances made in the study of genetics and molecular biology.
Recent findings regarding stimulation of tumor growth have been changing the history of this condition, making therapeutic trials with topical and systemic drugs possible.
Knowledge of these topics enables better management of the patients affected, since tissue replacement by tumors can result in significant morbidity and mortality.
PMID: 23911752
T-cell homeostasis in pediatric multiple sclerosis: old cells in young patients.
To assess pediatric patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) for early signs of homeostatic and functional abnormalities in conventional (Tcon) and regulatory T cells (Treg).
We studied the composition of the peripheral T-cell compartment and Treg function in a cross-sectional study with 30 pediatric MS (pMS) patients by multicolor flow cytometry and proliferation assays.
Data were compared to those obtained from adult patients (n = 26) and age-matched control donors (n = 67).
Proportions of naive T cells were 10%-20% higher in children than in adults, reflecting the age-related decline.
pMS patients, however, had clearly lower numbers of naive T cells, among them recent thymic emigrants (RTE), whereas percentages of memory T cells were increased.
In the Treg compartment, reduced RTE numbers coincided with markedly dampened suppressive capacities of total Treg.
These homeostatic changes in circulating T cells precisely paralleled the pattern seen in adult MS.
As in adults, treatment with immunomodulatory drugs attenuated these alterations.
The homeostatic changes detected in the T-cell compartment in pMS are similar to those in adult-onset disease.
With ratios between naive and memory T-cell subsets matching those of 20- to 30-years-older controls, signs of early thymic involution are already found in pMS, suggesting that an intrinsic compromise in thymic-dependent T-cell neogenesis might contribute to MS pathogenesis.
PMID: 22791906
Multiple sclerosis and extract of cannabis: results of the MUSEC trial.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is associated with chronic symptoms, including muscle stiffness, spasms, pain and insomnia.
Here we report the results of the Multiple Sclerosis and Extract of Cannabis (MUSEC) study that aimed to substantiate the patient based findings of previous studies.
Patients with stable MS at 22 UK centres were randomised to oral cannabis extract (CE) (N=144) or placebo (N=135), stratified by centre, walking ability and use of antispastic medication.
This double blind, placebo controlled, phase III study had a screening period, a 2 week dose titration phase from 5 mg to a maximum of 25 mg of tetrahydrocannabinol daily and a 10 week maintenance phase.
The primary outcome measure was a category rating scale (CRS) measuring patient reported change in muscle stiffness from baseline.
Further CRSs assessed body pain, spasms and sleep quality.
Three validated MS specific patient reported outcome measures assessed aspects of spasticity, physical and psychological impact, and walking ability.
The rate of relief from muscle stiffness after 12 weeks was almost twice as high with CE than with placebo (29.4% vs. 15.7%; OR 2.26; 95% CI 1.24 to 4.13; p=0.004, one sided).
Similar results were found after 4 weeks and 8 weeks, and also for all further CRSs.
Results from the MS scales supported these findings.
The study met its primary objective to demonstrate the superiority of CE over placebo in the treatment of muscle stiffness in MS.
This was supported by results for secondary efficacy variables.
Adverse events in participants treated with CE were consistent with the known side effects of cannabinoids.
No new safety concerns were observed. NCT00552604.
PMID: 22045554
Focal cortical lesion detection in multiple sclerosis: 3 Tesla DIR versus 7 Tesla FLASH-T2.
To evaluate the inter-rater agreement of cortical lesion detection using 7 Tesla (T) FLASH-T2 and 3T DIR sequences.
Twenty-six patients with multiple sclerosis were scanned on a human 7T (Siemens) and 3T MRI (TIM Trio, Siemens) to acquire 3T DIR/MEMPR and 7T FLASH-T2 sequences.
Four independent reviewers scored and categorized cortical lesions in the bilateral precentral gyri (motor strips) as leukocortical, intracortical, or subpial.
Inter-rater agreement was assessed according to lesion category using the kappa statistic.
The sensitivity of recent MAGNIMS consensus guidelines for cortical lesion detection using 3T DIR was assessed with 7T FLASH-T2 as the reference gold standard.
Inter-rater agreement at 7T was excellent compared with 3T (k = 0.97 versus 0.12).
FLASH-T2 at 7T detected subpial lesions while 3T DIR did not.
The predicted sensitivity of 3T DIR sequence for cortical lesions in vivo is modest (range of 13.6 to 18.3%).
The 7T FLASH-T2 detects more cortical-particularly subpial-lesions compared with 3T DIR.
In the absence of DIR/postmortem data, 7T FLASH-T2 is a suitable gold-standard instrument and should be incorporated into future consensus guidelines.
Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
PMID: 23537888
Invariant Natural Killer T-cell anergy to endogenous myelin acetyl-glycolipids in multiple sclerosis.
To extend our studies on glycolipid-reactive invariant Natural Killer T-cell (iNKT-cell) function in multiple sclerosis (MS), we investigated the stimulatory activities of two myelin-derived glycolipids that are poly-acetylated derivatives of β-galactosylceramide designated as fast-migrating cerebrosides (FMC) by thin-layer chromatography.
In healthy subjects, FMC stimulation of peripheral blood cells significantly expanded iNKT-cells similar to α-GalCer and induced significant increases in Th1, Th2 and Th17 cytokines.
In marked contrast, MS patients failed to respond to FMCs or to α-GalCer stimulation indicating an anergic response.
We propose that myelin-derived FMC glycolipids stimulate iNKT-cell responses in vivo and this is blocked in MS.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23049678
Comparison of disease activity in SPMS and PPMS in the context of multicenter clinical trials.
Retrospective single center natural history studies have shown that times to reach disability milestones and ages at which they are reached are similar in primary (PPMS) and secondary (SPMS) progressive multiple sclerosis suggesting that they may be phenotypic variations of the same disease.
Here we compared longitudinal disease activity in SPMS and PPMS in the context of international multicenter clinical trials.
We analyzed all objective outcome measures that were systematically collected over 2 years for all subjects randomized to placebo arms in one SPMS and one PPMS clinical trial over the last decade.
Conventional and exploratory definitions of clinical disease activity were used.
Disease activity was analyzed in 3 different categories intermittent activity, progression, and improvement.
Conventional MRI measures and one patient reported outcome measure of quality of life were included when available for comparison.
Heat maps were drawn for all results followed by hierarchical clustering.
There were 101 outcome variables from 206 SPMS subjects and 79 outcome variables from 135 PPMS subjects.
The comparison revealed that SPMS and PPMS subjects exhibited similar disease activity over 2 years in all but two of the variables in common worsening in the EDSS sensory system was more common in PPMS while worsening on the 9 hole PEG was more common in SPMS.
Intermittent activity was the most common pattern of disease activity in SPMS and PPMS.
Clinical worsening and improvement occurred at similar frequency in both.
Longitudinal disease activity was nearly identical in SPMS and PPMS subjects in the context of the two multicenter international clinical trials we examined.
PMID: 23159439
The CD27 and CD70 costimulatory pathway inhibits effector function of T helper 17 cells and attenuates associated autoimmunity.
T helper 17 (Th17) cells protect against infection but also promote inflammation and autoimmunity.
Therefore, the factors that govern Th17 cell differentiation are of special interest.
The CD27 and CD70 costimulatory pathway impeded Th17 effector cell differentiation and associated autoimmunity in a mouse model of multiple sclerosis.
CD27 or CD70 deficiency exacerbated disease, whereas constitutive CD27 signaling strongly reduced disease incidence and severity.
CD27 signaling did not impact master regulators of T helper cell lineage commitment but selectively repressed transcription of the key effector molecules interleukin-17 (IL-17) and the chemokine receptor CCR6 in differentiating Th17 cells.
CD27 mediated this repression at least in part via the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) pathway that restrained IL-17 and CCR6 expression in differentiating Th17 cells.
CD27 signaling also resulted in epigenetic silencing of the Il17a gene.
Thus, CD27 costimulation via JNK signaling, transcriptional, and epigenetic effects suppresses Th17 effector cell function and associated pathological consequences.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22914435
Decreased systemic IL-7 and soluble IL-7Rα in multiple sclerosis patients.
Polymorphisms (single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)) in the interleukin-7 receptor-α (IL-7Rα)/IL-7 pathway are associated with an increased risk to develop multiple sclerosis (MS).
The rs6897932 SNP in the IL-7Rα leads to increased soluble IL-7Rα production.
Given the functional interaction between sIL-7Rα, membrane-bound IL-7Rα and IL-7, we assessed IL-7, mIL-7Rα and sIL-7Rα levels in MS patients and healthy controls (HCs).
One-hundred and twenty eight MS patients had significantly lower sIL-7Rα levels compared with 73 HCs.
The levels of sIL-7Rα increased dose-dependent upon rs6897932 [C] risk allele carriership in both HCs and MS.
Next, we hypothesized that lower sIL-7Rα could result in a higher mIL-7Rα to soluble IL-7Rα ratio.
Indeed, 52 MS patients had significantly increased mIL-7Rα to sIL-7Rα ratio for both CD4 and CD8 T cells compared with 44 HCs.
Given the supposed role of IL-7 in autoimmunity, we determined whether sIL-7Rα influences IL-7 levels.
IL-7 levels were significantly decreased in 40 MS patients compared with 40 HCs.
In conclusion, MS patients had lower free IL-7 and a higher membrane to soluble IL-7Rα ratio.
The soluble IL-7Rα levels correlate with the rs6897932 [C] risk allele carriership.
The skew at the IL-7 and IL-7Rα level may influence responsiveness of IL-7Rα(+) cells.
PMID: 23202920
What Do Effective Treatments for Multiple Sclerosis Tell Us about the Molecular Mechanisms Involved in Pathogenesis?
Multiple sclerosis is a potentially debilitating disease of the central nervous system.
A concerted program of research by many centers around the world has consistently demonstrated the importance of the immune system in its pathogenesis.
This knowledge has led to the formal testing of a number of therapeutic agents in both animal models and humans.
These clinical trials have shed yet further light on the pathogenesis of MS through their sometimes unexpected effects and by their differential effects in terms of impact on relapses, progression of the disease, paraclinical parameters (MRI) and the adverse events that are experienced.
Here we review the currently approved medications for the commonest form of multiple sclerosis (relapsing-remitting) and the emerging therapies for which preliminary results from phase II/III clinical trials are available.
A detailed analysis of the molecular mechanisms responsible for the efficacy of these medications in multiple sclerosis indicates that blockade or modulation of both T- and B-cell activation and migration pathways in the periphery or CNS can lead to amelioration of the disease.
It is hoped that further therapeutic trials will better delineate the pathogenesis of MS, ultimately leading to even better treatments with fewer adverse effects.
PMID: 22989784
[Prevention of multiple sclerosis: a realistic goal?].
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most frequent source of chronic neurological disability in Western countries, and its incidence and prevalence are increasing.
However, it is possible to determine its prodromal phase and the radiological, biological and immunological endophenotypes that are present before the clinical onset of the disease, despite remaining unseen with the naked eye.
In this context, greater knowledge of the aetiological factors, both genetic and environmental, may lead the way towards primary prevention strategies for MS in the near future.
Copyright © 2012.
Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.
PMID: 23427327
Cortical atrophy in ALS is critically associated with neuropsychiatric and cognitive changes.
To characterize the patterns of brain atrophy in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) with and without cognitive and neuropsychiatric symptoms, in comparison to controls and patients with ALS-frontotemporal dementia (FTD).
A total of 57 participants (ALS = 22; ALS-FTD = 17; controls = 18) were included, following current ALS and FTD criteria.
Patients with ALS were further subclassified into ALS with cognitive and behavioral symptoms (ALS-plus; n = 8) and those without (ALS; n = 14).
By definition, ALS-plus did not reach the diagnostic threshold for ALS-FTD.
All patients underwent neuropsychological and neuropsychiatric assessments, and underwent a brain MRI.
Voxel-based morphometry analysis was conducted to establish patterns of brain atrophy.
Cortical atrophy in ALS was linked to neuropsychiatric and cognitive changes (ALS-plus vs ALS).
Patients with ALS-plus had significant atrophy across motor and somatosensory as well as adjacent frontal and parietal areas, even after strict multiple comparison correction.
By contrast, patients with ALS showed no significant cortical atrophy, and only brainstem atrophy.
Importantly, atrophy in ALS-plus was not as widespread as in ALS-FTD, with ALS-plus atrophy mostly confined to motor and somatosensory areas, while atrophy in ALS-FTD also included substantial frontal and temporal atrophy.
The present findings establish that cortical atrophy in ALS is highly dependent upon neuropsychiatric and cognitive changes.
Previous inconsistent findings of cortical atrophy in ALS likely relate to the inclusion of cognitively affected patients and patients with pure motor ALS.
PMID: 22116203
Natalizumab in aggressive multiple sclerosis after haematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
High-dose cyclophosphamide followed by autologous haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HDC-AHSCT) is a treatment option for aggressive and refractory multiple sclerosis (MS).
Natalizumab is a monoclonal antibody approved for relapsing-remitting (RR) MS unresponsive to immunomodulating drugs.
Nothing is known about the use of natalizumab in patients after HDC-AHSCT.
We describe five female RR-MS patients with incomplete response to HDC-AHSCT.
Natalizumab was then administered with abolition of both MRI and clinical activity.
No severe adverse events, in particular opportunistic infections such as Progressive Multifocal Leukoencephalopathy (PML), were observed.
Our results suggest that the use of natalizumab in aggressive RR-MS after HDC-AHSCT could be effective and safe.
The very long-term risk of adverse events due to sequential aggressive immunosuppression has to be established.
PMID: 22177922
Th17 cells induce ectopic lymphoid follicles in central nervous system tissue inflammation.
Ectopic lymphoid follicles are hallmarks of chronic autoimmune inflammatory diseases such as multiple sclerosis (MS), rheumatoid arthritis, Sjögren's syndrome, and myasthenia gravis.
However, the effector cells and mechanisms that induce their development are unknown.
Here we showed that in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), the animal model of MS, Th17 cells specifically induced ectopic lymphoid follicles in the central nervous system (CNS).
Development of ectopic lymphoid follicles was partly dependent on the cytokine interleukin 17 (IL-17) and on the cell surface molecule Podoplanin (Pdp), which was expressed on Th17 cells, but not on other effector T cell subsets.
Pdp was also crucial for the development of secondary lymphoid structures: Pdp-deficient mice lacked peripheral lymph nodes and had a defect in forming normal lymphoid follicles and germinal centers in spleen and lymph node remnants.
Thus, Th17 cells are uniquely endowed to induce tissue inflammation, characterized by ectopic lymphoid follicles within the target organ.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22058085
Multiple sclerosis and depression.
Clinically significant depression can affect up to 50% of patients with multiple sclerosis over the course of their lifetime.
It is associated with an increased morbidity and mortality and is regarded by patients as one of the main determinants of their quality of life.
This review summarizes current perspectives relating to diagnosis, the utility of self report screening questionnaires, warning signs of suicidal intent and the biological and psychosocial variables implicated in mood change.
In particular, the association between depression and structural brain abnormalities, including those derived from diffusion tensor imaging, is highlighted.
Depression is treatable, as the results from randomized controlled trials of antidepressant medication, cognitive behavior therapy and mindfulness therapy, reveal.
These positive findings are offset by data showing that depression in a neurological setting is often overlooked and under treated.
PMID: 22289050
Change in the clinical activity of multiple sclerosis after treatment switch for suboptimal response.
  Therapy for multiple sclerosis (MS) has a partial efficacy, and a significant proportion of treated patients will develop a suboptimal response with first-line disease-modifying drugs (DMD).
Therapy switch in patients with MS can be a strategy after a treatment failure.
We studied the change in clinical activity after switching of first-line DMD because of a treatment failure.
  Relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) patients treated with interferon-beta (IFNB) or glatiramer acetate (GA) were divided into (i) patients without change in DMD, (ii) patients with a change in DMD because of a poor response, and (iii) those with a change in DMD without relation with response.
Annualized relapse rate (ARR) and relapse-free proportions were analyzed.
  We identified 923 patients with RRMS.
Of the 180 who experienced a change because of suboptimal response, 90 switched to another first-line DMT, 38 to mitoxantrone, and 52 to natalizumab.
Median ARR in the pre-DMD period on first DMD and second DMD was the following: 1, 1, and 0 for switchers from IFNB to another IFNB (P = 0.0001); 0.67, 1, and 0 for switchers from GA to IFNB (P = 0.01); 1, 1, and 0 for switchers from an IFNB to GA (P = 0.02); 1.1, 1.5, 0.2 for switchers from IFNB or GA to mitoxantrone (P = 0.0001); 0.9, 1, 0 for switchers from IFNB or GA to natalizumab (P = 0.0001).
  In patients with RRMS who have a poor response, switch to another DMD may reduce the clinical activity of the disease.
© 2012 The Author(s).
European Journal of Neurology © 2012 EFNS.
PMID: 22516321
A pilot randomised controlled trial of an Internet-based cognitive behavioural therapy self-management programme (MS Invigor8) for multiple sclerosis fatigue.
The majority of people affected by Multiple Sclerosis (paMS) experience severe and disabling fatigue.
A recent randomised controlled trial (RCT) showed that cognitive behaviour therapy with a clinical psychologist was an effective treatment for MS fatigue.
An Internet-based version of this intervention, MS Invigor8, was developed for the current study using agile design and input from paMS.
MS Invigor8 includes eight tailored, interactive sessions.
The aim was to test the feasibility and potential efficacy and cost-effectiveness of the programme in a pilot RCT.
40 patients were randomised to MS Invigor8 (n=23) or standard care (n=17).
The MS Invigor8 group accessed sessions over 8-10 weeks and received up to three 30-60min telephone support sessions.
Participants completed online standardised questionnaires assessing fatigue, mood, quality of life and service use at baseline and 10 weeks follow-up.
Large between group treatment effects were found for the primary outcomes of fatigue severity (d=1.19) and impact (d=1.02).
The MS Invigor8 group also reported significantly greater improvements in anxiety, depression and quality-adjusted life years.
These data suggest that Internet-based CBT may be a clinically and cost-effective treatment for MS fatigue.
A larger RCT with longer term follow-up is warranted.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23181008
Molecular Mechanisms in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis: The Role of Angiogenin, a Secreted RNase.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a fatal neurodegenerative disease caused by the loss of motoneurons.
The precise molecular and cellular basis for neuronal death is not yet well established, but the contemporary view is that it is a culmination of multiple aberrant biological processes.
Among the proposed mechanisms of motoneuron degeneration, alterations in the homeostasis of RNA binding proteins (RBP) and the consequent changes in RNA metabolism have received attention recently.
The ribonuclease, angiogenin was one of the first RBPs associated with familial and sporadic ALS.
It is enriched in motoneurons under physiological conditions, and is required for motoneuron survival under stress conditions.
Furthermore, delivery of angiogenin protects cultured motoneurons against stress-induced injury, and significantly increases the survival of motoneurons in SOD(G93A) mice.
In this overview on the role of angiogenin in RNA metabolism and in the control of motoneuron survival, we discuss potential pathogenic mechanisms of angiogenin dysfunction relevant to ALS and other neurodegenerative disorders.
We also discuss recent evidence demonstrating that angiogenin secreted from stressed motoneurons may alter RNA metabolism in astrocytes.
PMID: 23316389
Switching and escalating therapy in long-lasting multiple sclerosis: not always necessary.
Although therapy switch is common among patients with multiple sclerosis (MS), sometimes the initial prescribed treatment is maintained for a long period with clinical stability, low disability, and nonsignificant side effects.
We aim to describe demographic and clinical characteristics of patients treated in our MS clinic with the same disease-modifying drug (DMD) lasting for &gt;12 years.
From the cohort of 51 patients followed in our MS clinic with relapse-remitting MS who started an DMD between 1996 and 1999, we found a high percentage (51%) of patients who were efficiently treated with the first DMD.
These patients were mainly females, with low annualized relapse rate and Multiple Sclerosis Severity Score (MSSS).
Our results may be related to the open and multidisciplinary model of our MS clinic organization.
Identifying characteristics associated with therapy persistence may be useful in developing strategies to improve therapy effectiveness.
PMID: 22853784
Onabotulinum toxin A for the treatment of neurogenic detrusor overactivity due to spinal cord injury or multiple sclerosis.
Evidence for the efficacy and safety of intravesical onabotulinum toxin A (onabotA) injections has led to it being licensed in many countries in patients with urinary incontinence due to neurogenic detrusor overactivity resulting from spinal cord injury and multiple sclerosis, who are refractory or intolerant to the gold-standard treatment, anticholinergics.
Owing to its mechanism of action, an inhibitory effect on acetylcholine release is obtained for up to 10 months, with a recommended dose of 200 units.
Urinary tract infections and postvoid residual volume are the most prevalent side effects.
In the case of residual volume, clean intermittent catheterization might be necessary.
In patients with spinal cord injury and multiple sclerosis, it is recommended to evaluate the manual dexterity and cognitive function before onabotA injections, to ensure that the patient and caregiver are able to perform catheterization if necessary.
OnabotA treatment has a beneficial effect not only on urinary symptoms but also on quality of life.
PMID: 21622592
The relationship between relapse, impairment and disability in multiple sclerosis.
To describe the spatial relationship between relapse and disability in multiple sclerosis (MS).
141 relapse onset MS patients were studied.
For each patient an examination was performed and a relapse history obtained.
Multivariate logistic regression examined whether there was an association between localizing clinical signs and a history of relevant relapse in order to explore the spatial relationship between relapse and subsequent disability.
The presence of impaired vision or sensation was independently associated with a history of one or more anatomically related relapses.
The presence of weakness or cerebellar ataxia in a limb was not associated with a single relevant relapse but was associated with multiple relevant relapses.
A history of multiple episodes of weakness or ataxia in the same limb was uncommon.
Our data suggest that motor pathways are relatively resistant to chronic impairment from acute relapse, whereas afferent pathways are more susceptible.
This, in combination with prominent usage of the Expanded Disability Status Scale, which is dependent on mobility and motor function at higher scores, may explain the paradox between natural history studies that suggest relapses are irrelevant to long-term disability and shorter studies at lower disability levels suggesting relapses are responsible for disability accumulation.
PMID: 22317869
Sclerosing peritonitis associated with a luteinized adult granulosa cell tumor.
Sclerosing peritonitis is an uncommon condition that has been reported in patients with luteinized ovarian thecomas, although some pathologists have suggested that the underlying ovarian pathology is not always neoplastic.
We now report sclerosing peritonitis in a patient with an uncommon, luteinized variant of an adult granulosa cell tumor.
To the best of our knowledge, this association has not been described previously.
We suggest that sclerosing peritonitis may result from the release of substances by luteinized ovarian stromal cells, in the context of hyperplasia or neoplasia, which stimulate the proliferation of submesothelial fibroblasts.
PMID: 23065787
A combined post-mortem magnetic resonance imaging and quantitative histological study of multiple sclerosis pathology.
Multiple sclerosis is a chronic inflammatory neurological condition characterized by focal and diffuse neurodegeneration and demyelination throughout the central nervous system.
Factors influencing the progression of pathology are poorly understood.
One hypothesis is that anatomical connectivity influences the spread of neurodegeneration.
This predicts that measures of neurodegeneration will correlate most strongly between interconnected structures.
However, such patterns have been difficult to quantify through post-mortem neuropathology or in vivo scanning alone.
In this study, we used the complementary approaches of whole brain post-mortem magnetic resonance imaging and quantitative histology to assess patterns of multiple sclerosis pathology.
Two thalamo-cortical projection systems were considered based on their distinct neuroanatomy and their documented involvement in multiple sclerosis: lateral geniculate nucleus to primary visual cortex and mediodorsal nucleus of the thalamus to prefrontal cortex.
Within the anatomically distinct thalamo-cortical projection systems, magnetic resonance imaging derived cortical thickness was correlated significantly with both a measure of myelination in the connected tract and a measure of connected thalamic nucleus cell density.
Such correlations did not exist between these markers of neurodegeneration across different thalamo-cortical systems.
Magnetic resonance imaging lesion analysis depicted clearly demarcated subcortical lesions impinging on the white matter tracts of interest; however, quantitation of the extent of lesion-tract overlap failed to demonstrate any appreciable association with the severity of markers of diffuse pathology within each thalamo-cortical projection system.
Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging metrics in both white matter tracts were correlated significantly with a histologically derived measure of tract myelination.
These data demonstrate for the first time the relevance of functional anatomical connectivity to the spread of multiple sclerosis pathology in a 'tract-specific' pattern.
Furthermore, the persisting relationship between metrics from post-mortem diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging and histological measures from fixed tissue further validates the potential of imaging for future neuropathological studies.
PMID: 23348761
Development of a standardized MRI scoring tool for CNS demyelination in children.
The degree to which MR imaging is useful in the diagnosis of MS is predicated on standardized and reliable evaluation of MR imaging parameters.
We aimed to devise items for an MR imaging scoring tool that would have high inter-rater agreement and would be straightforward to apply.
On the basis of a literature search and consensus of an expert panel, we identified 48 parameters that describe acute CNS demyelination, predict MS diagnosis, or characterize demyelinating disorder mimics.
MR images of children with clinically confirmed MS, monophasic ADEM, and angiography-negative biopsy-positive small-vessel primary angiitis of the CNS were scored by 2 neuroradiologists independently, using the preliminary 48-parameter tool.
Parameters with Cohen κ ≥ 0.6 and deemed important in predicting diagnosis were retained.
Parameters not visualized on routine clinical imaging or not important in differentiating MS, ADEM, and SV-cPACNS were discarded.
Of 65 eligible patients, 55 children were enrolled (16 with monophasic ADEM, 27 with MS, 12 with SV-cPACNS); 10 were excluded (6 had hard-copy films, 4 did not meet MR imaging quality requirements).
Of the 48 parameters, 16 were retained in the final scoring tool.
The remaining 28 parameters were discarded: 4 had κ &lt; 0.6 and were not deemed useful in predicting diagnosis; 9 were not visible on routinely acquired clinical images; and 15 had inter-rater agreement ≥0.6 but were not useful in differentiating monophasic ADEM, MS, and SV-cPACNS.
We propose a 16-parameter MR imaging scoring tool that is straightforward to apply in the clinical setting and demonstrates high inter-rater agreement.
PMID: 23348760
Functional homotopic changes in multiple sclerosis with resting-state functional MR imaging.
CC is extensively involved in MS with interhemispheric dysfunction.
The purpose of this study was to determine whether interhemispheric correlation is altered in MS by use of a recently developed RS-fMRI homotopy technique and whether these homotopic changes correlate with CC pathology.
Twenty-four patients with relapsing-remitting MS and 24 age-matched healthy volunteers were studied with RS-fMRI and DTI acquired at 3T.
The Pearson correlation of each pair of symmetric interhemispheric voxels of RS-fMRI time-series data was performed to compute VMHC, and z-transformed for subsequent group-level analysis.
In addition, 5 CC segments in the midsagittal area and DTI-derived FA were measured to quantify interhemispheric microstructural changes and correlate with global and regional VMHC in MS.
Relative to control participants, patients with MS exhibited an abnormal homotopic pattern with decreased VMHC in the primary visual, somatosensory, and motor cortices and increased VMHC in several regions associated with sensory processing and motor control including the insula, thalamus, pallidum, and cerebellum.
The global VMHC correlates moderately with the average FA of the entire CC for all participants in both groups (r = 0.3; P = .03).
Our data provide preliminary evidence of the potential usefulness of VMHC analyses for the detection of abnormalities of interhemispheric coordination in MS.
We demonstrated that the whole-brain homotopic RS-fMRI pattern was altered in patients with MS, which was partially associated with the underlying structural degenerative changes of CC measured with FA.
PMID: 23065788
Cortical lesion load associates with progression of disability in multiple sclerosis.
Cortical inflammatory lesions have been correlated with disability and cortical atrophy in multiple sclerosis.
The extent to which cortical lesion load is associated with longer-term physical and cognitive disability in different multiple sclerosis phenotypes has not yet been investigated.
Thus, a 5-year prospective longitudinal study was carried on in a large group of patients with multiple sclerosis.
Three hundred and twelve consecutive patients suffering from multiple sclerosis (157 relapsing remitting, 35 paediatric, 45 benign, 44 primary progressive and 31 secondary progressive) were enrolled in a 5-year prospective clinical and neuroimaging study.
Several magnetic resonance parameters (including cortical lesion number and volume, contrast-enhancing cortical lesions and grey matter atrophy) were analysed to find associations with clinical and cognitive outcomes.
Patients with high cortical lesion load had higher Expanded Disability Status Scale increase (median = 1.5; range = 0-3) during the study than both patients with low cortical lesion load (median = 1.0; range = 1-3, P &lt; 0.001) and without cortical lesions (median = 0.5; range = -1 to 2, P &lt; 0.001).
Compared with clinically stable patients, 101 (32.4%) patients showing clinical progression at 5 years had the highest rate of cortical lesion accumulation (P &lt; 0.001).
Stepwise regression analysis revealed significant and independent contributions from age (β = 0.55), cortical lesion volume (β = 0.58), T(2) white matter lesion volume (β = 0.34) and grey matter fraction (β = 0.42) as predictors (final model with r(2 )= 0.657, P &lt; 0.001) of Expanded Disability Status Scale change.
Disease duration (β = 0.52, P &lt; 0.001), cortical lesion volume (β = 0.67, P &lt; 0.001), grey matter fraction (β = 0.56, P &lt; 0.001) and T(2) white matter lesion volume (β = 0.31, P = 0.040) at baseline were found to be independent predictors of cognitive status at the end of the study.
While confirming the relevance of cortical pathology in all multiple sclerosis phenotypes, but benign, our study suggests that grey matter and white matter changes in multiple sclerosis occur, at least, partly independently, and that grey matter, more than white matter, damage is associated with physical and cognitive disability progression.
Thus, the combination of grey and white matter parameters gives a more comprehensive view of multiple sclerosis pathology and allows a better understanding of the progressive phase of the disease, which, however, seems more related to cortical damage than to subcortical white matter changes.
PMID: 22577119
A genetic variant of the anti-apoptotic protein Akt predicts natalizumab-induced lymphocytosis and post-natalizumab multiple sclerosis reactivation.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) patients discontinuing natalizumab treatment are at risk of disease reactivation.
No clinical or surrogate parameters exist to identify patients at risk of post-natalizumab MS reactivation.
To determine the role of natalizumab-induced lymphocytosis and of Akt polymorphisms in disease reactivation after natalizumab discontinuation.
Peripheral leukocyte count and composition were monitored in 93 MS patients during natalizumab treatment, and in 56 of these subjects who discontinued the treatment.
Genetic variants of the anti-apoptotic protein Akt were determined in all subjects because natalizumab modulates the apoptotic pathway and lymphocyte survival is regulated by the apoptotic cascade.
Natalizumab-induced peripheral lymphocytosis protected from post-natalizumab MS reactivation.
Subjects who relapsed or had magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) worsening after treatment cessation, in fact, had milder peripheral lymphocyte increases during the treatment, largely caused by less marked T cell increase.
Furthermore, subjects carrying a variant of the gene coding for Akt associated with reduced anti-apoptotic efficiency (rs2498804T) had lower lymphocytosis and higher risk of disease reactivation.
This study identified one functionally meaningful genetic variant within the Akt signaling pathway that is associated with both lymphocyte count and composition alterations during natalizumab treatment, and with the risk of disease reactivation after natalizumab discontinuation.
PMID: 22214450
Glutamate carboxypeptidase II in diagnosis and treatment of neurologic disorders and prostate cancer.
Glutamate carboxypeptidase II (GCPII) is a membrane-bound binuclear zinc metallopeptidase with the highest expression levels found in the nervous and prostatic tissue.
Throughout the nervous system, glia-bound GCPII is intimately involved in the neuron-neuron and neuron-glia signaling via the hydrolysis of N-acetylaspartylglutamate (NAAG), the most abundant mammalian peptidic neurotransmitter.
The inhibition of the GCPII-controlled NAAG catabolism has been shown to attenuate neurotoxicity associated with enhanced glutamate transmission and GCPII-specific inhibitors demonstrate efficacy in multiple preclinical models including traumatic brain injury, stroke, neuropathic and inflammatory pain, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and schizophrenia.
The second major area of pharmacological interventions targeting GCPII focuses on prostate carcinoma; GCPII expression levels are highly increased in androgen-independent and metastatic disease.
Consequently, the enzyme serves as a potential target for imaging and therapy.
This review offers a summary of GCPII structure, physiological functions in healthy tissues, and its association with various pathologies.
The review also outlines the development of GCPII-specific small-molecule compounds and their use in preclinical and clinical settings.
PMID: 22297884
Behavioral investigation of mice with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Multiple sclerosis is a neuroinflammatory disease that results in serious neurological disability.
Besides physical impairment, behavioral symptoms are also common in patients with multiple sclerosis.
Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) is considered to be a model of multiple sclerosis and mimics the main features of the disease, such as demyelination and motor impairment.
In this work, we aimed to study behavioral parameters in animals with EAE using the MOG(35-55) model in C57BL/6 mice.
We analyzed memory and anxiety in animals using the elevated plus maze, the step down inhibitory avoidance task and the memory recognition test.
No differences in any tests were found when comparing controls and animals induced with EAE.
Therefore, we conclude that behavioral changes in animals with EAE induced with MOG(35-55) are probably subtle or absent.
PMID: 22737082
Geographic differences in genetic susceptibility to IgA nephropathy: GWAS replication study and geospatial risk analysis.
IgA nephropathy (IgAN), major cause of kidney failure worldwide, is common in Asians, moderately prevalent in Europeans, and rare in Africans.
It is not known if these differences represent variation in genes, environment, or ascertainment.
In a recent GWAS, we localized five IgAN susceptibility loci on Chr.6p21 (HLA-DQB1/DRB1, PSMB9/TAP1, and DPA1/DPB2 loci), Chr.1q32 (CFHR3/R1 locus), and Chr.22q12 (HORMAD2 locus).
These IgAN loci are associated with risk of other immune-mediated disorders such as type I diabetes, multiple sclerosis, or inflammatory bowel disease.
We tested association of these loci in eight new independent cohorts of Asian, European, and African-American ancestry (N = 4,789), followed by meta-analysis with risk-score modeling in 12 cohorts (N = 10,755) and geospatial analysis in 85 world populations.
Four susceptibility loci robustly replicated and all five loci were genome-wide significant in the combined cohort (P = 5×10⁻³²-3×10⁻¹⁰), with heterogeneity detected only at the PSMB9/TAP1 locus (I² = 0.60).
Conditional analyses identified two new independent risk alleles within the HLA-DQB1/DRB1 locus, defining multiple risk and protective haplotypes within this interval.
We also detected a significant genetic interaction, whereby the odds ratio for the HORMAD2 protective allele was reversed in homozygotes for a CFHR3/R1 deletion (P = 2.5×10⁻⁴).
A seven-SNP genetic risk score, which explained 4.7% of overall IgAN risk, increased sharply with Eastward and Northward distance from Africa (r = 0.30, P = 3×10⁻¹²⁸).
This model paralleled the known East-West gradient in disease risk.
Moreover, the prediction of a South-North axis was confirmed by registry data showing that the prevalence of IgAN-attributable kidney failure is increased in Northern Europe, similar to multiple sclerosis and type I diabetes.
Variation at IgAN susceptibility loci correlates with differences in disease prevalence among world populations.
These findings inform genetic, biological, and epidemiological investigations of IgAN and permit cross-comparison with other complex traits that share genetic risk loci and geographic patterns with IgAN.
PMID: 23294680
Effects of different focus of attention rehabilitative training on gait performance in Multiple Sclerosis patients.
The present investigation studied the effects of different focus of attention training on gait performance.
Twelve volunteers with Multiple Sclerosis and with an average disability score (Expanded Disability Status Scale=6.5) were selected from a Medical School and took part in a three-phase intervention including baseline, internal focus, and external focus, for eight weeks.
In the baseline condition, the participants walked on a treadmill without any information.
In the first (internal-focus) intervention they focused on foot performance and in the second (external-focus) intervention they focused on external markers and auditory information.
The results of within-group analysis of variance showed that the external intervention was significantly (p&lt;.05) better than the other conditions for stride length, step length, step speed, and gait energy expenditure, but not for force and stride timing (p&gt;.05).
In conclusion, the second (external-focus) intervention was found to be an appropriate perceptual training method and to result in improvements in some of the gait performance parameters.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23634277
Alemtuzumab in multiple sclerosis: latest evidence and clinical prospects.
Alemtuzumab was first used in multiple sclerosis in 1991.
It is a monoclonal antibody which is directed against CD52, a protein of unknown function on lymphocytes.
Alemtuzumab causes a lymphopenia, following which homeostatic reconstitution leads to prolonged alteration of the immune repertoire.
This reduces the risk of relapse and disability accumulation in multiple sclerosis; it is the only drug to show superiority over interferon β-1a in disability outcomes in a monotherapy phase III trial.
It should be used with a parallel risk management programme to identify the principal adverse effects of alemtuzumab, especially secondary autoimmunity months or years later, mainly against the thyroid but also immune thrombocytopenia.
This review charts the development of alemtuzumab as a drug for multiple sclerosis and summarizes the latest clinical trial data.
PMID: 21883098
MRI and visual-evoked potentials in partners of multiple sclerosis patients.
Some epidemiological evidence, particularly concerning the role of Epstein Barr Virus implies that multiple sclerosis (MS) may be transmissible and if correct, this might be revealed by increased prevalence of MS in cohabiting partners.
We addressed this problem by neurological assessment, visual-evoked potentials (VEP) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in 112 partners of patients with MS in comparison to a control group of 93 individuals with clinically non-significant head or neck pain and in comparison to UK prevalence.
We found one instance of conjugal definite MS.
Including this case, VEP were abnormal in five instances with either significant delay (n = 3) or increased interocular latency difference (IOLD) (n = 2) in partners of MS patients thus raising the possibility of subclinical optic nerve demyelination.
The mean absolute value of IOLD in partners was greater than the value in controls (P = 0.033).
There were no significant differences in MRI findings between the two groups.
The finding of one conjugal pair and abnormal VEP in a further four MS partners could have several explanations.
It is compatible with the concept of a transmissible agent, although our observations could be due to several biases as well as the play of chance alone.
© 2011 John Wiley &amp; Sons A/S.
PMID: 22998573
T cell immunoglobulin-3 as a new therapeutic target for rheumatoid arthritis.
T cell immunoglobulin-3 (Tim-3) is a surface molecule expressed on various cell types of the immune system which plays a central role in immune regulation.
Recently, identiﬁcation of galectin-9 (Gal-9) as a ligand for Tim-3 has established the Tim-3-Gal-9 pathway as an important regulator of Th1 immunity and induction of tolerance.
The interaction of Tim-3 with Gal-9 induces cell death; the in vivo blockade of this interaction results in exacerbated autoimmunity and abrogation of tolerance in experimental models, thus establishing Tim-3 as a negative regulatory molecule.
A number of previous studies have demonstrated that Tim-3 inﬂuences chronic autoimmune diseases, such as multiple sclerosis and systemic lupus erythematosus.
In addition, an association between Tim-3 polymorphisms and susceptibility to several autoimmune diseases has been identiﬁed in various autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
Recent work has focused on the role of Tim-3 in RA, and the results indicate that Tim-3 may represent a novel target for the treatment of RA.
In this article we will discuss the Tim-3 pathway and the therapeutic potential of modulating the Tim-3 pathway in RA.
PMID: 22217249
Cost-effectiveness analysis of disease modifiying drugs (interferons and glatiramer acetate) as first line treatments in remitting-relapsing multiple sclerosis patients.
Abstract Objective: The aim of this study was to assess cost-effectiveness of the different Disease Modifying Drugs (DMD) used as first-line treatments (interferons IM IFNβ-1a, SC IFNβ-1a, SC IFNβ-1b, and glatiramer acetate, GA) in Remitting-Relapsing Multiple Sclerosis (RRMS) in Spain.
Methods: A Markov model was developed to simulate the progression of a cohort of patients with RRMS, during a period of 10 years.
Seven health states, defined by the Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS), were considered in the model.
Patients with an EDSS score less than 6.0 were assumed to be treated with one of the DMD.
In addition, all patients were assumed to receive symptomatic treatment.
The monthly transition probabilities of the model were obtained from the literature.
The analysis was performed from the societal perspective, in which both direct and indirect (losses in productivity) healthcare costs (€, 2010) were included.
A discount rate of 3% was applied to both costs and efficacy results.
Results: GA was the less costly strategy (€322,510), followed by IM IFNβ-1a (€329,595), SC IFNβ-1b (€ 333,925), and SC IFNβ-1a (€348,208).
IM IFNβ-1a has shown the best efficacy results, with 4.176 quality-adjusted life years (QALY), followed by SC IFNβ-1a (4.158 QALY), SC IFNβ-1b (4.157 QALY), and GA (4.117 QALY).
Incremental costs per QALY gained with IM IFNβ-1a were €-1,005,194/QALY, €-223,397/QALY, and €117,914/QALY in comparison to SC IFNβ-1a, SC IFNβ-1b, and GA, respectively.
Conclusions: First-line treatment with GA is the less costly strategy for the treatment of patients with RRMS.
Treatment with IM IFNβ-1a is a dominant strategy (lower cost and higher QALY) compared with SC IFNβ-1a and SC IFNβ-1b.
However, IM IFNβ-1a is not a cost-effective strategy vs GA, because incremental cost per QALY gained with IM IFNβ-1a exceeds the €30,000 per QALY threshold commonly used in Spain.
The highly-restrictive inclusion criteria of clinical trials limits generalization of the results on efficacy to all patients with multiple sclerosis.
Availability of data for head-to-head comparisons is associated with the use of information from clinical trials.
PMID: 22585288
Disease-modifying drugs for multiple sclerosis and JC virus expression.
Natalizumab-associated progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in multiple sclerosis (MS) occurred in two individuals also treated with interferon β1a, raising concerns about the interaction of these disease-modifying agents and leading to the recommendation to avoid their concomitant administration.
However, type I interferons are antiviral.
Using a real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction for the detection and quantification of the John Cunningham virus (JCV), DNA in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), and urine in MS patients, we tested the hypothesis that MS disease-modifying drugs (DMD) qualitatively and quantitatively alter JCV prevalence and viral copy numbers.
Two hundred thirty-nine patients were enrolled in a cross-sectional study in which blood and urine specimens were collected at a single time and 37 newly diagnosed, treatment-naïve MS patients were enrolled in a longitudinal study in which specimens were obtained at diagnosis and 6 months after treatment initiation.
JCV DNA was detected in PBMCs of only two patients (0.07 %), but was commonly detected in the urine (46.8 %) in this population.
There was no effect of DMDs on blood or urinary JCV prevalence or viral copy numbers with either glatiramer acetate (Copaxone®) or interferon-β therapy (Avonex®, Betaseron®, or Rebif®).
The small number of patients on other therapies precluded meaningful comment about their effects.
No obvious effect of the platform DMDs on JCV prevalence was observed even for the interferon-βs.
PMID: 22812720
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia secondary to vascular compression in a patient with multiple sclerosis: a case report.
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia is an uncommon, painful syndrome, characterized by paroxysms of pain in the sensory distribution of the 9th cranial nerve.
Idiopathic glossopharyngeal neuralgia may be due to compression of the glossopharyngeal nerve by adjacent vessels, while secondary glossopharyngeal neuralgia is associated with identifiable lesions affecting the glossopharyngeal nerve at different levels of its neuroanatomic pathway.
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia is rare in the general population, but is more common in patients with multiple sclerosis.
A 56-year-old Caucasian woman with multiple sclerosis and migraine presented to our facility with intermittent lancinating pain to the right of her throat, tongue, and the floor of her mouth that had been occurring for the past year.
The pain was intense, sharp, and stabbing, which lasted two to six seconds with radiation to the right ear.
Initially, the attacks were infrequent, however, they had become more intense and frequent over time.
Our patient reported weight loss, headache, painful swallowing, and the inability to maintain sleep due to painful attacks.
A neurological examination revealed a right-handed woman with trigger points in the back of the tongue and throat on the right side.
She also had dysphagia, hoarseness, and pain in the distribution of the right glossopharyngeal nerve.
Mild right hemiparesis, hyperreflexia, dysmetria, and an ataxic gait were present.
A magnetic resonance imaging scan of the brain was consistent with multiple sclerosis and magnetic resonance angiography demonstrated a loop of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery compressing the right glossopharyngeal nerve.
She responded satisfactorily to carbamazepine.
Microvascular decompression and Gamma Knife® radiosurgery were discussed in case of failure of the medical treatment; however, she declined these options.
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia in multiple sclerosis may occur due to vascular compressive lesions and it should not be solely attributed to the underlying demyelinating process.
Vascular compression of the glossopharyngeal nerve could independently cause glossopharyngeal neuralgia in patients with multiple sclerosis, and vascular imaging to exclude such a diagnosis is recommended.
PMID: 23152786
Genetic and infectious profiles of Japanese multiple sclerosis patients.
Nationwide surveys conducted in Japan over the past thirty years have revealed a four-fold increase in the estimated number of multiple sclerosis (MS) patients, a decrease in the age at onset, and successive increases in patients with conventional MS, which shows an involvement of multiple sites in the central nervous system, including the cerebrum and cerebellum.
We aimed to clarify whether genetic and infectious backgrounds correlate to distinct disease phenotypes of MS in Japanese patients.
We analyzed HLA-DRB1 and -DPB1 alleles, and IgG antibodies specific for Helicobacter pylori, Chlamydia pneumoniae, varicella zoster virus, and Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen (EBNA) in 145 MS patients and 367 healthy controls (HCs).
Frequencies of DRB1*0405 and DPB1*0301 were significantly higher, and DRB1*0901 and DPB1*0401 significantly lower, in MS patients as compared with HCs.
MS patients with DRB1*0405 had a significantly earlier age of onset and lower Progression Index than patients without this allele.
The proportion and absolute number of patients with DRB1*0405 successively increased with advancing year of birth.
In MS patients without DRB1*0405, the frequency of the DRB1*1501 allele was significantly higher, while the DRB1*0901 allele was significantly lower, compared with HCs.
Furthermore, DRB1*0405-negative MS patients were significantly more likely to be positive for EBNA antibodies compared with HCs.
Our study suggests that MS patients harboring DRB1*0405, a genetic risk factor for MS in the Japanese population, have a younger age at onset and a relatively benign disease course, while DRB1*0405-negative MS patients have features similar to Western-type MS in terms of association with Epstein-Barr virus infection and DRB1*1501.
The recent increase of MS in young Japanese people may be caused, in part, by an increase in DRB1*0405-positive MS patients.
PMID: 22563309
Histamine and neuroinflammation: insights from murine experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory, neurodegenerative disease of the CNS whose pathogenesis remains largely unknown, and available therapies are rarely successful in reversing neurological deficits or stopping disease progression.
Ongoing studies on MS and the widely used murine model of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) are focused on the many components of this complex and heterogeneous neurodegenerative disease in the hope of providing a mechanism-based characterization of MS that will afford successful strategies to limit and repair the neuronal damage.
Recently, histamine has been postulated to have a key regulatory role in EAE and MS pathogenesis.
Histamine is a mediator of inflammation and immune responses, exerting its many actions through four G protein-coupled receptors (H(1,2,3,4)R) that signal through distinct intracellular pathways and have different therapeutic potentials as they vary in expression, isoform distribution, signaling properties, and function.
Immune cells involved in MS/EAE, including dendritic cells (DCs) and T lymphocytes, express H(1)R, H(2)R and H(4)R, and histamine may have varying and counteracting effects on a particular cell type, depending on the receptor subtypes being activated.
Here, we review evidence of the complex and controversial role of histamine in the pathogenesis of MS and EAE and evaluate the therapeutic potential of histaminergic ligands in the treatment of autoimmune diseases.
PMID: 23027881
Multiple sclerosis and inflammatory bowel diseases: what we know and what we would need to know!
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a demyelinating disorder of the central nervous system (CNS) but the causes have not been defined.
The disease process appears to involve interplay between environmental factors and certain susceptibility genes.
It is likely that the identification of the exact etiological mechanisms will permit the development of preventive and curative treatments.
Evaluation of several diseases found to be more often associated than by chance alone may reveal clues to the etiology of those disorders.
An association between MS and inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) was suggested by the observation of an increased incidence of IBD among MS patients.
A problem in the interpretation of the data rests, in part, with the observation that abnormal findings in brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be reported as MS in IBD patients.
Defining the limits between incidental MRI findings and findings compatible with MS has resulted in further exploration of this possible association.
PMID: 23203160
[Fingolimod compassionate use program: case study on the concept of a therapy option for multiple sclerosis prior to marketing approval].
In order to meet the needs of therapy of multiple sclerosis (MS) new immune therapies with a user-friendly application and better effectiveness together with good tolerability are necessary.
With respect to its potential to improve MS therapy, patients with a high medical need were given access to Fingolimod even before marketing approval.
Therefore, a compassionate use program unique in the field of MS was initiated.
In total 137 centers participated (75 % outpatient neurologists and 25 % hospitals).
Within 19 weeks 135 patients were enrolled to receive Fingolimod.
The patients in the compassionate use program can be representatively described as showing hardly controllable disease activity and progression with currently available, often poorly tolerated therapy.
The compassionate use program for these patients offered better control of the disease with Fingolimod.
The adverse events were as expected.
The Fingolimod compassionate use program demonstrated the need for this new therapeutic option.
Patients who were not yet sufficiently treated were provided with an effective therapy with a good safety profile and a user-friendly administration form.
PMID: 23288696
Effects of topiramate on dysaesthetic pain in a patient with multiple sclerosis.
Dysaesthetic pain is a common neuropathic pain in patients with multiple sclerosis.
Both tricyclic antidepressants (i.e., amitriptyline and duloxetine) and antiepileptic drugs (i.e., carbamazepine, gabapentin and pregabalin) represent first-line treatment of neuropathic pain.
However, topiramate, an antiepileptic drug, also demonstrated clinical efficacy in these patients.
In this report we describe the case of a 42-year-old woman with an 8-year history of multiple sclerosis who developed dysaesthetic pain in the lower limbs, and was successfully treated with topiramate at a final dose of 150 mg/day.
About 8 months after beginning topiramate treatment, the patient had not shown any dysaesthetic pain, and no adverse events related to topiramate had been recorded.
PMID: 23056506
Heteromeric p97/p97R155C complexes induce dominant negative changes in wild-type and autophagy 9-deficient Dictyostelium strains.
Heterozygous mutations in the human VCP (p97) gene cause autosomal-dominant IBMPFD (inclusion body myopathy with early onset Paget's disease of bone and frontotemporal dementia), ALS14 (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with or without frontotemporal dementia) and HSP (hereditary spastic paraplegia).
Most prevalent is the R155C point mutation.
We studied the function of p97 in the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum and have generated strains that ectopically express wild-type (p97) or mutant p97 (p97(R155C)) fused to RFP in AX2 wild-type and autophagy 9 knock-out (ATG9(KO)) cells.
Native gel electrophoresis showed that both p97 and p97(R155C) assemble into hexamers.
Co-immunoprecipitation studies revealed that endogenous p97 and p97(R155C)-RFP form heteromers.
The mutant strains displayed changes in cell growth, phototaxis, development, proteasomal activity, ubiquitinylated proteins, and ATG8(LC3) indicating mis-regulation of multiple essential cellular processes.
Additionally, immunofluorescence analysis revealed an increase of protein aggregates in ATG9(KO)/p97(R155C)-RFP and ATG9(KO) cells.
They were positive for ubiquitin in both strains, however, solely immunoreactive for p97 in the ATG9(KO) mutant.
A major finding is that the expression of p97(R155C)-RFP in the ATG9(KO) strain partially or fully rescued the pleiotropic phenotype.
We also observed dose-dependent effects of p97 on several cellular processes.
Based on findings in the single versus the double mutants we propose a novel mode of p97 interaction with the core autophagy protein ATG9 which is based on mutual inhibition.
PMID: 23576622
Cognitive reserve and cortical atrophy in multiple sclerosis: a longitudinal study.
To test the cognitive reserve (CR) hypothesis in the model of multiple sclerosis (MS) by assessing the interactions among CR, brain atrophy, and cognitive efficiency in patients with relapsing-remitting MS.
A Cognitive Reserve Index was calculated including education, premorbid leisure activities, and IQ.
Brain atrophy was assessed through magnetic resonance quantitative parameters of normalized total brain volume and normalized cortical volume.
Cognitive function was measured using Rao's Brief Repeatable Battery.
Fifty-two patients with relapsing-remitting MS were evaluated at baseline and 35 of them were reassessed after a 1.6-year follow-up period.
At baseline, higher CR predicted better performance on most of the Brief Repeatable Battery tests, independent of brain atrophy and clinical and demographic characteristics (p ≤ 0.021).
An interaction between CRI and normalized cortical volume predicted better cognitive performance on tasks of verbal memory and attention/information processing speed (p &lt; 0.005).
However, at the follow-up examination, progressing cortical atrophy (β = 0.45; p = 0.008) and older age (β = -0.33; p = 0.044) were the only predictors of deteriorating cognitive performance.
Our findings suggest that higher CR in individuals with MS may mediate between cognitive performance and brain pathology.
CR-related compensation may, however, fail with progression of damage.
The time window of opportunity for therapeutic approaches aimed at intellectual enhancement most likely lies in the earliest disease stages.
PMID: 23296131
The thalamus and multiple sclerosis: modern views on pathologic, imaging, and clinical aspects.
The paired thalamic nuclei are gray matter (GM) structures on both sides of the third ventricle that play major roles in cortical activation, relaying sensory information to the higher cortical centers that influence cognition.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an immune-mediated disease of the human CNS that affects both the white matter (WM) and GM.
A number of clinical observations as well as recent neuropathologic and neuroimaging studies have clearly demonstrated extensive involvement of the thalamus, basal ganglia, and neocortex in patients with MS.
Modern MRI techniques permit visualization of GM lesions and measurement of atrophy.
These contemporary methods have fundamentally altered our understanding of the pathophysiologic nature of MS.
Evidence confirms the contention that GM injury can be detected in the earliest phases of MS, and that iron deposition and atrophy of deep gray nuclei are closely related to the magnitude of inflammation.
Extensive involvement of GM, and particularly of the thalamus, is associated with a wide range of clinical manifestations including cognitive decline, motor deficits, fatigue, painful syndromes, and ocular motility disturbances in patients with MS.
In this review, we characterize the neuropathologic, neuroimaging, and clinical features of thalamic involvement in MS.
Further, we underscore the contention that neuropathologic and neuroimaging correlative investigations of thalamic derangements in MS may elucidate not heretofore considered pathobiological underpinnings germane to understanding the ontogeny, magnitude, and progression of the disease process.
PMID: 22538300
Periventricular demyelination and axonal pathology is associated with subependymal virus spread in a murine model for multiple sclerosis.
Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus (TMEV) infection of mice is a widely used animal model for demyelinating disorders, such as multiple sclerosis (MS).
The aim of the present study was to identify topographical differences of TMEV spread and demyelination in the brain of experimentally infected susceptible SJL/J mice and resistant C57BL/6 mice.
Demyelination was confirmed by Luxol fast blue and cresyl violet staining and axonal damage by neurofilament-specific and β-amyloid precursor protein-specific immunohistochemistry.
Viral dissemination within the central nervous system (CNS) was quantified by immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization.
Further, the phenotype of infected cells was determined by confocal laser scanning microscopy.
An early transient infection of periventricular cells followed by demyelination and axonopathies around the fourth ventricle in SJL/J mice was noticed.
Periventricular and brain stem demyelination was associated with a predominant infection of microglia/macrophages and oligodendrocytes.
Summarized, the demonstration of ependymal infection and subjacent spread into the brain parenchyma as well as regional virus clearance despite ongoing demyelination and axonal damage in other CNS compartments allows new insights into TME pathogenesis.
This novel aspect of TMEV CNS interaction will enhance the understanding of region-specific susceptibilities to injury and regenerative capacities of the brain in this MS model.
Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.
PMID: 22036953
Cerebrospinal fluid levels of CXCL13 are elevated in neuromyelitis optica.
B cells are believed to play an important role in the pathogenesis of NMO.
Chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 13 (CXCL13), the most potent B-cell chemoattractant, is a chemokine which is critical for secondary lymphoid tissue development and for B-cell migration.
Concentration of CXCL13 in cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) is elevated in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS).
However, whether levels of CSF CXCL13 are elevated in NMO patients still remain unknown.
To measure the CSF concentration of CXCL13 in NMO patients, and to determine its relationship with NMO disease activity.
CSF CXCL13 was measured by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in NMO (n=22), MS (n=18) patients and controls (CTLs) (n=12).
CSF CXCL13 levels in NMO were notable higher than MS (p=0.015) and CTLs (p&lt;0.001), and were related to the NMO disease activity indicated by relapse rate and Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) scores.
NMO Patients with the higher relapse rates exhibited the higher CXCL13 concentrations in their CSF; and a trend of increased disease disability with increased CSF CXCL13 level was revealed.
The CSF CXCL13 concentrations seemed to associate with CSF white blood cell counting, total protein concentration in NMO subgroup, thought did not quite reach statistical significance (WBC, p=0.473; TP, p=0.276).
The concentration of CSF CXCL13 was elevated in NMO patients, and correlated with NMO activity.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22036952
The gap-junction inhibitor carbenoxolone suppresses the differentiation of Th17 cells through inhibition of IL-23 expression in antigen presenting cells.
Carbenoxolone (CBX) is a widely used gap-junction inhibitor.
We have previously shown that treatment with CBX significantly delayed the onset of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE).
However, the mechanism by which CBX delays the onset of EAE remains to be elucidated.
Here, we show that CBX specifically inhibits the production of IL-23 by dendritic cells (DCs) and microglia in vitro.
CBX treatment significantly reduced the population of Th17 cells in EAE mice.
Furthermore, CBX downregulated the expression of IL-23 p19 via increased production of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A).
Thus, CBX may be an effective therapeutic strategy against Th17-mediated autoimmune diseases, such as multiple sclerosis.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22701177
Treadmill training in multiple sclerosis: can body weight support or robot assistance provide added value? A systematic review.
Purpose.
This systematic review critically analyzes the literature on the effectiveness of treadmill training (TT), body-weight-supported TT (BWSTT), and robot-assisted TT (RATT) in persons with multiple sclerosis (MS), with focus on gait-related outcome measurements.
Method.
Electronic databases (Pubmed, Pedro, Web of Science, and Cochrane Library) and reference lists of articles and narrative reviews were searched.
Pre-, quasi- and true-experimental studies were included if adult persons with MS were involved in TT, BWSTT, or RATT intervention studies published before 2012.
Descriptive analysis was performed and two researchers scored the methodological quality of the studies.
Results.
5 true- and 3 preexperimental studies (mean quality score: 66%) have been included.
In total 161 persons with MS were involved (TT, BWSTT, or RATT, 6-42 sessions; 2-5x/week; 3-21 weeks).
Significant improvements in walking speed and endurance were reported.
Furthermore, improvements of step length, double-support time, and Expanded Disability Status Scale were found.
Conclusions.
There is a limited number of published papers related to TT in persons with MS, concluding that TT, BWSTT, and RATT improve the walking speed and endurance.
However, it is not clear what type of TT is most effective.
RCTs with larger but more homogeneous populations are needed.
PMID: 22769044
Effects of dimethyl fumarate on neuroprotection and immunomodulation.
Neuronal degeneration in multiple sclerosis has been linked to oxidative stress.
Dimethyl fumarate is a promising novel oral therapeutic option shown to reduce disease activity and progression in patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
These effects are presumed to originate from a combination of immunomodulatory and neuroprotective mechanisms.
We aimed to clarify whether neuroprotective concentrations of dimethyl fumarate have immunomodulatory effects.
We determined time- and concentration-dependent effects of dimethyl fumarate and its metabolite monomethyl fumarate on viability in a model of endogenous neuronal oxidative stress and clarified the mechanism of action by quantitating cellular glutathione content and recycling, nuclear translocation of transcription factors, and the expression of antioxidant genes.
We compared this with changes in the cytokine profiles released by stimulated splenocytes measured by ELISPOT technology and analyzed the interactions between neuronal and immune cells and neuronal function and viability in cell death assays and multi-electrode arrays.
Our observations show that dimethyl fumarate causes short-lived oxidative stress, which leads to increased levels and nuclear localization of the transcription factor nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 and a subsequent increase in glutathione synthesis and recycling in neuronal cells.
Concentrations that were cytoprotective in neuronal cells had no negative effects on viability of splenocytes but suppressed the production of proinflammatory cytokines in cultures from C57BL/6 and SJL mice and had no effects on neuronal activity in multi-electrode arrays.
These results suggest that immunomodulatory concentrations of dimethyl fumarate can reduce oxidative stress without altering neuronal network activity.
PMID: 23343711
Female gender and reproductive factors affecting risk, relapses and progression in multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS), a chronic inflammatory demyelina-ting and degenerative disease of the central nervous system, is a frequent cause of neurological disability in young adults.
Female predominance has increased over the last decades.
Although female gender carries a higher risk of developing relapsing remitting MS, being female and at child-bearing age also appears to provide some protection against cognitive decline and against progressive onset MS, an adverse predictive factor when considering long-term disability in MS.
The risk of MS in women has been associated with an earlier age at menarche.
In most studies, parity did not impact MS risk.
However, the recently published association of higher parity and offspring number with a reduced risk of a first demyelinating event suggests a potential suppressive effect.
Pregnancy in MS patients has been associated with a reduced relapse rate and a reduction of neurological symptoms, especially in the third trimester.
Despite the increased relapse risk in the postpartum period, there is no indication of an adverse effect of childbirth on the long-term course of MS.
Fertility treatment in MS has been associated with an increased relapse risk in the following 3-month period, especially when the procedure did not result in pregnancy and gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonists were used.
Altogether, there is substantial evidence to support a regulatory role of sex steroid hormones in MS.
In the absence of correlations with single hormone blood levels, we can only speculate about the underlying mechanisms.
In conclusion, the increased MS risk in women and the changes in relapse and progression risk in association with reproductive events suggest significant and complex interactions between immune, neuroendocrine and reproductive systems in MS.
Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.
PMID: 22056039
Florid reactive lymphoid hyperplasia (lymphoma-like lesion) of the uterine cervix.
Lymphoma-like lesion (LLL) of the female genital tract is an older term in the literature that describes a florid reactive lymphoid proliferation that can be misinterpreted as lymphoma.
Multiple causes of LLL have been suggested but most cases remain unexplained.
We describe the clinicopathologic features of 6 patients with LLL involving the uterine cervix.
Five patients presented with abnormal Papanicolaou test (Pap smear), and 3 patients had a biopsy procedure performed prior to detection of LLL in a loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP).
In each specimen, surface epithelial erosion was associated with a superficial, polymorphous lymphoid infiltrate with numerous scattered large cells, without cellular necrosis or sclerosis.
Squamous dysplasia was present in 4 patients.
Immunohistochemical studies revealed a mixed population of B- and T-lymphoid cells.
T-cells were more numerous but B-cells and formed aggregates or sheets in areas.
The large cells were predominantly B-cells positive for CD20 and negative for CD3 in all cases.
CD30 was positive 3 cases, and Epstein-Barr virus-encoded RNA was positive in 3 cases.
Assessment for clonality in 1 patient using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) methods revealed monoclonal immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) gene rearrangements.
At last clinical follow-up there was no evidence of progressive or systemic disease.
We conclude that LLL of the cervix has a number of etiologies and that a prior surgical procedure, present in 3 patients in this study, is another possible etiology.
As has been reported by others, monoclonal IgH gene rearrangements can be detected in this entity which has a benign clinical course.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23318126
Prevalence and natural history of pain in adults with multiple sclerosis: systematic review and meta-analysis.
The prevalence, associations, and natural history of pain in multiple sclerosis (MS) are poorly understood.
The objective of this work was to study the prevalence of pain syndromes in MS both cross-sectionally, and longitudinally during the MS disease course.
We systematically identified prospective studies detailing pain prevalence in definite MS.
We used pooled prevalence estimates, explored heterogeneity using meta-regression, and analysed prevalence during the disease course using both estimates at disease milestones and longitudinal studies.
Twenty-eight articles (7101 subjects) describing overall pain, or pain syndromes, met inclusion criteria.
Pooled overall pain prevalence (17 studies, 5319 subjects) was 63% (95% confidence interval [CI] 55-70%).
Marked heterogeneity in this estimate was not significantly explained by selected study design variables (use of outpatient sample, timeframe prior to study over which pain was assessed) or sample demographic variables (mean Expanded Disability Status Scale, mean disease duration, proportion of female sex, and proportion with progressive MS).
We quantified prevalence of headache (43%; 95% CI 33-52%), neuropathic extremity pain (26%; 95% CI 7-53%), back pain (20%; 95% CI 13-28%), painful spasms (15%; 95% CI 8.5-23%), Lhermitte sign (16%; 95% CI 10-25%), and trigeminal neuralgia (3.8%; 95% CI 2-6%) in included studies.
Prevalence of pain at MS disease milestones (prior to onset, at onset, and at relapse) and during longitudinal follow-up was poorly described.
Pain is common in MS, as are specific pain syndromes.
The clinical associations and natural history of pain in MS require clarification.
Future study could be enhanced by standardised study design.
Copyright © 2012 International Association for the Study of Pain.
Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23401803
A case of prolonged delayed postdural puncture headache in a patient with multiple sclerosis exacerbated by air travel.
The developments of new spinal needles and needle tip designs have reduced the incidence of postdural puncture headache (PDPH).
Although it is clear that reducing the loss of CSF leak from dural puncture reduces the headache, there are areas regarding the pathogenesis, treatment, and prevention of PDPH that remain controversial.
Air travel by itself may impose physiological alteration in central nervous system that may be detrimental to patients with PDPH.
This case report highlights a case of a young female patient who suffered from a severe incapacitating PDPH headache during high-altitude flight with a commercial jet.
PMID: 22828184
Emerging roles of endothelial cells in multiple sclerosis pathophysiology and therapy.
Although multiple sclerosis (MS) has traditionally been viewed and researched as an immune-mediated demyelinating and neurodegenerative disease of the human central nervous system (CNS), its highly complex pathogenesis clearly includes a significant vascular inflammatory component and  many therapeutic approaches achieve benefit by direct or indirect effects on cerebrovascular endothelial cells.
Cerebral endothelial cells create and separate the compartments of the peripheral circulation and CNS creating the blood-brain barrier (BBB), a selectively permeable boundary  layer between these spaces.
Interactions between activated leukocytes and cerebral endothelium play essential roles in mediating their trans-BBB diapedesis during normal immune surveillance and during pathogenesis of neuroinflammatory diseases like MS.
Extravasation of activated and committed  leukocytes from the peripheral circulation through the endothelial layer of the BBB into the CNS milieu is the most fundamental step in formation of MS lesions.
During MS pathogenesis, once the activated leukocytes enter the CNS environment, they propagate a massive wave of destruction which  culminates in the loss of both myelin/oligodendrocyte complex and neurodegeneration.
Multiple clinical and basic scientific observations support endothelial cell 'stress' and apoptosis as a hallmark characteristic of MS.
The manipulation of the endothelial biology aiming to block  trans-endothelial migration of activated immune cells into the CNS is a potent form of treatment for MS achieving significant reductions in disease activity and new lesion formation.
In particular, endothelial microparticles are now well-recognized as important biomarkers and mediators of  this type of stress.
In this review, we discuss recent findings and new advances in our knowledge regarding leukocyte migration through the endothelial frontier of the BBB and how this can be exploited toward treating MS patients.
PMID: 22261119
Are Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis and Epstein-Barr virus triggers of multiple sclerosis in Sardinia?
Sardinia acts as an ideal setting for multiple sclerosis (MS) studies because its prevalence of MS is one of the highest worldwide.
Several pathogens have been investigated amongst 119 Sardinian MS patients and 117 healthy controls to determine whether they might have a role in triggering MS in genetically predisposed individuals.
Mycobacterium avium subsp.
paratuberculosis (MAP) and Epstein Barr virus DNA were detected in 27.5% and 17.3%, respectively, of the MS patients.
Moreover an extremely high humoral immune response against MAP recombinant protein MAP FprB (homologous to human myelin P0) was observed, whereas no significant results were found against Mycobacterium tuberculosis FprA and Helicobacter pylori HP986 protein.
PMID: 22261118
Rituximab dosing and monitoring strategies in neuromyelitis optica patients: creating strategies for therapeutic success.
Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) is an autoimmune condition that predominantly causes severe optic neuritis and transverse myelitis.
Rituximab therapy has dramatically improved patient care, but standardized dosing regimens and guidelines are lacking.
The objective of this study was to define a rituximab dosing strategy for NMO patients that achieves the lowest rate of relapses.
This was a retrospective chart review of patients treated with various doses of rituximab.
Combining data from the NMO and multiple sclerosis (MS) patients, identified that the mean number of days after a 100 mg dose of rituximab until the CD19 population was greater than 2% was 99 days (standard deviation 36, range 43-172).
When allowed to rise, the mean number of days after a 1000 mg dose of rituximab until the CD19 population was greater than 2% was 184 (standard deviation 72, range 52-288).
The median number of days until a CD19 percentage of 2% was achieved was 133 days in the 100 mg dosing arm and 259 days in the 1000 mg dosing arm.
Analysis of the survival curves via both the Mantel-Cox log-rank test and the Wilcoxon test determined that the difference between medial survival for 100 and 1000 mg doses was statistically significant with p-values &lt;0.0001.
Low doses of rituximab have a high rate of early B-cell repopulation.
Any NMO patient treated with rituximab should be followed with monthly CD19 counts in order to identify the rare, but clinically significant, early repopulators.
PMID: 22985690
Astrocyte proliferation is regulated by the OGF-OGFr axis in vitro and in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Astrocytes become activated and proliferate in response to autoimmune diseases involving the CNS.
In many cases, elevated numbers of astrocytes may compound inflammatory responses and exacerbate neuronal degeneration.
The regulation of astrocytes in disease states has been shown as an important corollary to disease progression and recovery.
This study explores the role of the opioid growth factor (OGF)-OGF receptor (OGFr) axis in the proliferation of primary cultures of mouse cerebral astrocytes, as well as in spinal cord astrocytes of mice with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), the animal model of multiple sclerosis.
OGF was found to inhibit purified cultures of cortical astrocytes in a dose-related, receptor-mediated, and reversible manner.
Examination of a number of endogenous opioid peptides supported that OGF was the most effective inhibitor of astrocyte proliferation and that endogenous production of this peptide was neutralized by OGF antibodies.
The specificity and requirement for OGFr to be present and functional was indicated by studies using siRNA technology to knockdown the classical μ, δ, and κ opioid receptors, as well as OGFr.
Only knockdown of OGFr resulted in changes in astrocyte cell number with OGF rendered ineffective without the presence of OGFr.
Astrocyte migration as studied by a scratch model, as well as apoptosis and necrosis pathways, were not altered by OGF treatment.
However, BrdU incorporation during DNA synthesis phases of the cell cycle was significantly repressed in activated cultured astrocytes by OGF exposure.
Overall activation of the astrocytes measured by nitric oxide levels was reduced, but proportional to the reduction in cell number.
Examination of spinal cord tissues from mice with EAE revealed fewer astrocytes within 10 days of OGF treatment, with the mechanism of cell number reduction being repression of DNA synthesis.
In conclusion, these studies delineate a novel role for OGF in the proliferation of mouse cortical astrocytes in vitro and spinal cord astrocytes in vivo, and support the use of OGF as a therapy to inhibit astrogliosis within a broad spectrum of autoimmune diseases.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22991569
Effects of yoga interventions on fatigue: a meta-analysis.
Background.
Researchers aimed at systematically reviewing and meta-analyzing the effectiveness of yoga interventions for fatigue.
Methods.
PubMed/Medline was searched until January 2012 for controlled clinical studies.
Two reviewers independently extracted the data.
The methodological quality of the studies was assessed.
A meta-analysis was performed.
Results.
Nineteen clinical studies (total n = 948) were included in this review.
Investigated yoga styles included Hatha, Iyengar, Asanas, Patanjali, Sahaja, and Tibetan yoga.
Participants were suffering from cancer, multiple sclerosis, dialysis, chronic pancreatitis, fibromyalgia, asthma, or were healthy.
Yoga had a small positive effect on fatigue (SMD = 0.27, 59% CI = 0.23-0.31).
Seven studies received 4 points on the Jadad score.
There were baseline differences in at least 5 studies.
Conclusion.
Overall, the effects of yoga interventions on fatigue were only small, particularly in cancer patients.
Although yoga is generally a safe therapeutic intervention and effective to attenuate other health-related symptoms, this meta-analysis was not able to define the powerful effect of yoga on patients suffering from fatigue.
Treatment effects of yoga could be improved in well-designed future studies.
According to the GRADE recommendations assessing the overall quality of evidence, there is a moderate effect of the confidence placed in the estimates of the effects discussed here.
PMID: 22805247
Fatigue and depression in children with demyelinating disorders.
Fatigue and depression have been shown to be significant problems in children with multiple sclerosis.
The rate at which these conditions occur in children with other acquired demyelinating syndromes is unknown.
In this cross-sectional study, the authors evaluated 49 children with demyelinating disorders (multiple sclerosis and acute disseminated encephalomyelitis) and 92 healthy controls for depression and/or fatigue using the Behavior Assessment System for Children, Second Edition behavior and mood rating scale and Varni PedsQL Multidimensional Fatigue Scale.
The parents of acquired demyelinating syndrome patients were more likely to report elevated depressive symptoms (30.8% vs 10.8%, P = .008).
Elevated parent and self-reported total fatigue (25% vs 0%, P &lt; .001, 26.7% vs 8.6%, P = .024) was seen in the patient cohort.
The authors conclude that fatigue and depression are far more common in children with acquired demyelinating syndromes than in controls.
Clinical attention to and implementation of effective therapies oriented toward these conditions in children with acquired demyelinating syndromes is needed.
PMID: 23438232
Effect of 10-day forced treadmill training on neurotrophic factors in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
The impact of exercise on disease progression in multiple sclerosis (MS) is unclear.
In the present study, we evaluated the clinical effects of forced wheel running on rats induced with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), a model of MS.
Female Lewis rats (n = 40) were randomly assigned to 1 of 4 groups prior to inoculation: EAE exercise (EAE-Ex), EAE sedentary (EAE-Sed), control exercise (Con-Ex), or control sedentary (Con-Sed).
Exercise training was composed of forced treadmill running at increasing intensity across 10 consecutive days.
No significant differences in clinical disability were observed in the EAE groups at the conclusion of this study.
Furthermore, no significant differences in brain mass were observed across groups.
Analysis of brain tissue proteins revealed that tumour necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) concentrations were higher in both EAE groups compared with the control groups (p &lt; 0.05); however, no significant differences were seen between the EAE-Ex and EAE-Sed groups.
The Con-Ex group had lower whole-brain TNF-α compared with the Con-Sed group (p &lt; 0.05).
Nerve growth factor concentrations were greater in the EAE-Ex animals compared with both control groups (p &lt; 0.05 for both).
No differences were seen in brain-derived neurotrophic factor.
Our results indicate that aerobic exercise can modulate the proteins associated with disability in EAE; however, further research is required to understand the total impact of exercise on EAE disability and disease progression.
PMID: 22536333
The OSCAR-IB consensus criteria for retinal OCT quality assessment.
Retinal optical coherence tomography (OCT) is an imaging biomarker for neurodegeneration in multiple sclerosis (MS).
In order to become validated as an outcome measure in multicenter studies, reliable quality control (QC) criteria with high inter-rater agreement are required.
A prospective multicentre study on developing consensus QC criteria for retinal OCT in MS: (1) a literature review on OCT QC criteria; (2) application of these QC criteria to a training set of 101 retinal OCT scans from patients with MS; (3) kappa statistics for inter-rater agreement; (4) identification reasons for inter-rater disagreement; (5) development of new consensus QC criteria; (6) testing of the new QC criteria on the training set and (7) prospective validation on a new set of 159 OCT scans from patients with MS.
The inter-rater agreement for acceptable scans among OCT readers (n = 3) was moderate (kappa 0·45) based on the non-validated QC criteria which were entirely based on the ophthalmological literature.
A new set of QC criteria was developed based on recognition of: (O) obvious problems, (S) poor signal strength, (C) centration of scan, (A) algorithm failure, (R) retinal pathology other than MS related, (I) illumination and (B) beam placement.
Adhering to these OSCAR-IB QC criteria increased the inter-rater agreement to kappa from moderate to substantial (0.61 training set and 0.61 prospective validation).
This study presents the first validated consensus QC criteria for retinal OCT reading in MS.
The high inter-rater agreement suggests the OSCAR-IB QC criteria to be considered in the context of multicentre studies and trials in MS.
PMID: 22973423
White matter dementia.
White matter dementia (WMD) is a syndrome introduced in 1988 to highlight the potential of cerebral white matter disorders to produce cognitive loss of sufficient severity to qualify as dementia.
Neurologists have long understood that such a syndrome can occur, but the dominance of gray matter as the locus of higher function has strongly directed neurobehavioral inquiry to the cerebral cortex while white matter has received less attention.
Contemporary neuroimaging has been crucial in enabling the recognition of white matter abnormalities in a host of disorders, and the correlation of these changes with cognitive performance.
Comprising about half the brain, white matter is prominently or exclusively involved in well over 100 disorders, in each of which white matter dysfunction can potentially cause or contribute to dementia.
Neuropsychological findings from ten categories of white matter disorder lead to a convergence of findings that document remarkable neurobehavioral commonality among the dementias produced.
More recently, the syndrome of mild cognitive dysfunction (MCD) has been introduced to expand the concept of WMD by proposing a precursor syndrome related to early white matter neuropathology.
WMD and MCD inform the understanding of how white matter contributes to normal and abnormal cognition, and the specific neuroanatomic focus of these syndromes may enhance the diagnosis and treatment of many disabling disorders that do not primarily implicate the cerebral cortex.
Forming essential connections within widely distributed neural networks, white matter is critical for rapid and efficient information transfer that complements the information processing of gray matter.
As neuroimaging continues to advance, further information on white matter structure can be expected, and behavioral neurology will play a central role in elucidating the functional significance of these emerging data.
By emphasizing the contribution of myelinated systems to higher function, the study of white matter and cognition represents investigation of the basic neuroscience of human behavior.
PMID: 22374500
Predictors of quality of life for long-term cancer survivors with preexisting disabling conditions.
To explore whether measures of resources, barriers, and health-promoting behaviors would add significantly to the prediction of health-related quality of life among survivors with disabilities that occurred prior to their cancer diagnosis once contextual factors were controlled for.
A descriptive correlational study.
Adult cancer survivors with preexisting disabling conditions who had completed active treatment were recruited from throughout the United States.
Most of the 145 respondents were breast cancer survivors with preexisting neuromuscular conditions such as polio and multiple sclerosis.
The average time since cancer diagnosis was nine years.
Respondents completed a mailed survey.
Health-promoting behaviors, self-efficacy, barriers to health promotion, social support, functional limitations, cancer-related variables, depression, and quality of life.
The sample reported poorer physical well-being than other cancer survivors without preexisting disabling conditions.
Health-promoting behaviors and psychosocial factors, such as depressive symptoms and self-efficacy, added significantly to the prediction of physical, social, emotional, and functional components of health-related quality of life after contextual factors entered the equations.
The findings underscore the importance of providing this population with the means to promote their health to the greatest extent possible, given the multiple threats to their health status.
Nurses may be able to help survivors with preexisting disabling conditions reduce the negative influence of poorer health status and functional limitations on quality of life by providing interventions that reduce depression and build perceived ability to engage in health-promoting behaviors.
PMID: 22144311
ELISA methodology to quantify astrocyte production of cytokines/chemokines in vitro.
Astrocytes are intimately involved in immunological and inflammatory events occurring in the central nervous system (CNS), due to their ability to secrete and respond to a large number of immunoregulatory cytokines/chemokines such as IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-17, IL-27, TNF-α, TGF-β, IFN-γ, IFN-β, CCL2, CCL3, CCL5, CXCL10, and CXCL12.
Although expression of cytokines and chemokines is limited in the normal CNS, elevated expression of these proteins, as seen in disease entities such as multiple sclerosis (MS), HIV-1 associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND), Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), contributes to the development of inflammation and neuronal demise in these diseases.
As a potent source of cytokines and chemokines, astrocytes play a pivotal role in the type and extent of neuroinflammatory responses.
Astrocytes can be stimulated in vitro to produce numerous cytokines/chemokines, which are secreted and detected in supernatants by a technique known as enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
In this chapter, we describe our experience using ELISAs to detect and quantify cytokines and chemokines secreted by stimulated murine astrocytes, specifically IL-6 and CXCL10.
PMID: 22458980
Increased promoter methylation of the immune regulatory gene SHP-1 in leukocytes of multiple sclerosis subjects.
The protein tyrosine phosphatase, SHP-1, is a negative regulator of proinflammatory signaling and autoimmune disease.
We have previously reported reduced SHP-1 expression in peripheral blood leukocytes of subjects with multiple sclerosis (MS).
Recent evidence indicates that virus-induced DNA methylation of the SHP-1 promoter is responsible for aberrant silencing of SHP-1 expression and function in hematopoietic cells that might relate to inflammatory diseases.
In the present study, bisulfite sequencing of the SHP-1 promoter demonstrated that over a third of MS subjects had abnormally high promoter methylation.
As SHP-1 is deficient in MS leukocytes and SHP-1-regulated proinflammatory genes are correspondingly upregulated, we propose that increased SHP-1 promoter methylation may relate in part to decreased SHP-1 expression and increased leukocyte-mediated inflammation in MS.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22458983
Secretory products of multiple sclerosis B cells are cytotoxic to oligodendroglia in vitro.
B cells are important in the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis (MS) and some of the effects are not dependent on maturation of B cells into immunoglobulin (Ig) producing plasmablasts and plasma cells.
B cells present antigen, activate T cells, and are involved in immunoregulation and cytokine secretion.
To determine if B cells from MS patients secrete products that have deleterious effects on glial cells not mediated by Ig, and to compare effects with secretory products of normal controls (NC), we isolated B cells from 7 patients with relapsing remitting MS (RRMS) and 4 NC.
B cells were cultured alone or after stimulation with CD40 ligand (CD40L), CD40L+cross-linking of the B cell antigen receptor (xBCR) and CD40L+xBCR+stimulation of toll like receptor 9 (TLR9).
Supernatants were harvested and incubated with mixed central nervous system (CNS) neonatal rat glial cells.
Supernatants from unstimulated NC B cells induced on average death of 7% (range 0-24%) of differentiated oligodendrocytes (OL); in contrast, supernatants from unstimulated B cells from RRMS patients induced death of 57% (range 35-74%) of OL.
Supernatants of stimulated B cells from NC did not increase the minimal OL death whereas stimulation of B cells from RRMS had variable results compared to unstimulated B cells.
Supernatants from both NC and RRMS induced microglial enlargement and loss of normal resting bipolar morphology.
OL death did not correlate with levels of tumor necrosis alpha (TNF-α), lymphotoxin alpha (LT-α), interleukin 6 (IL-6), IL-10, transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF-β1) or any combination or ratio of these cytokines.
Analysis of 26 supernatants from NC and RRMS patients failed to detect IgM.
There were very low levels of IgG in 8 of the 26 supernatants, and no correlation between of OL death and presence or absence of IgG.
Sera used in both the B cell and glial cell cultures were heated, which inactivates complement.
The effects of B cell supernatants on OL could be direct and/or indirect involving either microglia and/or astrocytes.
The identity of the toxic factor(s) is as yet unknown.
Thus we have demonstrated that B cells from patients with RRMS but not NC secrete one or more factors toxic to OL.
It is possible that such factors produced by peripheral blood B cells when within the CNS could contribute to demyelination in MS patients.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22383232
Natalizumab discontinuation after PML risk stratification: outcome from a shared and informed decision.
Multifocal progressive leukoencephalopathy (PML) is associated with JC virus (JCV) seropositivity, past immunosuppression, and natalizumab treatment for two years or more.
The aim of our study was to investigate the rate of treatment discontinuation after stratifying for the three risk factors in a group of 104 natalizumab-treated patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
We investigated JCV serological status in our population.
We then divided patients into groups according to their PML risk.
Treatment indication was reassessed.
Of the patients, 64 (61.5%) were JCV seropositive.
Amongst seropositive patients on natalizumab for 2 years or more, 10 had received immunosuppression (group A), and 38 had not (group B).
After an informed and shared decision-making process, 6/10 (60%) from group A compared with 9/38 (23.7%) from group B discontinued treatment (p=0.027).
In groups A and B, discontinuation also depended upon doctors' views (p=0.019, group A; p=0.010, group B) and clinical outcomes (p=0.021, group A).
No-one from low-intermediate risk groups discontinued.
The decision to discontinue natalizumab treatment is complex, even when clear PML risk rates are described.
Clinical outcomes and doctors' idiosyncrasies play a crucial part in patients' final choice.
PMID: 22383231
Behavioural symptoms and impairments in multiple sclerosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Behavioural problems are not well recognized in multiple sclerosis (MS).
In this review we aimed to evaluate the prevalence of behavioural symptoms and impairments in MS.
A systematic search was carried out from MEDLINE, PsycINFO, Web of Science, CINAHL and COCHRANE.
In total, 23 studies (1831 participants) were identified.
Based on the literature search, behavioural symptoms and impairments are observed in MS.
Aggression (23%), apathy (22%), euphoria (12%) and lack of insight (11%) were the most frequent symptoms, and adjustment disorder (17%) the most frequent impairment.
Severe mental disorders are more infrequent than changes in behaviour, manner of reaction, and way of action.
In conclusion the objective behavioural impairments and especially subjective symptoms are present in patients with MS.
These manifestations should be taken into account in the diagnostics and treatment of the disease.
PMID: 22383230
Characteristics of multiple sclerosis in aboriginals living in British Columbia, Canada.
The objectives of this study were to identify and describe the demographic and clinical characteristics of multiple sclerosis (MS) in aboriginals in British Columbia (BC), Canada and compare these findings with non-aboriginal MS patients.
This retrospective chart and database review accessed patient information from the linked BC-wide MS clinical and genetics databases.
Data gathered included: demographics (age, sex and ethnicity); clinical characteristics (MS onset date, disease course and disability scores (Expanded Disability Status Scale [EDSS]).
Aboriginals were identified via the database linkage augmented by physician and nurse recall.
Two non-aboriginal comparator groups with definite MS were selected.
Group one included all definite MS patients in the BC MS database, and group two comprised MS patients matched by sex, age at onset and initial disease course.
Patient characteristics were compared using the Student's t-test, chi-squared test, and Kaplan-Meier survival analysis was used to examine disease progression (time to sustained and confirmed EDSS 6) We identified 26 aboriginals with MS, of which 19/26 (73%) were female, 23/26 (89%) had relapsing-onset MS and a mean onset age of 31.1 years.
There were no significant differences between the MS aboriginals and the non-matched (n = 5708) comparator group with respect to age, sex or disease course (p &gt; 0.1), However, aboriginals progressed more rapidly to EDSS 6 from disease onset (p &lt; 0.001) when compared with the matched and unmatched comparator groups.
We identified a small, but important cohort of aboriginals with MS; being the largest identified to date.
There was evidence of more rapid MS progression in aboriginals compared with non-aboriginals.
PMID: 22383236
Diffusion tensor-MRI evidence for extra-axonal neuronal degeneration in caudate and thalamic nuclei of patients with multiple sclerosis.
MS is an inflammatory demyelinating disease affecting both WM and GM.
While WM lesions are easily visualized by conventional MR imaging, the detection of GM alterations remains challenging.
This diffusion tensor MR imaging study aimed to detect and characterize diffuse microscopic alterations in 2 deep GM structures, the caudate nucleus and the thalamus, in patients with RR and SP MS.
The relationship between diffusivity markers, and atrophy of the caudate and the thalamus, as well as brain lesion load and clinical status of the patients was also explored.
Twenty-three RR and 18 SP patients, along with 27 healthy controls, underwent MR imaging examination including anatomic and DTI acquisitions.
Volumes, mean FA, and MD of the caudate and the thalamus, as well as WM lesion volumes, were assessed.
FA was significantly (P &lt; .001) increased in the caudate and the thalamus of patients with MS compared with controls, and was higher in SP compared with RR patients.
Increased FA was associated with volume decreases of caudate (r = -0.712; P &lt; .001) and thalamus (r = -0.407; P &lt; .01) in patients with MS.
WM T2 lesion load was significantly associated with caudate (r = 0.611; P &lt; .001) and thalamic (r = 0.354; P &lt; .05) FA.
Caudate FA, and, to a lesser extent, thalamic FA, were associated with functional deficits, as measured by EDSS and MSFC.
Increased FA in the caudate and the thalamus may constitute a sensitive marker of MS pathologic processes, such as loss of dendrites and/or swelling of neuronal cell bodies.
PMID: 22411505
Replication study of multiple sclerosis (MS) susceptibility alleles and correlation of DNA-variants with disease features in a cohort of Austrian MS patients.
We performed a replication study in 883 Austrian multiple sclerosis (MS) patients and 972 control individuals for 25 previously risk-associated loci (39 SNPs).
Two loci, rs1109670 (DDEF2/MBOAT2, p &lt; 0.02) and rs16914086 (TBC1D2, p &lt; 0.05), are replicated here for the first time.
Furthermore, we tested all 39 SNPs for association with age at disease onset and measures of disease severity.
We observed a trend for association of rs3135388 (HLA-DRB1*1501, p &lt; 0.01), rs7090530 (IL2RA, p &lt; 0.026) and rs1841770 (ZIC1, p &lt; 0.017) with a younger age at MS onset and of rs12044852 (CD58, p &lt; 0.035) with shorter time to reach EDSS6.
PMID: 23319475
Harry Lee Parker and paroxysmal dysarthria and ataxia.
To review descriptions of paroxysmal dysarthria and ataxia in multiple sclerosis (MS), with special attention given to Parker and his 1946 case series.
Evaluation of original publications describing paroxysmal dysarthria and ataxia, bibliographic information, writings, and unpublished letters from the Mayo Clinic Historical Unit.
In 1940, Störring described a patient with MS with paroxysmal symptoms that included dizziness and trouble speaking, but also unilateral extremity weakness.
In 1946, Parker published a series of 11 patients with paroxysmal dysarthria and ataxia.
Six of these patients had MS, and he recognized this phenomenon as a manifestation of the disease.
The term paroxysmal dysarthria and ataxia was first used in 1959 by Andermann and colleagues.
Since that time, paroxysmal dysarthria and ataxia has become a well-recognized phenomenon in MS.
More recent reports have suggested that the responsible lesion is located in the midbrain, near or involving the red nucleus.
Parker was the first to accurately describe paroxysmal dysarthria and ataxia in patients with MS.
PMID: 21571744
Internet portal use in an academic multiple sclerosis center.
To evaluate the use of a secure internet portal in an academic Multiple Sclerosis (MS) Center.
Retrospective case-control chart review of 240 patients during the years 2008 and 2009.
Patient demographic and clinical information was extracted from our online medical records, and portal use metrics were provided by Information Systems.
Descriptive statistics were utilized to explore characteristics of portal users, how the portal is used, and what associations exist between medical resource utilization and active portal use.
Logistic regression identified independent patient predictors and barriers to portal use.
Portal users tended to be young professionals with minimal physical disability.
The most frequently used portal feature was secure patient-physician messaging.
Message content largely consisted of requests for medications or refills in addition to self-reported side effects.
Independent predictors and barriers of portal use include the number of medications prescribed by our staff (OR 1.69, p&lt;0.0001), Caucasian ethnicity (OR 5.04, p=0.007), arm and hand disability (OR 0.23, p=0.01), and impaired vision (OR 0.31, p=0.01).
Discussion MS patients use the internet in a greater proportion than the general US population, yet physical disability limits their access.
Technological adaptations such as voice-activated commands and easy font-size adjustment may help patients overcome these barriers.
Future research should explore the influence of portal technology on healthcare resource utilization and cost.
Additional emedicine applications could be linked to the patient portal for disease monitoring and prospective investigation.
PMID: 23019265
Subcortical atrophy and cognition: sex effects in multiple sclerosis.
Gray matter (GM) atrophy is common in multiple sclerosis (MS), as is cognitive dysfunction.
Understanding the exact relationship between atrophy and cognition requires further investigation.
The aim of this study was to investigate the relationship between subcortical GM atrophy and cognition in early relapsing onset MS.
Structural MRI and neuropsychological evaluations were performed in 120 patients (80 women) and 50 controls (30 women), part of an early inception cohort, 6 years postdiagnosis.
Deep GM volumes were segmented automatically.
Cognition was assessed in 7 domains.
Stepwise linear regression was used to predict average cognition in the patient group.
Most deep GM volumes were reduced in patients, with larger effects on average in men (-11%) than in women (-6.3%).
Only the bilateral hippocampus, amygdala, and right nucleus accumbens in men, and right hippocampus and nucleus accumbens, bilateral amygdala, and putamen in women, showed no atrophy compared to controls.
All cognitive domains except visuospatial memory were affected in men; none were significantly affected in women.
In the MS group, average cognition was best predicted by thalamic volume, sex, and education (adjusted R(2) = 0.31), while lesion volume was not a significant predictor in the model.
Six years postdiagnosis, almost all subcortical structures were affected by MS, especially in men.
Cognition was most severely affected in male patients.
Thalamic volume, sex, and education best predicted average cognition.
These results underline the relevance of specific subcortical structures to cognition, as well as the relevance of (sex-specific) atrophy in MS.
PMID: 23618072
Do generic utility measures capture what is important to the quality of life of people with multiple sclerosis?
The three most widely used utility measures are the Health Utilities Index Mark 2 and 3 (HUI2 and HUI3), the EuroQol-5D (EQ-5D) and the Short-Form-6D (SF-6D).
In line with guidelines for economic evaluation from agencies such as the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) and the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH), these measures are currently being used to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of different interventions in MS.
However, the challenge of using such measures in people with a specific health condition, such as MS, is that they may not capture all of the domains that are impacted upon by the condition.
If important domains are missing from the generic measures, the value derived will be higher than the real impact creating invalid comparisons across interventions and populations.
Therefore, the objective of this study is to estimate the extent to which generic utility measures capture important domains that are affected by MS.
The available study population consisted of men and women who had been registered after 1994 in three participating MS clinics in Greater Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
Subjects were first interviewed on an individualized measure of quality of life (QOL) called the Patient Generated Index (PGI).
The domains identified with the PGI were then classified and grouped together using the World Health Organization's International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF), and mapped onto the HUI2, HUI3, EQ-5D and SF-6D.
A total of 185 persons with MS were interviewed on the PGI.
The sample was relatively young (mean age 43) and predominantly female.
Both men and women had mild disability with a median Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) score of 2.
The top 10 domains that patients identified to be the most affected by their MS were, work (62%), fatigue (48%), sports (39%), social life (28%), relationships (23%), walking/mobility (22%), cognition (21%), balance (14%), housework (12%) and mood (11%).
The SF-6D included the most number of domains (6 domains) important to people with MS, followed by the EQ-5D (4 domains) and the HUI2 (4 domains) and then the HUI3 (3 domains).
The mean and standard deviation (SD) for the PGI, EQ-5D and the SF-6D were 0.50 (SD 0.25), 0.69 (0.18) and 0.69 (0.13), respectively.
The magnitude of difference between the PGI and the generic utility measures was large and statistically significant.
Although the generic utility measures included certain items that were important to people with MS, there were several that were missing.
An important consequence of this mismatch was that values of QOL derived from the PGI were importantly and significantly lower than those estimated using any of the generic utility measures.
This could have a substantial impact in evaluating the effect of interventions for people with MS.
PMID: 22204324
Physiological and pathological functions of acid-sensing ion channels in the central nervous system.
Protons are important signals for neuronal function.
In the central nervous system (CNS), proton concentrations change locally when synaptic vesicles release their acidic contents into the synaptic cleft, and globally in ischemia, seizures, traumatic brain injury, and other neurological disorders due to lactic acid accumulation.
The finding that protons gate a distinct family of ion channels, the acid-sensing ion channels (ASICs), has shed new light on the mechanism of acid signaling and acidosis-associated neuronal injury.
Accumulating evidence has suggested that ASICs play important roles in physiological processes such as synaptic plasticity, learning/memory, fear conditioning, and retinal integrity, and in pathological conditions such as brain ischemia, multiple sclerosis, epileptic seizures, and malignant glioma.
Thus, targeting these channels may lead to novel therapeutic interventions for neurological disorders.
The goal of this review is to provide an update on recent advances in our understanding of the functions of ASICs in the CNS.
PMID: 23961029
Glaucoma masqueraders: Diagnosis by spectral domain optical coherence tomography.
Advances in optic nerve and retinal imaging have dramatically changed the care of glaucoma patients, complementing the importance of the clinical exam of the optic nerve and automated perimetry in making the diagnosis of glaucoma.
Computerized imaging, however, does not replace the clinical exam, as there can be overlap in the appearance of non-glaucomatous optic neuropathies with glaucoma.
The spectral domain optic coherence tomography (SD-OCT) images of five patients with non-glaucomatous optic nerve pathology are presented.
The first patient had bilateral temporal thinning on OCT imaging and subsequent positive syphilis testing.
The second patient had a glaucomatous-appearing inferior arcuate scotoma and associated superior thinning on OCT; these findings were due to buried optic nerve head drusen, clearly appreciated on OCT of the optic nerve head.
Bilateral diffuse macular thinning, with preservation of the superior and inferior fiber bundles, was seen in the third patient, who had multiple sclerosis, with no clinical history of optic neuritis.
Dense and marked thinning of a macular half, respecting the horizontal meridian, is seen in two patients, one patient with non-arteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy and lastly, in a patient with hemi-retinal vein occlusion.
SD-OCT of the optic nerve and retina complements the essential clinical examination of patients with glaucomatous and non-glaucomatous optic neuropathies.
PMID: 23747577
Suppression of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by 300-315nm ultraviolet light.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic debilitating disease, with lowest incidence in equatorial regions and highest incidence in temperate regions.
This relationship is believed to be related to sunlight or UV light exposure.
Recent evidence with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model of MS, established that this suppression is not mediated by vitamin D production.
UV is comprised of three general wave bands: UVC (100-280nm), UVB (280-320nm) and UVA (320-400nm).
In the present study we used four lamps that emit different wavelengths of UV: (1) broad band UVB (BB-UVB: 280-320nm); (2) narrow band UVB (NB-UVB: 300-315nm); (3) broad band UVA (BB-UVA: 300-400nm); and (4) long wavelength UVA (UVA-1: 340-400nm).
The effect of these light sources was studied in vitamin D-sufficient C57BL/6 mice.
The NB-UVB largely accounted for the suppression and delay of onset of EAE by BB-UVB.
In contrast, UVA-1 failed to suppress EAE severity at low (∼2.5KJ/m(2)), medium (∼5.0KJ/m(2)) and high (∼10.0KJ/m(2)) doses.
Serum calcium and 25-(OH)D3 levels were unchanged after both NB-UVB and UVA-1 treatments.
The results demonstrate that NB-UVB (300-315nm) is largely responsible for light-induced suppression of EAE and its effect is not via production of vitamin D.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21415774
Vitamin D: a d-lightful solution for health.
Throughout evolution, sunlight-produced vitamin D in the skin has been critically important for health.
Vitamin D, known as the sunshine vitamin, is actually a hormone.
Once it is produced in the skin or ingested from the diet, it is converted sequentially in the liver and kidneys to its biologically active form 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D.
This hormone interacts with its receptor in the small intestine to increase the efficiency of intestinal calcium and phosphate absorption for the maintenance of the skeleton throughout life.
Vitamin D deficiency during the first few years of life results in a flattened pelvis, making it difficult for childbirth.
Vitamin D deficiency causes osteopenia and osteoporosis, increasing risk of fracture.
Essentially, every tissue and cell in the body has a vitamin D receptor.
Therefore, vitamin D deficiency has been linked to increased risk for preeclampsia, requiring a cesarean section for birthing, multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, types I and II diabetes, heart disease, dementia, deadly cancers, and infectious diseases.
Therefore, sensible sun exposure along with vitamin D supplementation of at least 2000 IU/d for adults and 1000 IU/d for children is essential to maximize their health.
PMID: 23145923
Sphingosine and FTY720 are potent inhibitors of the transient receptor potential melastatin 7 (TRPM7) channels.
Transient receptor potential melastatin 7 (TRPM7) is a unique channel kinase which is crucial for various physiological functions.
However, the mechanism by which TRPM7 is gated and modulated is not fully understood.
To better understand how modulation of TRPM7 may impact biological processes, we investigated if TRPM7 can be regulated by the phospholipids sphingosine (SPH) and sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), two potent bioactive sphingolipids that mediate a variety of physiological functions.
Moreover, we also tested the effects of the structural analogues of SPH, N,N-dimethyl-D-erythro-sphingosine (DMS), ceramides and FTY720 on TRPM7.
HEK293 cells stably expressing TRPM7 were used for whole-cell, single-channel and macropatch current recordings.
Cardiac fibroblasts were used for native TRPM7 current recording.
SPH potently inhibited TRPM7 in a concentration-dependent manner, whereas S1P and other ceramides did not produce noticeable effects.
DMS also markedly inhibited TRPM7.
Moreover, FTY720, an immunosuppressant and the first oral drug for treatment of multiple sclerosis, inhibited TRPM7 with a similar potency to that of SPH.
In contrast, FTY720-P has no effect on TRPM7.
It appears that SPH and FTY720 inhibit TRPM7 by reducing channel open probability.
Furthermore, endogenous TRPM7 in cardiac fibroblasts was markedly inhibited by SPH, DMS and FTY720.
This is the first study demonstrating that SPH and FTY720 are potent inhibitors of TRPM7.
Our results not only provide a new modulation mechanism of TRPM7, but also suggest that TRPM7 may serve as a direct target of SPH and FTY720, thereby mediating S1P-independent physiological/pathological functions of SPH and FTY720.
© 2012 The Authors.
British Journal of Pharmacology © 2012 The British Pharmacological Society.
PMID: 23609963
Liver X receptors, nervous system, and lipid metabolism.
Lipids in the nervous system are represented by cholesterol and phospholipids as constituents of cell membranes and, in particular, of myelin.
Therefore, lipids are finely regulated to guarantee physiological functions.
In the central nervous system, cholesterol is locally synthesized due to the presence of the blood brain barrier.
In the peripheral nervous system cholesterol is either up-taken by lipoproteins and/or produced by de novo biosynthesis.
Defects in lipid homeostasis in these tissues lead to structural and functional changes that often result in different pathological conditions depending on the affected pathways (i.e. cholesterol biosynthesis, cholesterol efflux, fatty acid biosynthesis etc.).
Alterations in cholesterol metabolism in the central nervous system are linked to several disorders such as Alzheimer's disease, Huntington disease, Parkinson disease, Multiple sclerosis, Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome, Niemann-Pick type C disease, and glioblastoma.
In the peripheral nervous system changes in lipid metabolism are associated with the development of peripheral neuropathy that may be caused by metabolic disorders, injuries, therapeutics, and autoimmune diseases.
Transcription factors, such as the Liver X receptors (LXR), regulate both cholesterol and fatty acid metabolism in several tissues including the nervous system.
In the last few years several studies elucidated the biology of LXR in the nervous system due to the availability of knock-out mice and the development of synthetic ligands.
Here, we review a survey of the literature focused on the central and peripheral nervous system and in physiological and pathological settings with particular attention to the roles played by LXR in both districts.
PMID: 22487860
Mice devoid of Tau have increased susceptibility to neuronal damage in myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein-induced experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
The abundant axonal microtubule-associated protein tau regulates microtubule and actin dynamics, thereby contributing to normal neuronal function.
We examined whether mice deficient in tau (Tau(-/-)) or with high levels of human tau differ from wild-type (WT) mice in their susceptibility to neuroaxonal injury in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, an animal model of multiple sclerosis.
After sensitization with MOG35-55, there was no difference in clinical disease course between human tau and WT mice, but Tau mice had more severe clinical disease and significantly more axonal damage in spinal cord white matter than those in WT mice.
Axonal damage in gray matter correlated with clinical severity in individual mice.
By immunoblot analysis, the early microtubule-associated protein-1b was increased 2-fold in the spinal cords of Tau mice with chronic experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis versus naive Tau mice.
This difference was not detected in comparable WT animals, which suggests that there was compensation for the loss of tau in the deficient mice.
In addition, levels of the growth arrest-specific protein 7b, a tau-binding protein that is stabilized when bound to tau, were higher in WT than those in Tau(-/-) spinal cord samples.
These data indicate that loss of tau exacerbates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis and suggest that maintaining tau integrity might reduce the axonal damage that occurs in inflammatory neurodegenerative diseases such as multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 23365232
The antiaging protein Klotho enhances oligodendrocyte maturation and myelination of the CNS.
We have previously shown that myelin abnormalities characterize the normal aging process of the brain and that an age-associated reduction in Klotho is conserved across species.
Predominantly generated in brain and kidney, Klotho overexpression extends life span, whereas loss of Klotho accelerates the development of aging-like phenotypes.
Although the function of Klotho in brain is unknown, loss of Klotho expression leads to cognitive deficits.
We found significant effects of Klotho on oligodendrocyte functions, including induced maturation of rat primary oligodendrocytic progenitor cells (OPCs) in vitro and myelination.
Phosphoprotein analysis indicated that Klotho's downstream effects involve Akt and ERK signal pathways.
Klotho increased OPC maturation, and inhibition of Akt or ERK function blocked this effect on OPCs.
In vivo studies of Klotho knock-out mice and control littermates revealed that knock-out mice have a significant reduction in major myelin protein and gene expression.
By immunohistochemistry, the number of total and mature oligodendrocytes was significantly lower in Klotho knock-out mice.
Strikingly, at the ultrastructural level, Klotho knock-out mice exhibited significantly impaired myelination of the optic nerve and corpus callosum.
These mice also displayed severe abnormalities at the nodes of Ranvier.
To decipher the mechanisms by which Klotho affects oligodendrocytes, we used luciferase pathway reporters to identify the transcription factors involved.
Together, these studies provide novel evidence for Klotho as a key player in myelin biology, which may thus be a useful therapeutic target in efforts to protect brain myelin against age-dependent changes and promote repair in multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 22056965
Long term lymphocyte reconstitution after alemtuzumab treatment of multiple sclerosis.
Alemtuzumab is a lymphocyte depleting monoclonal antibody that has demonstrated superior efficacy over interferon β-1a for relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (MS), and is currently under investigation in phase 3 trials.
One unresolved issue is the duration and significance of the lymphopenia induced.
The long term effects on lymphocyte reconstitution of a single course, and the consequences that this has on disability, morbidity, mortality and autoimmunity, were examined.
The lymphocyte reconstitution (n=36; 384 person years) and crude safety data (n=37; 447 person years) are reported for the first patients with progressive MS to receive alemtuzumab (1991-1997).
Reconstitution time was expressed as a geometric mean or, when a non-negligible number of individuals failed to recover, as a median using survival analysis.
Geometric mean recovery time (GMRT) of total lymphocyte counts to the lower limit of the normal range (LLN; ≥1.0×10(9) cells/l) was 12.7 months (95% CI 8.8 to 18.2 months).
For B cells, GMRT to LLN (≥0.1×10(9)/l) was 7.1 months (95% CI 5.3 to 9.5); median recovery times for CD8 (LLN ≥0.2×10(9) cells/l) and CD4 lymphocytes (LLN ≥0.4×10(9) cells/l) were 20 months and 35 months, respectively.
However, CD8 and CD4 counts recovered to baseline levels in only 30% and 21% of patients, respectively.
No infective safety concerns arose during 447 person years of follow-up.
Lymphocyte counts recovered to LLN after a single course of alemtuzumab in approximately 8 months (B cells) and 3 years (T cell subsets), but usually did not recover to baseline values.
However, this long lasting lymphopenia in patients with a previously normal immune system was not associated with an increased risk of serious opportunistic infection.
PMID: 21847666
Evaluation of normal appearing white matter in multiple sclerosis: comparison of diffusion magnetic resonance, magnetization transfer imaging and multivoxel magnetic resonance spectroscopy findings with expanded disability status scale.
The aim of this study was to determine diffusion magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), magnetization transfer (MT) imaging and multivoxel MR spectroscopy findings in plaques, periplaque white matter and normal appearing white matter (NAWM) regions in multiple sclerosis (MS) and to correlate the findings with the expanded disability status scale (EDSS).
A total of 30 patients with MS and 30 healthy control subjects were studied and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) values, MT ratio (MTR), N-acetyl-aspartate/creatine (NAA/Cr) and choline/creatine (Cho/Cr) ratios were measured in plaques, periplaques and NAWM regions and compared with the control subjects.
The MTR and NAA/Cr ratio were decreased more in plaques than periplaques and NAWM, in contrast ADC values and Cho/Cr ratios were highest in plaques and higher in periplaques than in NAWM.
Decreased MTR and NAA/Cr in NAWM demonstrated moderate inverse correlations (r = - 0.604, p &lt; 0.001 and r = - 0.494, p &lt; 0.001, respectively) while Cho/Cr ratios and ADC of NAWM demonstrated weak linear correlations (r = 0.370, p = 0.004, r = 0.297, p = 0.021 respectively) with EDSS.
The MS, MTR and MR spectroscopy findings were found to be useful for detecting subtle abnormalities in NAWM.
Although ADC values were significantly altered in plaque and periplaque regions a significance difference was not found in NAWM.
PMID: 22471303
Prospective memory, emotional valence, and multiple sclerosis.
Cognitive impairments in multiple sclerosis (MS) extend to tasks demanding prospective memory (PM): remembering to perform an intended act during ongoing activity.
This study investigated whether emotional content influenced the effects of MS on PM, following evidence that emotional valence can influence other aspects of memory.
Thirty participants with MS were compared to 30 controls on a PM task, Virtual Week, in which emotion was manipulated.
People with MS showed a consistent deficit in PM performance across manipulations of task and valence.
Results indicated that emotionally positive tasks improved the PM performance of MS participants, with implications for rehabilitation.
PMID: 23280834
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and organ donation: is there risk of disease transmission?
A new protocol suggests that patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) are a viable source of tissue for organ transplantation.
However, multiple lines of evidence suggest that many neurodegenerative diseases, including ALS, might progress due to transcellular propagation of protein aggregation among neurons.
Transmission of the disease state from donor to host thus may be possible under the permissive circumstances of graft transplantation.
We argue for careful patient selection and close longitudinal follow-up of recipients when harvesting organs from individuals with neurodegenerative disease, especially dominantly inherited forms.
Copyright © 2012 American Neurological Association.
PMID: 23620516
Characterization of pathogenic human monoclonal autoantibodies against GM-CSF.
The origin of pathogenic autoantibodies remains unknown.
Idiopathic pulmonary alveolar proteinosis is caused by autoantibodies against granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF).
We generated 19 monoclonal autoantibodies against GM-CSF from six patients with idiopathic pulmonary alveolar proteinosis.
The autoantibodies used multiple V genes, excluding preferred V-gene use as an etiology, and targeted at least four nonoverlapping epitopes on GM-CSF, suggesting that GM-CSF is driving the autoantibodies and not a B-cell epitope on a pathogen cross-reacting with GM-CSF.
The number of somatic mutations in the autoantibodies suggests that the memory B cells have been helped by T cells and re-entered germinal centers.
All autoantibodies neutralized GM-CSF bioactivity, with general correlations to affinity and off-rate.
The binding of certain autoantibodies was changed by point mutations in GM-CSF that reduced binding to the GM-CSF receptor.
Those monoclonal autoantibodies that potently neutralize GM-CSF may be useful in treating inflammatory disease, such as rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis, cancer, and pain.
PMID: 23897062
A 5-year follow-up of rituximab treatment in patients with neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder.
A previous 2-year analysis of repeated rituximab treatment in patients with neuromyelitis optica (NMO) revealed significant improvements in relapse rates and disability.
We report the findings from the longest follow-up of rituximab treatment in NMO, which provide reassurance regarding the long-term efficacy and safety of rituximab in NMO.
To report the results of rituximab treatment in patients with relapsing NMO or NMO spectrum disorder (NMOSD) for a median of 60 months.
Retrospective case series in an institutional referral center for multiple sclerosis, including 30 patients with relapsing NMO or NMOSD.
After induction therapy, a single infusion of rituximab (375 mg/m2) as maintenance therapy was administered whenever the frequency of reemerging CD27+ memory B cells in peripheral blood mononuclear cells, as measured with flow cytometry, exceeded 0.05%in the first 2 years and 0.1% thereafter.
Annualized relapse rate (ARR), disability (Expanded Disability Status Scale score), change in anti–aquaporin 4 antibody, and safety of rituximab treatment.
Of 30 patients, 26 (87%) exhibited a marked reduction in ARR over 5 years (mean [SD] pretreatment vs posttreatment ARR, 2.4 [1.5] vs 0.3 [1.0]).
Eighteen patients (60%) became relapse free after rituximab treatment.
In 28 patients (93%), the disability was either improved or stabilized after rituximab treatment.
No serious adverse events leading to discontinuation were observed during follow-up.
Repeated treatment with rituximab in patients with NMOSD over a 5-period, using an individualized dosing schedule according to the frequency of reemerging CD27+ memory B cells, leads to a sustained clinical response with no new adverse events.
PMID: 22804110
Sclerotic fibroma (storiform collagenoma)-like stroma in a fibroadenoma of axillary accessory breast tissue.
Accessory breast tissue is a subcutaneous remnant persisting after normal embryological development of the breast.
It occurs most frequently in the axilla.
Fibroadenomas in axillary breast tissue are rare.
We report the case of a 29-year-old female patient who presented a fibroadenoma arising in the accessory breast tissue of the right axillary fossa.
The neoplasm showed foci of sclerotic fibroma-like stroma.
The patient had no signs of Cowden's syndrome.
To the best of our knowledge, a lesion of this kind has not been previously reported.
This stromal change suggests an uncommon involutional phase of the fibroadenoma with production of sclerotic and hypocellular collagen.
The lesion should be differentiated from extraneural perineuroma, from the changes in fibroadenomas in Cowden's syndrome, from sclerosing lobular hyperplasia (fibroadenomatoid mastopathy) and from pseudoangiomatous stromal hyperplasia.
Copyright © 2012 John Wiley &amp; Sons A/S.
PMID: 22195277
How does age at onset influence the outcome of autoimmune diseases?
The age at onset refers to the time period at which an individual experiences the first symptoms of a disease.
In autoimmune diseases (ADs), these symptoms can be subtle but are very relevant for diagnosis.
They can appear during childhood, adulthood or late in life and may vary depending on the age at onset.
Variables like mortality and morbidity and the role of genes will be reviewed with a focus on the major autoimmune disorders, namely, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), multiple sclerosis (MS), type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1D), Sjögren's syndrome, and autoimmune thyroiditis (AITD).
Early age at onset is a worst prognostic factor for some ADs (i.e., SLE and T1D), while for others it does not have a significant influence on the course of disease (i.e., SS) or no unanimous consensus exists (i.e., RA and MS).
PMID: 22272817
Sympathetic nervous system dysfunction in multiple sclerosis, linking neurodegeneration to a reduced response to therapy.
A lower than normal function of the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) has been identified early in the course of multiple sclerosis (MS) and has been shown to play a role in the pathology of the disease.
In addition, the chronic use of many drugs commonly used by MS patients could further downregulate SNS by interfering with norepinephrine (NE) synthesis/release and/or interfering with the function of the adrenergic receptors in both the brain and in the periphery.
This drug-induced downregulation of SNS activity, when imposed on a background of SNS dysfunction, could not only promote immune inflammatory and neurodegenerative processes, but also can lead to a reduced clinical response to immunomodulaory therapies.
Furthermore, low SNS activity could contribute to a higher prevalence of disorders such as depression, fatigue and osteoporosis, which has been observed in MS patients.
An algorithm could be constructed based on the combination of baseline NE plasma levels and SNS response levels to a β-adrenergic agonist stimulus.
This algorithm, corrected for age and gender, would have the potential to identify MS patients who have a reduced response to immunomodulatory therapies.
PMID: 21378002
Impairment of contrast visual acuity as a functional correlate of retinal nerve fibre layer thinning and total macular volume reduction in multiple sclerosis.
To analyse the association between retinal nerve fibre layer thickness (RNFLT) and total macular volume (TMV) as measured by optical coherence tomography, and contrast sensitivity (CS) measured by Functional Acuity Contrast Testing (FACT) in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis; and to investigate whether FACT testing by a contrast box device is feasible in multiple sclerosis (MS). fact was performed using the Optec 6500 P vision testing system with best correction under photopic and mesopic conditions without glare.
The Area Under the Log Contrast Sensitivity Function (AUC) was calculated.
RNFLT and TMV were assessed by Stratus optical coherence tomography.
All participants underwent visual acuity testing (Snellen), spherical refractive error testing and cylindrical refractive error testing.
85 relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis patients (170 eyes) and 35 healthy controls (HC, 70 eyes) were measured.
AUC Day and Night were lower in MS than in HC (p&lt;0.001) when correcting for age, as were mean RNFLT and TMV (p&lt;0.001 and p=0.018, respectively).
Both RNFLT and TMV predicted contrast sensitivity in MS (AUC Day: standardised coefficient β=0.277, p&lt;0.001, and β=0.262, p&lt;0.001, respectively; AUC Night: β=0.202, p=0.009 and β=0.222, p=0.004, respectively, linear regressions).
In HC, there was no correlation between RNFLT or TMV and contrast sensitivity.
(1) Contrast sensitivity is reduced in MS versus HC; (2) RNFL and TMV as morphological measures of retinal axonal loss are predictors of contrast sensitivity as a functional visual parameter in MS but not in HC; and (3) FACT with the contrast box is a novel, feasible and rapid method to assess contrast sensitivity in MS.
PMID: 23183048
Delayed central nervous system irradiation effects in rats--part 2: aggravation of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Central nervous system (CNS) irradiation has detrimental effects which become evident within hours to few days and after a long latency of months and years.
However, the delayed effect of irradiation on neuroimmune diseases has not been thoroughly examined.
We evaluated the delayed effects of irradiation on the course of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), which is used as a model for neuroimmune inflammation and multiple sclerosis.
Adult male rats were exposed to a dose of 15 Gy given to the thoracolumbar spinal cord.
Six months later, EAE was induced by inoculation of rat spinal cord homogenate in complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA).
The disease was evaluated by clinical, histopathological and immunological parameters.
Irradiated rats developed clinical signs of EAE earlier than the control group and their disease was much more severe.
Unlike the control group, all rats in the EAE-irradiated group died within 5 days after the onset of clinical signs.
Sections taken from irradiated rats showed diffuse and large hemorrhagic infiltrates of lymphocytes and granulocytes.
In contrast, control rats displayed fewer infiltrates, which were less prominent and not hemorrhagic.
CNS irradiation has a delayed effect that caused a marked aggravation of the clinical and pathological signs of EAE.
The severity of the disease may be a consequence of the effect of irradiation on the CNS vascular bed and impaired blood-brain barrier.
Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.
PMID: 23492997
Association of Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis and SLC11A1 polymorphisms in Sardinian multiple sclerosis patients.
Recent findings propose that Mycobacterium avium subsp.
paratuberculosis (MAP) infection could act as risk factor in favoring multiple sclerosis (MS) progression.
SLC11A1 is a gene associated with mycobacterial survival in the host and it may be involved in the induction and maintenance of autoimmune disease.
In this preliminary study, 100 MS patients and 100 healthy controls (HCs) from Sardinia were enrolled.
Eight single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the SLC11A gene were searched by PCR RFLP-genotyping.
IS900 specie specific PCR was undertaken to search for MAP presence.
Indirect ELISA was performed to asses if MS patients displayed a stronger humoral response against MAP2694 protein compared to the HCs.
Only rs2276631 SNP was associated with MS.
MAP DNA was detected in 23 out of 100 MS patients (23%) and in 7 out of 100 HCs (7%).
A strong humoral response against MAP2694 protein was detected in 36% of MS patients and only in 3% of HCs.
A correlation between ELISA sero-positivity and the rs2276631 SNP was also found.
Our preliminary results suggest that the Sardinian population might be prone to develop autoimmune disease due to polymorphisms in immunomodulating the SLC11A1 gene, which is important in the immune response against intracellular bacteria such as MAP.
PMID: 21984532
The effects of a 12-week leisure centre-based, group exercise intervention for people moderately affected with multiple sclerosis: a randomized controlled pilot study.
To establish the effects of a 12-week, community-based group exercise intervention for people moderately affected with multiple sclerosis.
Randomized controlled pilot trial.
Two community leisure centres.
Thirty-two participants with multiple sclerosis randomized into intervention or control groups.
The intervention group received 12 weeks of twice weekly, 60-minute group exercise sessions, including mobility, balance and resistance exercises.
The control group received usual care.
An assessor blinded to group allocation assessed participants at baseline, after eight weeks and after 12 weeks.
The primary outcome measure was 25-foot (7.6 m) walk time, secondary outcomes assessed walking endurance, balance, physical function, leg strength, body mass index, activity levels, fatigue, anxiety and depression, quality of life and goal attainment.
The intervention made no statistically significant difference to the results of participants' 25-foot walk time.
However the intervention led to many improvements.
In the intervention group levels of physical activity improved statistically between baseline and week 8 (P &lt; 0.001) and baseline and week 12 (P = 0.005).
Balance confidence results showed a significant difference between baseline and week 12 (P = 0.013).
Good effect sizes were found for dynamic balance (d = 0.80), leg strength (d = 1.33), activity levels (d = 1.05) and perceived balance (d = 0.94).
The results of the study suggest that community-based group exercise classes are a feasible option for people moderately affected with multiple sclerosis, and offer benefits such as improved physical activity levels, balance and leg strength.
PMID: 21906625
Development of small-molecule inhibitors of sphingosine-1-phosphate signaling.
The pleiotropic sphingolipid mediator, sphingosine-1-phosphate, produced in cells by two sphingosine kinase isoenzymes, SphK1 and SphK2, regulates many cellular and physiological processes important for homeostasis and development and pathophysiology.
Many of the actions of S1P are mediated by a family of five specific cell surface receptors that are ubiquitously and specifically expressed, although important direct intracellular targets of S1P have also recently been identified.
S1P, SphK1, and or S1P receptors have been linked to onset and progression of numerous diseases, including many types of cancer, and especially inflammatory disorders, such as multiple sclerosis, asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, and sepsis.
S1P formation and signaling are attractive targets for development of new therapeutics.
The effects of a number of inhibitors of SphKs and S1PRs have been examined in animal models of human diseases.
The effectiveness of the immunosuppressant FTY720 (known as Fingolimod or Gilenya), recently approved for the treatment of multiple sclerosis, whose actions are mediated by downregulation of S1PR1, has become the gold standard for S1P-centric drugs.
Here, we review S1P biology and signaling with an emphasis on potential therapeutic benefits of specific interventions and discuss recent development of small molecule antagonists and agonists that target specific subtypes of S1P receptors as well as inhibitors of SphKs.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21652609
Delayed fingolimod-associated asystole.
Oral fingolimod (Gilenya) is a sphingosine-1-phosphate-receptor modulator that prevents the egress of lymphocytes from lymph nodes.
Fingolimod reduces relapses and delays disability progression in patients with relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis (MS).
We report a patient with MS who developed asystole and sustained bradycardia 21 hours after the first dose of fingolimod.
PMID: 22380843
Evidence for the different physiological significance of the 6- and 2-minute walk tests in multiple sclerosis.
Researchers have recently advocated for the 2-minute walk (2MW) as an alternative for the 6-minute walk (6MW) to assess long distance ambulation in persons with multiple sclerosis (MS).
This recommendation has not been based on physiological considerations such as the rate of oxygen consumption (V·O2) over the 6MW range.
This study examined the pattern of change in V·O2 over the range of the 6MW in a large sample of persons with MS who varied as a function of disability status.
Ninety-five persons with clinically-definite MS underwent a neurological examination for generating an Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) score, and then completion of the 6MW protocol while wearing a portable metabolic unit and an accelerometer.
There was a time main effect on V·O2 during the 6MW (p=.0001) such that V·O2 increased significantly every 30 seconds over the first 3 minutes of the 6MW, and then remained stable over the second 3 minutes of the 6MW.
This occurred despite no change in cadence across the 6MW (p=.84).
The pattern of change in V·O2 indicates that there are different metabolic systems providing energy for ambulation during the 6MW in MS subjects and steady state aerobic metabolism is reached during the last 3 minutes of the 6MW.
By extension, the first 3 minutes would represent a test of mixed aerobic and anaerobic work, whereas the second 3 minutes would represent a test of aerobic work during walking.
PMID: 22402368
Differential regulation of CD4(+) T helper cell responses by curcumin in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Nutraceuticals and phytochemicals are important regulators of human health and diseases.
Curcumin is a polyphenolic phytochemical isolated from the rhizome of the plant Curcuma longa (turmeric) that has been traditionally used for the treatment of inflammation and wound healing for centuries.
Systematic analyses have shown that curcumin exerts its beneficial effects through antioxidant, antiproliferative and anti-inflammatory properties.
We and others have shown earlier that curcumin ameliorates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) model for multiple sclerosis.
In this study, we show that C57BL/6 mice induced to develop EAE express elevated levels of interferon (IFN) γ and interleukin (IL)-17 in the central nervous system (CNS) and lymphoid organs that decreased significantly following in vivo treatment with curcumin.
The EAE mice also showed elevated expression of IL-12 and IL-23 that decreased after treatment with curcumin.
Ex vivo and in vitro treatment with curcumin resulted in a dose-dependent decrease in the secretion of IFNγ, IL-17, IL-12 and IL-23 in culture.
The inhibition of EAE by curcumin was also associated with an up-regulation of IL-10, peroxisome proliferator activated receptor γ and CD4(+)CD25(+-)Foxp3(+) Treg cells in the CNS and lymphoid organs.
These findings highlight that curcumin differentially regulates CD4(+) T helper cell responses in EAE.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22324470
IL-17/IL-17 receptor system in autoimmune disease: mechanisms and therapeutic potential.
IL-17 (interleukin-17), a hallmark cytokine of Th17 (T-helper 17) cells, plays critical roles in host defence against bacterial and fungal infections, as well as in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases.
The present review focuses on current knowledge of the regulation, functional mechanisms and targeting strategies of IL-17 in the context of inflammatory autoimmune diseases.
Evidence shows that IL-17 is highly up-regulated at sites of inflammatory tissues of autoimmune diseases and amplifies the inflammation through synergy with other cytokines, such as TNF (tumour necrosis factor) α.
Although IL-17 was originally thought to be produced mainly by Th17 cells, a newly defined T-cell subset with a specific differentiation programme and tight regulation, several other cell types (especially innate immune cells) are also found as important sources for IL-17 production.
Although IL-17 activates common downstream signalling, including NF-κB (nuclear factor κB), MAPKs (mitogen-activated protein kinases), C/EBPs (CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins) and mRNA stability, the immediate receptor signalling has been shown to be quite unique and tightly regulated.
Mouse genetic studies have demonstrated a critical role for IL-17 in the pathogenesis of variety of inflammatory autoimmune diseases, such as RA (rheumatoid arthritis) and MS (multiple sclerosis).
Importantly, promising results have been shown in initial clinical trials of monoclonal antibodies against IL-17 or its receptor (IL-17R) to block IL-17-mediated function in treating autoimmune patients with psoriasis, RA and MS.
Therefore targeting IL-17/IL-17R, IL-17-producing pathways or IL-17-mediated signalling pathways can be considered for future therapy in autoimmune diseases.
PMID: 22153821
Demyelinating optic neuritis presenting as a clinically isolated syndrome.
Clinically isolated syndrome (CIS) describes a single, first-occurrence attack caused by inflammation/demyelination in 1 or more locations in the central nervous system.
The optic nerve is a frequent site affected by this neurologic event.
As the name implies, CIS is an isolated condition but is often considered a precursor to multiple sclerosis (MS).
When distinctive brain lesions detected by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) accompany CIS, the person is considered at a high risk for MS.
Treatment is aimed at delaying the onset of a second neurologic episode, reducing the accumulation of MRI-detected brain lesions and delaying the development of definite MS.
This article describes a 40-year-old woman who experienced a sudden loss of vision in the right eye.
Testing ultimately found a normal MRI, demyelination of the optic nerve, and progressive thinning of the retinal nerve fiber layer, leading to a diagnosis of CIS.
Copyright © 2012 American Optometric Association.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22285249
Special issue on microglia and chronic pain.
This special issue of Experimental Neurology is devoted to the role of Microglia and Chronic Pain.
Chronic pain affects 116 million people per year in the United States, which is more than heart disease, cancer, and diabetes combined.
Nervous system trauma and disease are principal contributors to the establishment of chronic pain in people and in animal models.
Central nervous system (CNS) injury or tumor development, peripheral nerve injury, multiple sclerosis, diabetes and many other neurological disruptions can serve as the instigating pathophysiolgical conditions that lead to chronic pain.
Once considered to function solely as the phagocytotic cells of the CNS, more recent work has demonstrated that persistent activation of the microglial population may contribute to continued dysfunction including chronic pain.
In the invited articles for this special issue on Microglia and Chronic Pain, we present evidence for the role of persistent microglial activation in chronic pain after peripheral and central nervous system injury, as well as in diabetic pain, post-herpetic neuralgia pain and related diseases.
Collectively, the body of work indicates the importance of understanding the roles of microglial cells in chronic pain which will lead to targeted treatment to attenuate or alleviate chronic neuropathic pain syndromes.
Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23018359
Visual evoked potentials in early diagnosis of demyelinating diseases--a case report of Devic's disease.
Devic's disease, also known as neuromyelinitis optica (NMO), is a severe, rare demyelinating disorder, previously considered to be a form of multiple sclerosis (MS).
The aim of this study was to present the case report of 21-year-old woman with a very early diagnosis of Devic's disease, established following electrophysiological testing.
A 21-year-old woman was referred to Warsaw Medical University, Department of Ophthalmology, with subjective visual impairment.
The patient underwent a full clinical examination, colour vision and Goldmann visual field testing, fluorescein angiography, OCT, multifocal ERG, and visual evoked potentials (VEPs).
Visual evoked potentials are a very useful diagnostic tool in optic nerve neuropathies.
In our patient, the electrophysiological testing allowed us to establish a proper diagnosis very early, before typical clinical signs of Devic's disease.
PMID: 21618592
Complement regulator factor H in multiple sclerosis.
A recent proteomic study published in this journal demonstrated lower cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) expression of factor H (fH), an important complement regulator, along with two other complement proteins, in active multiple sclerosis (MS) patients.
We have previously demonstrated raised serum fH levels in MS and here, an extended analysis, quantifying fH in CSF, demonstrates no change in fH levels in active disease, but significantly raised levels in progressive disease.
These findings support our previous work showing raised serum fH in patients with progressive MS, and our results predict that CSF fH levels will be raised rather than reduced in active disease.
Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
PMID: 22247419
Treatment experience, burden, and unmet needs (TRIBUNE) in multiple sclerosis: the costs and utilities of MS patients in Canada.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most common neurological disease among young adults in Canada, but few studies to date have measured the burden imposed by MS on Canadian society.
To estimate the costs and quality of life of MS patients in Canada, while focusing on the burden of relapses and increasing disease severity.
MS patients in Canada (N=241) completed a web-based questionnaire which captured information on demographics, disease characteristics, severity (Expanded Disability Status Scale [EDSS]), comorbidities, relapses, as well as resource consumption and quality of life associated with MS.
Most patients (74%) reported treatment with disease modifying therapies (DMTs).
54% of patients with the relapsing-remitting form of the disease with an EDSS score ≤ 5 had experienced at least one relapse in the past year.
The mean cost per patient per year increased with worsening disability, and was estimated at Can $30,836 for patients with mild disability (EDSS score 0-3), Can $46,622 for patients with moderate disability (EDSS 4-6.5), and Can $77,981 for patients with severe disability due to MS (EDSS score 7-9).
The excess costs of relapsing-remitting MS patients with EDSS score ≤ 5 that could be attributable to relapse(s) were estimated at Can $10,512.
More severe disease and experiencing a relapse were also associated with poorer quality of life of MS patients.
Costs of MS patients are higher today than shown in previous studies.
Disease progression and relapses are associated with increased economic and quality of life burden.
Effective treatment that reduces relapse frequency and prevents progression could impact both costs and quality of life and may help to reduce the societal burden of MS.
PMID: 24189079
Radiologically isolated syndrome: an uncommon finding at a university clinic in a high-prevalence region for multiple sclerosis.
The improved availability of MRI in medicine has led to an increase in incidental findings.
Unexpected brain MRI findings suggestive of multiple sclerosis (MS) without typical symptoms of MS were recently defined as radiologically isolated syndrome (RIS).
The prevalence of RIS is uncertain.
The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of RIS at a university hospital in a region with a high prevalence for MS and describe the long-term prognosis of the identified patients.
Retrospective cohort study conducted in 2012.
All brain MRI examinations performed at Karolinska University Hospital in Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden during 2001 were retrospectively screened by a single rater for findings fulfilling the Okuda criteria.
The sample year was chosen in order to establish the long-term prognosis of the patients identified.
The examinations of interest were re-evaluated according to the Barkhof criteria by a neuroradiologist with long experience in MS.
In total 2105 individuals were included in the study.
Ages ranged from 0 to 90 years with a median age of 48 years.
Only one patient with RIS was identified, equivalent to a prevalence of 0.05% in the studied population, or 0.15% among patients aged 15-40 years.
The patient with RIS developed symptoms consistent with MS within 3 months accompanied with radiological progression and was diagnosed with MS.
RIS, according to present criteria, is an uncommon finding in a tertiary hospital setting in a high-prevalence region for MS where awareness and clinical suspicion of MS is common.
In order to study the prognosis of RIS, multicentre studies, or case-control studies are recommended.
PMID: 22455832
Decreased hydrocortisone sensitivity of T cell function in multiple sclerosis-associated major depression.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory, demyelinating disease of the CNS with a high prevalence of depression.
Both MS and depression have been linked to elevated cortisol levels and inflammation, indicating disturbed endocrine-immune regulation.
An imbalance in mineralocorticoid versus glucocorticoid signaling in the CNS has been proposed as a pathogenetic mechanism of depression.
Intriguingly, both receptors are also expressed in lymphocytes, but their role for 'escape' of the immune system from endocrine control is unknown.
Using steroid sensitivity of T cell function as a read-out system, we here investigate a potential role of mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) versus glucocorticoid receptor (GR) regulation in the immune system as a biological mechanism underlying MS-associated major depression.
Twelve female MS patients meeting diagnostic criteria for current major depressive disorder (MDD) were compared to twelve carefully matched MS patients without depression.
We performed lymphocyte phenotyping by flow cytometry.
In addition, steroid sensitivity of T cell proliferation was tested using hydrocortisone as well as MR (aldosterone) and GR (dexamethasone) agonists.
Sensitivity to hydrocortisone was decreased in T cells from depressed MS patients.
Experiments with agonists suggested disturbed MR regulation, but intact GR function.
Importantly, there were no differences in lymphocyte composition and frequency of T cell subsets, indicating that the differences in steroid sensitivity are unlikely to be secondary to shifts in the immune compartment.
To our knowledge, this study provides first evidence for altered steroid sensitivity of T cells from MS patients with comorbid MDD possibly due to MR dysregulation.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21844065
No increase in cancer incidence detected after cyclophosphamide in a French cohort of patients with progressive multiple sclerosis.
Cyclophosphamide is still used in progressive forms of multiple sclerosis (MS) in view of its suggested efficacy and safety in the short term.
No data exist on its long-term safety in MS, particularly on the risk of malignancy.
The objective of this study was to evaluate cancer incidence in MS after cyclophosphamide treatment.
We performed a historical prospective study in a cohort of MS patients treated with cyclophosphamide.
We collected demographic data and medical history from medical databases and patient interviews.
Reported cancers were histologically confirmed.
Cancer incidence was compared with the incidence in the general population by estimating standardized incidence ratios (SIRs).
We included 354 patients, with a median follow-up of 5 years (range 2-15) after cyclophosphamide treatment.
Fifteen patients developed a solid cancer, which occurred at a median of 3 years (range 0.5-14) after cyclophosphamide introduction.
The cumulative incidence of cancer after cyclophosphamide was 3.1% at 5 years and 5.9% at 8 years.
We found no increase in cancer incidence after cyclophosphamide treatment in men (SIR = 0.83, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.30-1.82), women (SIR = 0.99, 95% CI 0.43-1.95), or men and women combined (SIR = 0.92, 95% CI 0.50-1.54).
We found no evidence of an increased risk of cancer associated with cyclophosphamide treatment in MS patients.
PMID: 21844064
Fatigue and its relationships with cognitive functioning and depression in paediatric multiple sclerosis.
There is limited information on fatigue and its clinical and psychosocial correlates in children and adolescents with multiple sclerosis (MS).
To assess the relationships between fatigue, cognitive functioning and depression in paediatric MS.
The study cohort consisted of patients with MS recruited for an Italian collaborative study on cognitive and psychosocial functioning in paediatric MS.
The present assessment included evaluation of fatigue on the Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory-Multidimensional Fatigue Scale, cognitive functioning on an extensive neuropsychological battery and depression on the Children's Depression Inventory (CDI).
A psychiatric interview through the Kiddie-SADS-Present and Lifetime Version was also administered.
In total, 57 patients with relapsing-remitting MS were compared with 70 healthy controls.
Percentages of fatigued patients ranged from 9% to 14% according to self-reports, and from 23% to 39% according to parent reports.
Fatigue was significantly related with higher scores on the CDI (p &lt; 0.03).
Higher levels of self-reported cognitive fatigue were associated with impaired performance on a problem-solving test, whereas higher levels of parent-reported cognitive fatigue were associated with impairment on tests of verbal learning, processing speed, complex attention and verbal comprehension.
Our data show that fatigue can affect a sizeable proportion of paediatric MS patients, and confirm the association between fatigue and depressive symptoms in MS.
They also highlight the difficulties of fatigue assessment in the paediatric population and provide a few clues to further research in the field.
PMID: 21844067
Substantial adverse association of visual and vascular comorbidities on visual disability in multiple sclerosis.
Visual comorbidities are common in multiple sclerosis (MS) but the impact of visual comorbidities on visual disability is unknown.
We assessed the impact of visual and vascular comorbidities on severity of visual disability in MS.
In 2006, we queried participants of the North American Research Committee on Multiple Sclerosis (NARCOMS) about cataracts, glaucoma, uveitis, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, heart disease, diabetes and peripheral vascular disease.
We assessed visual disability using the Vision subscale of Performance Scales.
Using Cox regression, we investigated whether visual or vascular comorbidities affected the time between MS symptom onset and the development of mild, moderate and severe visual disability.
Of 8983 respondents, 1415 (15.9%) reported a visual comorbidity while 4745 (52.8%) reported a vascular comorbidity.
The median (interquartile range) visual score was 1 (0-2).
In a multivariable Cox model the risk of mild visual disability was higher among participants with vascular (hazard ratio [HR] 1.45; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.39-1.51) and visual comorbidities (HR 1.47; 95% CI: 1.37-1.59).
Vascular and visual comorbidities were similarly associated with increased risks of moderate and severe visual disability.
Visual and vascular comorbidities are associated with progression of visual disability in MS.
Clinicians hearing reports of worsening visual symptoms in MS patients should consider visual comorbidities as contributing factors.
Further study of these issues using objective, systematic neuro-ophthalmologic evaluations is warranted.
PMID: 23625489
The fine balance of chemokines during disease: trafficking, inflammation, and homeostasis.
The action of chemokines (or chemotactic cytokines) is recognized as an integral part of inflammatory and regulatory processes.
Leukocyte mobilization during physiological conditions, trafficking of various cell types during pathological conditions, cell activation, and angiogenesis are among the target functions exerted by chemokines upon signaling via their specific receptors.
Current research is focused in analyzing changes in chemokine/chemokine receptor patterns during various diseases with the aim to modulate pathological trafficking of cells, or to attract particular cell types to specific tissues.
This review focuses on defining the role(s) of certain chemokine ligands and receptors in inflammatory neurological conditions such as multiple sclerosis.
In addition, the role(s) of chemokines in neurodegenerative conditions such as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease is also described, as well as the contribution of chemokines to the pathogenesis of cancer, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease.
PMID: 21919736
The critical role of antigen-presentation-induced cytokine crosstalk in the central nervous system in multiple sclerosis and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a debilitating disease of the central nervous system (CNS) that has been extensively studied using the animal model experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE).
It is believed that CD4(+) T lymphocytes play an important role in the pathogenesis of this disease by mediating the demyelination of neuronal axons via secretion of proinflammatory cytokines resulting in the clinical manifestations.
Although a great deal of information has been gained in the last several decades about the cells involved in the inflammatory and disease mediating process, important questions have remained unanswered.
It has long been held that initial neuroantigen presentation and T cell activation events occur in the immune periphery and then translocate to the CNS.
However, an increasing body of evidence suggests that antigen (Ag) presentation might initiate within the CNS itself.
Importantly, it has remained unresolved which antigen presenting cells (APCs) in the CNS are the first to acquire and present neuroantigens during EAE/MS to T cells, and what the conditions are under which this takes place, ie, whether this occurs in the healthy CNS or only during inflammatory conditions and what the related cytokine microenvironment is comprised of.
In particular, the central role of interferon-γ as a primary mediator of CNS pathology during EAE has been challenged by the emergence of Th17 cells producing interleukin-17.
This review describes our current understanding of potential APCs in the CNS and the contribution of these and other CNS-resident cells to disease pathology.
Additionally, we discuss the question of where Ag presentation is initiated and under what conditions neuroantigens are made available to APCs with special emphasis on which cytokines may be important in this process.
PMID: 23641196
Interleukin-1β and tumor necrosis factor-α: reliable targets for protective therapies in Parkinson's Disease?
Neuroinflammation has received increased attention as a target for putative neuroprotective therapies in Parkinson's Disease (PD).
Two prototypic pro-inflammatory cytokines interleukin-1β (IL-1) and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF) have been implicated as main effectors of the functional consequences of neuroinflammation on neurodegeneration in PD models.
In this review, we describe that the functional interaction between these cytokines in the brain differs from the periphery (e.g., their expression is not induced by each other) and present data showing predominantly a toxic effect of these cytokines when expressed at high doses and for a sustained period of time in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SN).
In addition, we highlight opposite evidence showing protective effects of these two main cytokines when conditions of duration, amount of expression or state of activation of the target or neighboring cells are changed.
Furthermore, we discuss these results in the frame of previous disappointing results from anti-TNF-α clinical trials against Multiple Sclerosis, another neurodegenerative disease with a clear neuroinflammatory component.
In conclusion, we hypothesize that the available evidence suggests that the duration and dose of IL-1β or TNF-α expression is crucial to predict their functional effect on the SN.
Since these parameters are not amenable for measurement in the SN of PD patients, we call for an in-depth analysis to identify downstream mediators that could be common to the toxic (and not the protective) effects of these cytokines in the SN.
This strategy could spare the possible neuroprotective effect of these cytokines operative in the patient at the time of treatment, increasing the probability of efficacy in a clinical setting.
Alternatively, receptor-specific agonists or antagonists could also provide a way to circumvent undesired effects of general anti-inflammatory or specific anti-IL-1β or TNF-α therapies against PD.
PMID: 22186852
Screening for balance disorders in mildly affected multiple sclerosis patients.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) patients often complain about balance problems when Romberg's test and tandem gait are normal.
The aim of the study was to determine if measures of trunk sway taken during a battery of stance and gait tasks could be used to detect subclinical balance disorders.
We recorded trunk angular sway in the pitch and roll directions from 20 MS patients (EDSS 1.4 ± 0.5) and 20 age- and gender-matched healthy controls (HCs), during 12 stance and gait tasks.
We filmed 22 subjects simultaneously.
Two neurologists assessed the videos, deciding whether task performance was pathological.
Sway measures were significantly different between patients and HCs in eight out of 12 balance tasks.
The most significant differences between MS patients and HCs were pitch angle range standing on one leg with eyes open on a firm surface (mean 3.13° vs. 2.09°, p = 0.005), and on a foam support surface (mean 6.24° vs. 2.96°, p = 0.006), pitch velocity range walking 8 m with eyes closed (mean 75.5 vs. 50.2°/s, p &lt; 0.001) and pitch velocity range walking 3 m on heels (mean 85.37 vs. 60.9°/s, p = 0.002).
Multivariate analysis revealed a model with three tasks which detected balance disorders in 84% of the MS patients and 90% of the HCs correctly.
The neurologists achieved accuracies of 30% for the MS patients and 82% for the HCs.
Using trunk sway measures during stance and gait tasks is a sensitive screening method for balance problems in MS patients, and is more accurate than assessment by trained neurologists.
PMID: 22186851
The more things change the more they stay the same: a case report of neurology residency experiences.
This study compared the neurology residency training experience for a single neurology resident at the University of Pennsylvania from the years 2002-2005.
The prevalence of encounters seen during this residency was compared to the prevalence of neurological disorders typically observed by ambulatory neurologists in the United States (US).
A total of 1,333 patients were evaluated during this residency.
Ischemic stroke/transient ischemic accident, epilepsy, metabolic encephalopathy, peripheral neuropathy, and multiple sclerosis were the most common neurological disorders observed.
The four most common reasons for an outpatient visit to a neurologist (i.e., headache/migraine, epilepsy, cerebrovascular disease, and peripheral neuropathy) typically account for approximately 49-55% of all appointments, but only contributed to approximately 40% of patient encounters during this neurology residency.
While these results reflect the encounters of a single neurology resident, both the total number and distribution of neurological diagnoses were similar to previous experiences over two decades ago at US academic medical centers despite significant changes in health care delivery and policy.
This case report demonstrates that neurology residency programs continue to overemphasize acute management of inpatient neurological disorders compared to outpatient care of more prevalent neurological complaints.
Additional measures could be instituted to ensure a broader range of experiences during residency (i.e., online resident log).
These methods could allow residency coordinators to identify certain areas of deficiency with regards to exposure to patients for a resident and ensure greater competency during residency.
PMID: 23373525
The meaning of spasticity to people with multiple sclerosis: what can health professionals learn?
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most common disabling neurological condition affecting young adults.
One third of people on an American registry of people with MS (PWMS) reported having activities affected by spasticity.
The psychosocial effects of spasticity in people with MS have been shown to be distressing and detrimental to emotional and social relationships when investigated from a psychology perspective.
This paper investigates the impact of spasticity on the lives of people living with MS from a physiotherapeutic perspective.
This study involved 12 semi-structured interviews with individuals experiencing MS-related spasticity.
Ten sets of data were analyzed following framework analysis principles.
Results suggest spasticity effects life experience of these PWMS in diverse and complex ways.
Physical, psychological and social consequences of spasticity are closely linked and can be far reaching.
Therapists need to be aware of links between specific physical symptoms and their psychosocial consequences if they want to improve peoples' quality of life.
This paper provides in depth qualitative research evidence for the complexity of the spasticity experience for each individual, strengthening the argument for a patient-centred approach to treatment.
These results also support the case for targeted interventions with effectiveness recorded in a patient-centred way.
• Spasticity is suggested here to affect the lives of individuals with multiple sclerosis in diverse and far reaching ways.
Therapists need to investigate this fully in subjective assessment to impact on people's quality of life.
• Direct links were identified between treatable physical symptoms and far reaching consequences of spasticity.
• Knowledge about the complexity of the spasticity experience for each individual will allow therapists to target interventions appropriately and accurately record effectiveness in a patient-centred way.
PMID: 23910615
A subset of systemic sclerosis but not of systemic lupus erythematosus is defined by isolated anti-Ku autoantibodies.
We aimed to analyse the annual incidence of anti-Ku antibodies and to study their clinical associations in patients mainly affected by systemic sclerosis (SSc) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) overlap diseases.
Anti-Ku were detected by counterimmunoelectrophoresis in a total of 203 sera during 14 years of anti-ENA detection.
Anti-Ku+ sera belong to 46 patients, mostly affected by UCTD (12 cases), SSc spectrum diseases (13 cases), including SSc/PM, SSc/DM and SSc; and SLE spectrum diseases (9 cases), including SLE, SLE/APS, SLE/SS, SLE/PM.
Anti-Ku antibodies represent 2% of all anti-ENA positive sera, and are found in 1.3-3% of anti-ENA positive sera per year.
Anti-Ku+ SSc represents 2% of all SSc patients.
All anti-Ku+ SSc spectrum diseases showed a limited cutaneous disease; myositis, dysphagia and isolated anti-Ku in more than 70% of cases.
Interstitial lung disease (ILD) was found in 54% of SSc patients, frequently with mild functional impairment.
When compared with other limited SSc cases, anti-Ku+ SSc showed a higher rate of male patients, arthritis, myositis and ILD.
A lower rate of digital ulcers was found, although both groups showed the same rate of SSc pattern at nailfold capillaroscopy.
Anti-Ku+ SLE patients (representing 1.5% of all SLE) showed cutaneous features, Raynaud's phenomenon, multiple autoantibodies, without major organ manifestations.
Isolated anti-Ku+ patients significantly show a diagnosis within SSc spectrum diseases, with arthralgias, Raynaud's phenomenon, dysphagia, ILD, myositis and sclerodactyly.
In SLE spectrum diseases, anti-Ku are found associated with other autoantibodies, without a peculiar clinical profile, except for Raynaud's phenomenon and severe alterations of capillary bed.
In SSc anti-Ku are frequently associated with myositis and ILD, mostly found as isolated autoantibodies.
PMID: 22751954
Fingolimod impedes Schwann cell-mediated myelination: implications for the treatment of immune neuropathies?
Fingolimod (FTY720), a first-in-class sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) receptor agonist, is a recently approved drug for treating relapsing multiple sclerosis.
Experimental evidence suggests that FTY720 not only exhibits anti-inflammatory properties but also promotes myelination in the central nervous system by direct interaction with oligodendrocytes.
To assess the effects of FTY720 on Schwann cells (SCs) and peripheral nerve myelination.
Receptor expression studies and myelination were investigated in primary rat SCs and rat neuronal/SC cocultures.
Cells were treated with physiologically relevant concentrations of the active phosphorylated form of FTY720 (FTY720P).
In addition, S1P receptor expression was corroborated in human and rat peripheral nerve tissue sections.
Schwann cells express all known S1P receptors on the RNA level, not altered by FTY720P.
In the myelination model, treatment with FTY720P resulted in a significant reduction of quantitative myelin formation.
FTY720P induced reactive oxygen species in SCs associated with apoptosis of these cells, as demonstrated by the detection of cysteine aspartic acid–specific protease 3 and 7, as well as terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick-end labeling.
This effect was dependent of S1P signaling because the blocking of S1P receptors ameliorated reactive oxygen species production, SC apoptosis, and myelin loss.
FTY720P at greater concentrations induces apoptosis in SCs and may interfere with peripheral nerve myelination.
PMID: 23465998
Bone scintigraphy may help differentiate bone sclerotic lesions from osteoblastic metastases in tuberous sclerosis patients with concomitant pulmonary adenocarcinoma.
Tuberous sclerosis (TS) is a multisystem disorder characterized by widespread hamartomas in multiple organs, including the skeleton.
We present a case of bone involvement in a patient with TS and concomitant pulmonary adenocarcinoma.
Bone scintigraphy is useful in distinguishing the TS bone lesions from osteoblastic metastases.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 24250492
Effect of honey bee venom on lewis rats with experimental allergic encephalomyelitis, a model for multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a progressive and autoimmune neurodegenerative disease of the central nervous system (CNS).
This disease is recognized through symptoms like inflammation, demyelination and the destruction of neurological actions.
Experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE) is a widely accepted animal model for MS.
EAE is created in animals by injecting the tissue of myelin basic protein (MBP), CNS, or myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) along with the adjuvant.
EAE and MS are similar diseases.
Honey Bee venom (Apis mellifera) contains a variety of low and high molecular weight peptides and proteins, including melittin, apamin, adolapin, mast cell degranulating peptide and phospholipase A2.
Bee venom (BV) could exert anti-inflammatory and antinociceptive effects on the inflammatory reactions.
The guinea pig spinal cord homogenate (GPSCH) is with the Complete Freund's Adjuvant (CFA), consisting of 1 mg/mL Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
It was used for inducting EAE in Lewis rats for creating the MS model.
The hematoxylin and eosin and luxol fast blue methods were used respectively in analyses of inflammation and detection of demyelination in the central nervous system.
Furthermore, the ELISA and the high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) were used for the assessment of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and nitrate in rats serum.
In this study, we indicated that the treatment of EAE with Bee venom decreased the symptoms of clinical disorder, pathological changes, inflammatory cell infiltration, demyelination in the central nervous system, level of serum TNF-α, and the serum nitrates in rat EAE induced through GPSCH.
PMID: 23845464
Biased Treg/Th17 balance away from regulatory toward inflammatory phenotype in relapsed multiple sclerosis and its correlation with severity of symptoms.
The opposing immune functions of Treg and Th17 lymphocytes and the plasticity of Treg/Th17 differentiation, has led us to investigate the effects of their fluctuations and counterbalance in autoimmune condition of multiple sclerosis (MS).
Evaluation of Treg and Th17 frequency in peripheral blood of a group of relapsed MS patients, showed a decrease in Treg/Th17 ratio compared to that of healthy controls.
A reverse correlation between these subsets was observed in controls but not in patient groups.
Both Treg frequency and Treg/Th17 ratio were negatively correlated with severity of symptoms.
There was shown to be an enduring increase in Treg frequency associated with MS disease.
© 2013.
PMID: 21987393
Association between immediate initiation of intramuscular interferon beta-1a at the time of a clinically isolated syndrome and long-term outcomes: a 10-year follow-up of the Controlled High-Risk Avonex Multiple Sclerosis Prevention Study in Ongoing Neurological Surveillance.
To determine whether immediate initiation of treatment at the time of a clinically isolated syndrome in patients at high risk for clinically definite multiple sclerosis alters disease course over 10 years.
Prospective follow-up study.
Twenty-four Controlled High-Risk Subjects Avonex Multiple Sclerosis Prevention Study (CHAMPS) sites in the United States and Canada.
A total of 81 patients originally randomly assigned to receive intramuscular interferon beta-1a (the immediate-treatment group) and 74 patients originally randomly assigned to receive placebo (the delayed-treatment group).
All patients were from CHAMPS.
For the immediate-treatment group, treatment was initiated within a month after the onset of a clinically isolated syndrome, and for the delayed-treatment group, treatment was initiated a median of 30 months (interquartile range, 24-35 months) after CHAMPS randomization.
Rate of developing clinically definite multiple sclerosis, annualized relapse rate, disease course classification, disability measures, and magnetic resonance imaging measures.
The immediate-treatment group showed a lower 10-year rate of clinically definite multiple sclerosis (unadjusted hazard ratio, 0.64 [95% CI, 0.48-0.87]; P = .004) and a lower annualized relapse rate between years 5 and 10 (P = .03).
There was no differential effect on disability, magnetic resonance imaging T2-weighted lesions, or the proportion of patients developing progressive disease at 10 years.
Few patients reached the Expanded Disability Status Scale milestone scores of 4.0 or greater (9% of patients) or 6.0 or greater (6% of patients).
Immediate initiation of intramuscular interferon beta-1a at the time of a clinically isolated syndrome in high-risk patients reduces relapse rates over 10 years but does not improve disability outcomes compared with a control group that also initiated therapy relatively early in the disease course.
clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00179478.
PMID: 23616154
Effect of 4-aminopyridine on vision in multiple sclerosis patients with optic neuropathy.
The objective of this randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study was to examine if patients with optic neuropathy would derive a therapeutic benefit from 4-aminopyridine (4-AP) treatment.
Furthermore, the study was intended to determine if patients with certain P100 latencies or retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) measures would be more likely to respond to therapy.
Patients were enrolled in a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind, crossover study of 10 weeks duration.
Patients underwent visual evoked potentials (VEP), optical coherence tomography (OCT), and visual acuity before starting 5 weeks of either placebo or 4-AP.
After 5 weeks, they completed a second evaluation (VEP, OCT, and visual acuity) and were crossed over between treatment arms.
Five weeks later, they had their final evaluation.
All investigators were blinded to treatment arm until after data analysis.
On average, patients had faster P100s on 4-AP when compared to placebo.
A subset of patients had distinct responses to 4-AP as measured by improvements in visual acuity.
Finally, eyes with an RNFL measure between 60 and 80 µm had the highest response rate.
4-Aminopyridine is useful for improving vision in patients with demyelinating optic neuropathy.
Future clinical trials may be able to enrich a patient population for potential responders using OCT and VEP measures.
Selecting patients for future trials should use RNFL measures as part of inclusion/exclusion criteria.
This study provides Class IV evidence supporting the use of 4-AP in certain patients with optic neuropathy to improve visual function (patients with RNFL between 60 and 80 µm).
PMID: 23079871
MicroRNA let-7e is associated with the pathogenesis of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play important roles in the regulation of immune responses.
There is evidence that miRNAs also participate in the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis (MS), but how the miRNAs regulate the pathogenesis of MS is still under investigation.
The identification of new members of the miRNA family associated with the pathogenesis of MS could facilitate early diagnosis and treatment.
Here, we show that the level of miRNA let-7e is significantly upregulated in EAE, an animal model of MS using miRNA array and quantitative real-time PCR.
The expression of let-7e was mainly in CD4(+)  T cells and infiltrated mononuclear cells of CNS, and highly correlated with the development of EAE.
We found that let-7e silencing in vivo inhibited encephalitogenic Th1 and Th17 cells and attenuated EAE, with reciprocal increase of Th2 cells; overexpression of let-7e enhanced Th1 and Th17 cells and aggravated EAE.
We also identified IL-10 as one of the functional targets of let-7e.
Together, we propose that let-7e is a new miRNA involved in the regulation of encephalitogenic T-cell differentiation and the pathogenesis of EAE.
© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH &amp; Co.
KGaA, Weinheim.
PMID: 23509048
International Pediatric MS Study Group Clinical Trials Summit: meeting report.
Pediatric studies for new biological agents are mandated by recent legislation, necessitating careful thought to evaluation of emerging multiple sclerosis (MS) therapies in children with MS.
Challenges include a small patient population, the lack of prior randomized clinical trials, and ethical concerns.
The goal of this meeting was to assess areas of consensus regarding clinical trial design and outcome measures among academic experts involved in pediatric MS care and research.
The Steering Committee of the International Pediatric MS Study Group identified key focus areas for discussion.
A total of 69 meeting attendees were assembled, including 35 academic experts.
Regulatory and pharmaceutical representatives also attended, and provided input, which informed academic expert consensus decisions.
The academic experts agreed that clinical trials were necessary in pediatric MS to obtain pharmacokinetic, safety and efficacy data, and regulatory approval allowing for greater medication access.
The academic experts agreed that relapse was an appropriate primary outcome measure for phase III pediatric trials.
An international standardized cognitive battery was identified.
The pros and cons of various trial designs were discussed.
Guidelines surrounding MRI studies, pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and registries were developed.
The academic experts agreed that given the limited subject pool, a stepwise approach to the launch of clinical trials for the most promising medications is necessary in order to ensure study completion.
Alternative approaches could result in unethical exposure of patients to trial conditions without gaining knowledge.
Consensus points for conduct of clinical trials in the rare disease pediatric MS were identified amongst a panel of academic experts, informed by regulatory and industry stakeholders.
PMID: 22805230
The use of aminopyridines in neurological disorders.
Aminopyridines are members of a family of monoamino and diamino derivatives of pyridine, and their principal mechanism of action is dose-dependent blockade of voltage-gated potassium channels, in particular, fast voltage-gated potassium channels.
To date, only 2 main broad-spectrum potassium channel blockers, 4-aminopyridine (4-AP) and 3,4-diaminopyridine (3,4-DAP), have been used as investigational new drugs in various neurological diseases.
More recently, licensed versions of these compounds including dalfampridine extended release (Fampyra, Biogen Idec) for the improvement of walking in adult patients with multiple sclerosis, and amifampridine (Firdapse, Biomarin Europe Ltd) for the treatment of Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome have been released, and the costs associated with using these new products highlights the importance of evaluating the clinically meaningful treatment effects of these drugs.The current review summarizes the evidence of aminopyridine use in neurological conditions and in particular presents a systematic review of all randomized trials of 3,4-DAP in Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome to determine the efficacy of this treatment using meta-analysis of clinical and electrophysiological end points.
PMID: 23665549
T helper-17 activation dominates the immunologic milieu of both amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and progressive multiple sclerosis.
MS (multiple sclerosis) and ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) differ in important respects, but common pathogenic features seem to be shared in these two diseases.
To shed light on such features, immunophenotypic and functional analysis were performed in peripheral monocytes and T lymphocytes of ALS and primary progressive (PP) MS patients and healthy controls (HC).
Results showed that TH1-, TH17-, and IL-6-driven inflammation characterize both diseases; this is unsuccessfully hampered by TH2 activation and, possibly, BDNF secretion.
Results herein clarify the pathogenic similarities between ALS and PP-MS and could be helpful for the design of novel diagnostic and therapeutic approaches to ALS.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22132904
Changes in expression of the antioxidant enzyme SOD3 occur upon differentiation of human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells in vitro.
The discovery that mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) secrete SOD3 may help explain studies in which MSCs have direct antioxidant activities both in vivo and in vitro.
SOD3 is an antioxidant enzyme that dismutes toxic free radicals produced during inflammatory processes.
Therefore, MSC production and secretion of active and therapeutically significant levels of SOD3 would further support the use of MSCs as a cellular based antioxidant therapy.
The aim of this study was therefore to investigate in vitro if MSC differentiation down the adipogenic, chondrogenic, and osteogenic lineages influences the expression of the antioxidant molecule SOD3.
Human bone marrow MSCs and their differentiated progeny were cultured under standard conditions and both the SOD3 gene and protein expression examined.
Following adipogenesis, cultures demonstrated that both SOD3 protein and gene expression are significantly increased, and conversely, following chondrogenesis SOD3 protein and gene expression is significantly decreased.
Following osteogenesis there were no significant changes in SOD3 protein or gene expression.
This in vitro study describes the initial characterization of SOD3 expression and secretion by differentiated MSCs.
This should help guide further in vivo work establishing the therapeutic and antioxidative potential of MSC and their differentiated progeny.
PMID: 22700708
Impact of repeated topical-loaded manganese-enhanced MRI on the mouse visual system.
Optic nerve degeneration in diseases such as glaucoma and multiple sclerosis evolves in months to years.
The use of Mn(2+)-Enhanced Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MEMRI) in a time-course study may provide new insights into the disease progression.
Previously, we demonstrated the feasibility of using a topical administration for Mn(2+) delivery to the visual system.
This study is to evaluate the impact of biweekly or monthly repeated Mn(2+) topical administration and the pH levels of the Mn(2+) solutions for MEMRI on the mouse visual pathway.
Using groups of mice, the MEMRI with an acidic or pH neutralized 1 M MnCl(2) solution was performed.
To evaluate the feasibility of repeated MEMRIs, topical-loaded MEMRI was conducted biweekly seven times or monthly three times.
The enhancement of MEMRI in the visual system was quantified.
After repeated MEMRIs, the corneas were examined by optical coherence tomography.
The retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) and optic nerves were examined by histology.
All mice exhibited consistent enhancements along the visual system following repeated MEMRIs.
The acidic Mn(2+) solution induced a greater MEMRI enhancement as compared with a neutral pH Mn(2+) solution.
Significant 20% RGC loss was found after three biweekly Mn(2+) inductions, but no RGC loss was found after three monthly Mn(2+) treatments.
The corneal thickness was found increased after seven biweekly topical-loaded MEMRI.
Acidic Mn(2+) solutions enhanced the uptake of Mn(2+) observed on the MEMRI.
Increasing the time intervals of repeated Mn(2+) topical administration reduced the adverse effects caused by MEMRI.
PMID: 23245605
Common values in assessing health outcomes from disease and injury: disability weights measurement study for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010.
Measurement of the global burden of disease with disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs) requires disability weights that quantify health losses for all non-fatal consequences of disease and injury.
There has been extensive debate about a range of conceptual and methodological issues concerning the definition and measurement of these weights.
Our primary objective was a comprehensive re-estimation of disability weights for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010 through a large-scale empirical investigation in which judgments about health losses associated with many causes of disease and injury were elicited from the general public in diverse communities through a new, standardised approach.
We surveyed respondents in two ways: household surveys of adults aged 18 years or older (face-to-face interviews in Bangladesh, Indonesia, Peru, and Tanzania; telephone interviews in the USA) between Oct 28, 2009, and June 23, 2010; and an open-access web-based survey between July 26, 2010, and May 16, 2011.
The surveys used paired comparison questions, in which respondents considered two hypothetical individuals with different, randomly selected health states and indicated which person they regarded as healthier.
The web survey added questions about population health equivalence, which compared the overall health benefits of different life-saving or disease-prevention programmes.
We analysed paired comparison responses with probit regression analysis on all 220 unique states in the study.
We used results from the population health equivalence responses to anchor the results from the paired comparisons on the disability weight scale from 0 (implying no loss of health) to 1 (implying a health loss equivalent to death).
Additionally, we compared new disability weights with those used in WHO's most recent update of the Global Burden of Disease Study for 2004.
13,902 individuals participated in household surveys and 16,328 in the web survey.
Analysis of paired comparison responses indicated a high degree of consistency across surveys: correlations between individual survey results and results from analysis of the pooled dataset were 0·9 or higher in all surveys except in Bangladesh (r=0·75).
Most of the 220 disability weights were located on the mild end of the severity scale, with 58 (26%) having weights below 0·05.
Five (11%) states had weights below 0·01, such as mild anaemia, mild hearing or vision loss, and secondary infertility.
The health states with the highest disability weights were acute schizophrenia (0·76) and severe multiple sclerosis (0·71).
We identified a broad pattern of agreement between the old and new weights (r=0·70), particularly in the moderate-to-severe range.
However, in the mild range below 0·2, many states had significantly lower weights in our study than previously.
This study represents the most extensive empirical effort as yet to measure disability weights.
By contrast with the popular hypothesis that disability assessments vary widely across samples with different cultural environments, we have reported strong evidence of highly consistent results.
Bill &amp; Melinda Gates Foundation.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21982872
Cesarean delivery may increase the risk of multiple sclerosis.
Prenatal and perinatal factors are believed to contribute to the risk of developing multiple sclerosis (MS).
This study was designed to evaluate whether mode of delivery (vaginal versus cesarean section), as a perinatal factor, affects susceptibility to MS.
MS patients were recruited from the MS registry of Isfahan Multiple Sclerosis Society (IMSS) and were compared with their healthy siblings.
Data regarding mode of delivery, birth order, and gestation week of birth were obtained through a specially designed questionnaire.
Preterm or post term deliveries were excluded.
We used conditional logistic regression statistics and adjusted for gender and birth order.
This study included 1349 participants (449 MS patients and 900 controls).
Subjects who were born by cesarean section had significant risk of MS (odds ratio, OR = 2.51; 95% confidence interval, CI: 1.43-4.41; p = 0.001).
There was significant MS risk for females who were born by cesarean section (OR = 2.69, 95% CI: 1.30-5.58; p = 0.008), but not for males (OR = 2.25, 95% CI: 0.90-5.63; p = 0.082).
The mean age at onset was lower in MS patients born by cesarean section (24.58 ± 6.33) compared with that of patients born by vaginal delivery (27.59 ± 7.97; p = 0.041).
There was no significant difference between the two groups for birth order (p = 0.417).
Our results suggest that those born by vaginal delivery are at a lower risk of subsequent MS.
These preliminary findings will need to be addressed in a much larger and preferably prospective study.
PMID: 21982871
The relationship between walking, manual dexterity, cognition and activity/participation in persons with multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis has a vast impact on health, but the relationship between walking, manual dexterity, cognition and activity/participation is unclear.
The specific aims were to explore the discriminative ability of measures of walking, manual dexterity and cognition, and to identify cut-off values in these measures, for prediction of independence in personal and instrumental activities of daily living (ADL) and activity/participation in social and lifestyle activities.
Data from 164 persons with multiple sclerosis were collected during home visits with the following measures: the 2 × 5 m walk test, the Nine-hole Peg Test, the Symbol Digit Modalities Test, the Katz Personal and Instrumental ADL Indexes, and the Frenchay Activities Index (measuring frequency in social and lifestyle activities).
The 2 × 5 m walk test and the Nine-hole Peg Test had high and better discriminative and predictive ability than the Symbol Digit Modalities Test.
Cut-off values were identified.
The accuracy of predictions was increased above all by combining the 2 × 5 m walk test and the Nine-hole Peg Test.
The proposed cut-off values in the 2 × 5 m walk test and the Nine-hole Peg Test may be used as indicators of functioning and to identify persons risking activity limitations and participation restrictions.
However, further studies are needed to confirm the usefulness in clinical practice.
PMID: 23178033
Development and psychometric validation of the intermittent self-catheterization questionnaire.
Intermittent catheterization, often performed by the users themselves and known as intermittent self-catheterization (ISC), has become the gold standard treatment for people with chronic urinary retention.
To date, there are no validated patient-reported outcome measures for individuals who rely on ISC that focus on ISC-related quality of life and can help health care professionals and catheter users to optimize long-term ISC care.
The objective of this study was to develop and validate a patient-reported outcome measure, the Intermittent Self-Catheterization Questionnaire (ISC-Q), which evaluates aspects of quality of life specific to the needs of individuals performing ISC.
This study was divided into 2 phases.
The first phase focused on the development of the ISC-Q using 20 interviews and a review of selected literature.
In addition, 10 interviews with UK and French individuals who performed ISC were conducted to ensure face and content validity of the ISC-Q.
In the second phase of the study, the ISC-Q was administered online in the United Kingdom, France, and Germany to 306 individuals with neurologic urinary retention (including spinal cord injury, multiple sclerosis, and spina bifida), who performed ISC for at least 6 months, and were aged 18 to 85 years.
Item reduction, reliability, and validity testing were performed to determine the psychometric properties of the ISC-Q.
Responsiveness and minimum important differences were also examined.
The initial phase of the study led to the development of a 4-domain instrument focusing on ease of use, convenience, discreetness, and psychological well-being.
Various item reduction techniques were used that resulted in the removal of 3 items from the ISC-Q; there were 24 items in the final version.
The conceptual framework of the ISC-Q was confirmed with a four-factor solution of the subscales.
The ISC-Q was psychometrically robust, with excellent internal consistency, adequate test-retest reliability, and good validity (convergent and known groups validity).
Overall, the responsiveness results show the ISC-Q to be sensitive to change, and the total ISC-Q minimum important difference estimates ranged from 4.94 to 8.73.
The findings illustrate the ISC-Q to be a valid and reliable outcome measure that evaluated aspects of ISC-related quality of life.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier HS Journals, Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22699511
NLRP3 inflammasome induces chemotactic immune cell migration to the CNS in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
The NLRP3 inflammasome is a multiprotein complex consisting of three kinds of proteins, NLRP3, ASC, and pro-caspase-1, and plays a role in sensing pathogens and danger signals in the innate immune system.
The NLRP3 inflammasome is thought to be involved in the development of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model of multiple sclerosis (MS).
However, the mechanism by which the NLRP3 inflammasome induces EAE is not clear.
In this study, we found that the NLRP3 inflammasome played a critical role in inducing T-helper cell migration into the CNS.
To gain migratory ability, CD4(+) T cells need to be primed by NLRP3 inflammasome-sufficient antigen-presenting cells to up-regulate chemotaxis-related proteins, such as osteopontin, CCR2, and CXCR6.
In the presence of the NLRP3 inflammasome, dendritic cells and macrophages also induce chemotactic ability and up-regulate chemotaxis-related proteins, such as α4β1 integrin, CCL7, CCL8, and CXCL16.
On the other hand, reduced Th17 cell population size in immunized Nlrp3(-/-) and Asc(-/-) mice is not a determinative factor for their resistance to EAE.
As currently applied in clinical interventions of MS, targeting immune cell migration molecules may be an effective approach in treating MS accompanied by NLRP3 inflammasome activation.
PMID: 21630352
Nonexponential T₂ decay in white matter.
Visualizing myelin in human brain may help the study of diseases such as multiple sclerosis.
Previous studies based on T(1) and T(2) relaxation contrast have suggested the presence of a distinct water pool that may report directly on local myelin content.
Recent work indicates that T(2) contrast may offer particular advantages over T(1) and T(2) contrast, especially at high field.
However, the complex mechanism underlying T(2) relaxation may render interpretation difficult.
To address this issue, T(2) relaxation behavior in human brain was studied at 3 and 7 T.
Multiple gradient echoes covering most of the decay curve were analyzed for deviations from mono-exponential behavior.
The data confirm the previous finding of a distinct rapidly relaxing signal component (T(2) ∼ 6 ms), tentatively attributed to myelin water.
However, in extension to previous findings, this rapidly relaxing component displayed a substantial resonance frequency shift, reaching 36 Hz in the corpus callosum at 7 T.
The component's fractional amplitude and frequency shift appeared to depend on both field strength and fiber orientation, consistent with a mechanism originating from magnetic susceptibility effects.
The findings suggest that T(2) contrast at high field may be uniquely sensitive to tissue myelin content and that proper interpretation will require modeling of susceptibility-induced resonance frequency shifts.
Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
PMID: 23416238
Amelioration of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by probiotic mixture is mediated by a shift in T helper cell immune response.
The immunomodulatory effect of probiotics has been shown mainly in gastro-intestinal immune disorders and little information is available on the inflammation of central nervous system.
Recently we reported that IRT5 probiotics, a mixture of 5 probiotics, could suppress diverse experimental inflammatory disorders.
In this study, we evaluated the prophylactic and therapeutic effects of IRT5 probiotics in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), a T cell mediated inflammatory autoimmune disease of the central nervous system.
Pretreatment of IRT5 probiotics before disease induction significantly suppressed EAE development.
In addition, treatment with IRT5 probiotics to the ongoing EAE delayed the disease onset.
Administration of IRT5 probiotics inhibited the pro-inflammatory Th1/Th17 polarization, while inducing IL10(+) producing or/and Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells, both in the peripheral immune system and at the site of inflammation.
Collectively, our data suggest that IRT5 probiotics could be applicable to modulate T cell mediated neuronal autoimmune diseases, including multiple sclerosis.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22218763
MicroRNAs: novel regulators of oligodendrocyte differentiation and potential therapeutic targets in demyelination-related diseases.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs or miRs) are a class of endogenous small non-coding RNAs that consist of about 22 nucleotides and play critical roles in various biological processes, including cell proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, and tumorigenesis.
In recent years, some specific miRNA, such as miR-219, miR-138, miR-9, miR-23, and miR-19b were found to participate in the regulation of oligodendrocyte (OL) differentiation and myelin maintenance, as well as in the pathogenesis of demyelination-related diseases (e.g., multiple sclerosis, ischemic stroke, and leukodystrophy).
These miRNAs control their target mRNA or regulate the protein levels of some signaling pathways, and participate in OL differentiation and the pathogenesis of demyelination-related diseases.
During pathologic processes, the expression levels of specific miRNAs are dynamically altered.
Therefore, miRNAs act as diagnostic and prognostic indicators of defects in OL differentiation and demyelination-related diseases, and they can provide potential targets for therapeutic drug development.
PMID: 23261766
Vorinostat, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, suppresses dendritic cell function and ameliorates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Vorinostat, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, has been used clinically as an anticancer drug and also has immunosuppressive properties.
However, the underlying mechanisms of effects of vorinostat on central nervous system (CNS) inflammatory diseases remain incomplete.
Here, this study investigates the effects of vorinostat on human CD14(+) monocyte-derived dendritic cells (DCs) and mouse immature DC in vitro.
Furthermore, we explore the therapeutic effects and cellular mechanisms of vorinostat on animal model of multiple sclerosis, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) in vivo.
Our findings demonstrate that vorinostat inhibited human CD14(+) monocyte-derived DCs differentiation, maturation, endocytosis, and further inhibited mDCs' stimulation of allogeneic T-cell proliferation.
In addition, vorinostat inhibited DC-directed Th1- (Type 1T helper) and Th17-polarizing cytokine production.
Furthermore, vorinostat ameliorated Th1- and Th17-mediated EAE by reducing CNS inflammation and demyelination.
What's more, Th1 and Th17 cell functions were suppressed in vorinostat-treated EAE mice.
Finally, vorinostat suppressed expression of costimulatory molecules of DC in EAE mice.
These suggest therapeutic effects of vorinostat on EAE which may by suppress DCs and DCs-mediated Th1 and Th17 cell functions.
Our findings warrant further investigation in the potential of vorinostat for the treatment of human multiple sclerosis.
Copyright © 2012.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
PMID: 22859697
The spectrum of neuromyelitis optica (NMO) in childhood.
The evaluation of inflammatory central nervous system disorders in childhood with predominant involvement of the optic nerves and spinal cord has been greatly enhanced over the last decade with identification of a group of disorders unified by the detection of neuromyelitis optica (NMO)-IgG, an antibody targeting the central nervous system-predominant water channel aquaporin-4.
Clinical syndromes are predominated by the relapsing form of NMO but also include encephalopathic variants that can mimic acute disseminated encephalomyelitis.
Maintenance immunotherapy is used to prevent relapses in NMO-IgG-seropositive patients.
In contrast, NMO-IgG-seronegative children with NMO more commonly have a monophasic course (simultaneous occurrence of optic neuritis and transverse myelitis) and do not require remission-maintaining immunotherapy, but close surveillance is advised.
Current clinical, pathological, and pathogenetic knowledge is reviewed with a focus on clinical presentation, neuroimaging findings, serological investigations, and treatment of children with disorders within the spectrum of central nervous system aquaporin-4 autoimmunity.
PMID: 23039230
Oestrogen treatment of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis requires 17β-oestradiol-receptor-positive B cells that up-regulate PD-1 on CD4+ Foxp3+ regulatory T cells.
It is now well accepted that sex hormones have immunoregulatory activity and may prevent exacerbations in multiple sclerosis during pregnancy.
Our previous studies demonstrated that oestrogen (17β-oestradiol; E(2) ) protection against experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) is mediated mainly through oestrogen receptor-α (ERα) and the membrane receptor G-protein-coupled receptor 30 (GPR30) and is abrogated in the absence of B cells and the co-inhibitory receptor, Programmed Death-1 (PD-1).
To critically evaluate the cell source of the E2 and PD-1 co-inhibitory pathways in EAE regulation, we assessed the requirement for ERs on transferred B cells and downstream effects on expression of PD-1/PD-ligand on CD4+ Foxp3+ regulatory T (Treg) cells in B-cell-replenished, E2-treated B-cell-deficient (μMT-/-) mice with EAE.
The results clearly demonstrated involvement of ERα and GPR30 on transferred B cells that mediated the protective E2 treatment effect on EAE and further showed an E2-mediated B-cell-dependent up-regulation of PD-1 on CD4+ Foxp3+ Treg cells.
These findings identify regulatory B-cell populations as key players in potentiating Treg-cell activity during E2-mediated protection against EAE.
© 2012 The Authors.
Immunology © 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
PMID: 23383186
The physical and psychological impact of multiple sclerosis using the MSIS-29 via the web portal of the UK MS Register.
The MSIS-29 was developed to assess the physical and psychological impact of MS.
The aims of this study were to use the responses to the MSIS-29 via the web portal of the UK MS Register to: examine the internal properties of the scale delivered via the internet, profile the cohort, and assess how well the scale measures impact of disability on the potential workforce.
Between May 2011 and April 2012, 4558 people with MS completed the MSIS-29(v.1).
The responses were collated with basic demographic and descriptive MS data and the resulting dataset was analysed in SPSS(v.20).
Internal consistency was high (Cronbach's alpha 0.97 MSIS-29-PHYS, 0.92 MSIS-29-PSYCH).
The mean MSIS-29-PHYS score was 60.5 (50.6%) with a median of 62 and the mean MSIS-29-PSYCH score was 24.8 (43.8%) with a median of 24.
Physical scores increased with age and disease duration (p&lt;0.001, p&lt;0.001), but there was a weak negative relationship between psychological scores and age (p&lt;0.001).
The odds of people having an employment status of sick/disabled were 7.2 (CI 5.5, 9.4, p&lt;0.001) for people with a moderate physical score, and 22.3 (CI 17.0, 29.3, p&lt;0.001) for people with a high physical score (relative to having a low physical score).
This largest known study of its kind has demonstrated how the MSIS-29 can be administered via the internet to characterise a cohort, and to predict the likely impact of disability on taking an active part in the workforce, as a reasonable proxy for the effects of MS on general activities.
The findings examining MSIS-29-PHYS and MSIS-29-PSYCH scores against age support the use of two sub-scales, not a combined score.
These results underline the importance of using a scale such as this to monitor disability levels regularly in guiding MS care to enable people to be as active as possible.
PMID: 22144343
Natalizumab treatment perturbs memory- and marginal zone-like B-cell homing in secondary lymphoid organs in multiple sclerosis.
Natalizumab, an antibody against the α4 subunit of α4 integrins, has been approved for multiple sclerosis (MS) therapy based on its high efficacy and safety profile.
However, natalizumab has been associated with the development of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), a disorder caused by JC virus (JCV) infection.
In order to improve our understanding of the mechanism of action of natalizumab and to identify possible risk factors for PML development, we have characterized in detail the cell blood composition in MS patients treated with natalizumab for more than 30 months.
Natalizumab induced the release of lymphoid- but not myeloid precursor cells, which resulted in a chronic increase ofT-, NK- and particularly B cells.
While the percentage of recent thymic emigrants (RTEs), naϊve, effector or memory T cells remained unchanged during treatment, a higher percentage of memory- and marginal zone (MZ)-like, but not of naϊve B cells, was observed, which most likely is due to a decreased retention of these cells within the splenic MZ.
The ability of natalizumab to influence B-cell migration and homeostasis through the splenic MZ, where JCV has been detected, adds to the list of natalizumab effects and may contribute to PML development by disseminating JCV.
Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH &amp; Co.
KGaA, Weinheim.
PMID: 22084489
Anti-HHV-6 IgG titer significantly predicts subsequent relapse risk in multiple sclerosis.
Some of the strongest associations with MS onset are for human herpesviruses, particularly Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6).
Their role in MS clinical course is less clear, however.
Prospective cohort of 198 persons with clinically definite MS, followed 2002-5, and serum samples obtained from all subjects at study entry to measure anti-HHV-6 and anti-EBV (Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen [EBNA] and viral capsid antigen [VCA]) IgG titers.
Association with relapse evaluated using survival analysis; association with disability/progression evaluated using linear regression or multilevel mixed-effects linear regression.
For the 145 persons with relapsing-remitting MS followed beyond one review, anti-HHV-6 IgG titer was positively associated with the hazard of relapse with a dose-dependent trend (p = 0.003), not affected by adjustment for anti-EBV IgG titers, neither of which were independently associated with relapse.
There was no significant association between anti-human herpesvirus IgG titers and baseline-measured disability scores, or change in disability scores; however, anti-HHV-6 IgG titers were 2.8 times higher among progressive-course females than progressive-course males.
These findings suggest that, in addition to a potential etiological role in MS, HHV-6 infection or the immune response to HHV-6 antigens may have an effect on the risk of MS relapses and possibly on progressive courses of MS.
The observed effect was directly related to anti-HHV-6 IgG titers and may indicate that either HHV-6 infection or factors associated with an altered humoral immune response to HHV-6 may have an effect on MS clinical course.
Anti-HHV-6 IgG titer may be a useful prognostic factor in relapsing-remitting MS clinical course.
PMID: 22951995
Generation of an immortalized murine brain microvascular endothelial cell line as an in vitro blood brain barrier model.
Epithelial and endothelial cells (EC) are building paracellular barriers which protect the tissue from the external and internal environment.
The blood-brain barrier (BBB) consisting of EC, astrocyte end-feet, pericytes and the basal membrane is responsible for the protection and homeostasis of the brain parenchyma.
In vitro BBB models are common tools to study the structure and function of the BBB at the cellular level.
A considerable number of different in vitro BBB models have been established for research in different laboratories to date.
Usually, the cells are obtained from bovine, porcine, rat or mouse brain tissue (discussed in detail in the review by Wilhelm et al.).
Human tissue samples are available only in a restricted number of laboratories or companies.
While primary cell preparations are time consuming and the EC cultures can differ from batch to batch, the establishment of immortalized EC lines is the focus of scientific interest.
Here, we present a method for establishing an immortalized brain microvascular EC line from neonatal mouse brain.
We describe the procedure step-by-step listing the reagents and solutions used.
The method established by our lab allows the isolation of a homogenous immortalized endothelial cell line within four to five weeks.
The brain microvascular endothelial cell lines termed cEND (from cerebral cortex) and cerebEND (from cerebellar cortex), were isolated according to this procedure in the Förster laboratory and have been effectively used for explanation of different physiological and pathological processes at the BBB.
Using cEND and cerebEND we have demonstrated that these cells respond to glucocorticoid- and estrogen-treatment as well as to pro-infammatory mediators, such as TNFalpha.
Moreover, we have studied the pathology of multiple sclerosis and hypoxia on the EC-level.
The cEND and cerebEND lines can be considered as a good tool for studying the structure and function of the BBB, cellular responses of ECs to different stimuli or interaction of the EC with lymphocytes or cancer cells.
PMID: 22720838
Effects of an aqueous extract of North American ginseng on MOG(35-55)-induced EAE in mice.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory disease of the central nervous system, in which the release of reactive oxygen species by infiltrating immune cells contributes to demyelination.
American ginseng ( Panax quinquefolius ) is a natural health product with numerous beneficial properties, including anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant effects.
The purpose of this study was to determine whether ginseng could influence the course of the disease experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model of MS.
C57BL/6J mice were immunized with MOG((35-55)) peptide to induce EAE.
After clinical disease appeared, mice received either oral doses of an aqueous extract of ginseng (150 mg/kg body mass), or the vehicle.
Clinical symptoms were recorded, and spinal cord tissue samples were analyzed for pathological signs of disease.
The aqueous extract of ginseng significantly decreased (i) clinical signs of EAE, (ii) levels of circulating TNF-α, and (iii) central nervous system immunoreactive iNOS and demyelination scores, without a change in other neuropathological measures.
This study shows that an aqueous extract of ginseng may be able to attenuate certain signs of EAE, suggesting that it may be a useful adjuvant therapy for MS.
PMID: 22466791
Energy cost of walking and its association with gait parameters, daily activity, and fatigue in persons with mild multiple sclerosis.
Energy cost of walking (C(w)) is elevated in persons with multiple sclerosis (MS), perhaps because of gait impairment, and may impact daily activity and fatigue.
The authors examined for associations between C(w), spatiotemporal gait parameters, daily activity, and perceived fatigue in persons with mild MS.
Forty-four participants completed 4 trials of walking on a GAITRite mat and one 6-minute trial of walking on a treadmill at a constant, controlled speed of 54 m min(-1) while expired gases were analyzed for oxygen consumption.
Participants also completed the Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS) and wore a waist-mounted accelerometer for 7 days.
C (w) was significantly and inversely associated with gait speed (r = -.25) and stride length (r = -.32) and positively associated with double limb support (r = .27).
C (w) was significantly and inversely associated with daily accelerometer activity counts (r = -.35) and positively associated with FSS scores (ρ = .31).
The results support the development and application of rehabilitation strategies to address impaired gait parameters as an approach to improve C(w), daily activities, and fatigue.
PMID: 22968542
Commentary on 'disability outcome measures in multiple sclerosis clinical trials'.
In order to fully understand and explore the effectiveness of any intervention for the management of multiple sclerosis (MS), it is important to have robust, valid, reliable, and universally applied measures.
The recent article, 'Disability outcome measures in multiple sclerosis clinical trials' by Cohen, Reingold, Polman and Wolinsky (2012), explores this issue in regards to the effective measurement of MS-related disability, and the utilisation of patient-reported outcome measures, whilst highlighting the need for collaboration between the academic and clinical communities.
Although it is important to examine disability measures, it is also equally important to recognise that physical function is only one aspect of a person's experience; for example, quality of life and psychological well-being are also important aspects to assess.
The application of e-health technologies and patient registers could be a useful method of gaining additional information, using patient-reported outcomes.
This commentary explores these issues in relation to points raised by the Cohen et al. paper.
PMID: 22968543
Iron content of the pulvinar nucleus of the thalamus is increased in adolescent multiple sclerosis.
The objective of this paper is to assess abnormal phase values, indicative of increased iron content, using susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI)-filtered phase of the subcortical deep gray matter (SDGM) in adolescent multiple sclerosis (MS) and other neurological disorders (OND) patients, and in healthy controls (HC).
Twenty adolescent MS and eight adolescent OND patients and 21 age- and sex-matched HC were scanned on a 3T GE scanner.
Mean phase of abnormal phase tissue (MP-APT), MP-APT volume, normal phase tissue volume (NPTV) and normalized volume measurements were obtained for total SDGM, as well as specific structures separately.
Significantly increased MP-APT (28.2%, p&lt;.001) and MP-APT volume (82.7%, p&lt;.001), and decreased NPTV (-23.3%, p&lt;.001) and normalized volume (-15.5%, p&lt;.001) in the pulvinar nucleus of the thalamus was found in MS patients compared to HC.
MP-APT in MS patients was also increased in total SDGM (p=.012) and thalamus (p=.044).
Compared to OND patients, MS patients had increased MP-APT volume in the pulvinar nucleus of the thalamus (p=.044) and caudate (p=.045).
Increased MP-APT of the SDGM structures were associated with increased T2 and T1 lesion burden and brain atrophy in MS patients.
Adolescent MS patients showed increased iron content in the SDGM compared to OND patients and HC.
PMID: 22968544
Efficacy and safety of beta-interferon in Thai patients with demyelinating diseases.
The efficacy of beta-interferon (IFN-β) treatment in Thai patients with demyelinating diseases has not been reported.
To evaluate the efficacy and any adverse drug reactions of IFN-β therapy in Thai patients, for each group of demyelinating diseases.
We retrospectively reviewed data of Thai patients with multiple sclerosis (MS), neuromyelitis optica (NMO) and NMO spectrum disorders (NMOSDs) who attended the MS Clinic at Siriraj Hospital, Thailand from March 2000 to October 2011.
We reviewed those 73 patients who received IFN-β.
We evaluated the drug's efficacy over 2 years and any adverse drug reactions among these patients.
Of the 40 MS patients who received IFN-β, 26 adhered to the medication for at least 2 years.
In addition, 27 NMO/NMOSDs patients who had been diagnosed with MS were treated as such with IFN-β.
In the true MS group, the pre- and post-treatment annualized relapse rates (ARR) were 1.25 and 0.59, respectively, so there was a reduction of 52.8% (p = 0.004).
In addition, in 69.2% of the patients, IFN-β also showed beneficial effects by prolonging the time to first relapse to 15.9 months and stabilizing or decreasing progression of the disease.
In contrast, no significant benefit was seen in the NMO/NMOSDs group.
On the contrary, an increase in EDSS was seen in 53.3 % of them.
The most common side effects seen were local skin reactions and flu-like symptoms.
Treatment with IFN-β was effective in reducing both ARR and disability progression in Thai patients with MS.
In contrast, we observed that giving IFN-β treatment to NMO/NMOSDs patients may lead to a worsening of symptoms.
PMID: 22277374
The therapeutic effect of mesenchymal stem cell transplantation in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis is mediated by peripheral and central mechanisms.
Stem cells are currently seen as a treatment for tissue regeneration in neurological diseases such as multiple sclerosis, anticipating that they integrate and differentiate into neural cells.
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), a subset of adult progenitor cells, differentiate into cells of the mesodermal lineage but also, under certain experimental circumstances, into cells of the neuronal and glial lineage.
Their clinical development, however, has been significantly boosted by the demonstration that MSCs display significant therapeutic plasticity mainly occurring through bystander mechanisms.
These features have been exploited in the effective treatment of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, an animal model of multiple sclerosis where the inhibition of the autoimmune response resulted in a significant amelioration of disease and decrease of demyelination, immune infiltrates and axonal loss.
Surprisingly, these effects do not require MSCs to engraft in the central nervous system but depend on the cells' ability to inhibit pathogenic immune responses both in the periphery and inside the central nervous system and to release neuroprotective and pro-oligodendrogenic molecules favoring tissue repair.
These results paved the road for the utilization of MSCs for the treatment of multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 23303521
The long-term cost-effectiveness of the use of Functional Electrical Stimulation for the correction of dropped foot due to upper motor neuron lesion.
Functional Electrical Stimulation (FES) for correction of dropped foot has been shown to increase mobility, reduce the incidence of falls and to improve quality of life.
This study aimed to determine how long the intervention is of benefit, and the total cost of its provision.
Retrospective review of medical records.
One hundred and twenty-six people with spastic dropped foot (62 stroke, 39 multiple sclerosis, 7 spinal cord injury, 3 cerebral palsy, 15 others) who began treatment in the year 1999.
All received common peroneal nerve stimulation, producing dorsiflexion and eversion time to the swing phase of gait using a heel switch.
Device usage, 10 m walking speed and Functional Walking Category (FWC) were recorded.
The median time of FES use was 3.6 years (mean 4.9, standard deviation 4.1, 95% confidence interval 4.2-5.6) with 33 people still using FES after a mean of 11.1 years.
People with stroke walked a mean of 45% faster overall, including a 24% training effect with 52% improving their FWC.
People with multiple sclerosis did not receive a consistent training effect but walked 29% faster when FES was used with 40% increasing their FWC.
The average treatment cost was £3,095 per patient resulting in a mean cost per Quality Adjusted Life Years of £15,406.
FES is a practical, long-term and cost-effective treatment for correction of dropped foot.
PMID: 22396437
Quality of life of multiple sclerosis patients: translation and validation of the Spanish version of Qualiveen.
Up until now there were no specific questionnaire translated into Spanish for evaluating urinary disorder specific health-related quality of life (HRQoL) associated with multiple sclerosis (MS).
Qualiveen is recommended by the European Association of Urology guidelines as a tool for evaluating neurogenic lower urinary tract dysfunction.
The objective was to translate the Qualiveen into Spanish, adapt it cross-culturally and validate it against the currently available tools.
A bidirectional translation of Qualiveen was undertaken by professional translators.
One hundred two Spanish MS patients were sent the Qualiveen and the ICIQ-SF questionnaires twice within a month.
The questionnaires were sent and received by mail and reviewed when the patients came for the scheduled visit.
Eighty-one patients participated.
The validation study showed that the Spanish version of Qualiveen has good internal consistency with Cronbach's coefficient superior to 0.80 for all the questionnaire's subdomains and also for the entire Qualiveen demonstrating high discriminative power.
Also the test-retest analysis proved internal stability of the Qualiveen (kappa coefficient between 0.81 and 0.89).
Finally, all the Qualiveen scores correlated with the ICIQ-SF final score.
The Spanish version of Qualiveen functions similarly to the English language version retaining its discriminating power.
It has shown it could be a valid instrument for discriminating between patients in a cross-sectional survey, as well as for measuring within subject changes over time thus evaluating the extent to which MS patients' HRQoL is impaired by urinary-related problems.
Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 23576302
Partial MHC class II constructs inhibit MIF/CD74 binding and downstream effects.
MIF and its receptor, CD74, are pivotal regulators of the immune system.
Here, we demonstrate for the first time that partial MHC class II constructs comprised of linked β1α1 domains with covalently attached antigenic peptides (also referred to as recombinant T-cell receptor ligands - RTLs) can inhibit MIF activity by not only blocking the binding of rhMIF to immunopurified CD74, but also downregulating CD74 cell-surface expression.
This bifunctional inhibition of MIF/CD74 interactions blocked downstream MIF effects, including enhanced secretion of proinflammatory cytokines, anti-apoptotic activity, and inhibition of random migration that all contribute to the reversal of clinical and histological signs of EAE.
Moreover, we demonstrate that enhanced CD74 cell-surface expression on monocytes in mice with EAE and subjects with multiple sclerosis can be downregulated by humanized RTLs, resulting in reduced MIF binding to the cells.
Thus, binding of partial MHC complexes to CD74 blocks both the accessibility and availability of CD74 for MIF binding and downstream inflammatory activity.
© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH &amp; Co.
KGaA, Weinheim.
PMID: 23207182
Stress caused adverse entanglement of the nervous and autoimmune systems: A case for MS.
The adverse role of stress in daily life, on human health has long been recognized and is being firmly substantiated by scientific investigation.
Though many comforts of the modern life are owed to progress in the post-industrial age, increased levels of stress, in daily life, are also attributed to it, as well.
Comparing life in the agrarian era with that of post industrial one, the change of the background sustained stress levels, among humans (not to mention Nature), is very dramatic.
Variations in overall living conditions and psyche can further aggravate the state of stress.
Living with such levels of stress - outside of the realm of evolutionary learned survival preparedness of human beings - is bound to wreak havoc with our mental and biological construct, rendering various levels of unease and diseases.
Multiple Sclerosis can be of such origin.
Medical Sciences has little to offer in the way understanding of the cause(s) of deterioration of brain cells, other than noting it as a kind of likely attack of the autoimmune system on the nervous system.
Following some observations made in the paper, a hypothesis for the onset and prevention of MS is put forward.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22246459
Lp-PLA2: inflammatory biomarker of vascular risk in multiple sclerosis.
A member of the A2 phospholipase superfamily, the enzyme lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 (Lp-PLA2), is involved in atherogenic processes.
Lp-PLA2 mass and activity were measured by the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and by a colorimetric method, respectively, and compared among 63 multiple sclerosis (MS) patients and 47 age-matched healthy controls (HCs).
Lp-PLA2 plasma levels were significantly higher in MS patients (236.7 ± 10 ng/ml) compared to HCs (197.0 ± 7 ng/ml) (p = 0.003), but LP-PLA2 activity did not differ between the two groups.
Both Lp-PLA2 plasma mass and activity were higher in secondary progressive (mass 247.0 ±15.5 ng/ml, p = 0.05; activity 156.1 ±6 nmol/min/ml, p = 0.003) compared to relapsing-remitting MS patients (mass 227.0 ± 16 ng/ml; activity 128.8 ± 5 nmol/min/ml) and compared to HCs.
Lp-PLA2 plasma activity was associated with measures of MS clinical disability.
However, this association was attenuated after adjustment for the components of lipid profiles.
PMID: 22694930
Genome-wide association studies of asthma indicate opposite immunopathogenesis direction from autoimmune diseases.
Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) of asthma have consistently implicated the ORM1-like 3 and gasdermin B (ORMDL3-GSDMB), IL33, IL-1 receptor-like 1 and IL-18 receptor 1 (IL1RL1-IL18R1), RAD50-IL13, thymic stromal lymphopoietin and WD repeat domain 36 region (TSLP-WDR36), and HLA-DR/DQ regions.
A GWAS of asthma was performed in a non-Hispanic white population.
A GWAS was performed in 813 Severe Asthma Research Program/Collaborative Studies on the Genetics of Asthma/Chicago Asthma Genetics Study cases and 1564 control subjects.
The GWAS results were compared with those of the published GWASs of autoimmune diseases.
Multiple single nucleotide polymorphisms in the TNFAIP3 interacting protein 1 (TNIP1) gene, which interacts with TNFAIP3 and inhibits the TNF-α-induced nuclear factor κB inflammation pathway, were associated with asthma: rs1422673 (P = 3.44 × 10(-7)) and rs10036748 (P = 1.41 × 10(-6), r(2) = 0.67).
rs1422673 was also associated with asthma in the published GABRIEL (P = .018) and EVE (P = 1.31 × 10(-5)) studies.
The minor allele T of rs20541 in IL13 is the risk allele for asthma but the protective allele for psoriasis.
The minor allele T of rs2395185 in HLA-DRA is the risk allele for asthma but the protective allele for ulcerative colitis.
The minor allele A of rs2872507 in GSDMB is the protective allele for asthma but the risk allele for rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn disease, and ulcerative colitis.
The T allele of rs10036748 in the TNIP1 gene is the minor protective allele for asthma but the minor or major risk allele for systemic lupus erythematosus and systemic sclerosis in non-Hispanic white or Chinese subjects, respectively.
Our study suggests that single nucleotide polymorphisms associated with both asthma and autoimmune diseases might have opposite effects on immunopathogenesis.
Copyright © 2012 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma &amp; Immunology.
Published by Mosby, Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22046772
Antibiotic prophylaxis considering patient outcome from percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy.
The main indications for PEG insertions are the following: stroke/CVA/diffuse cerebral vascular disease, neurological conditions, e.g.
head injury, motor neurone disease, Multiple Sclerosis etc.
Peristomal infection can sometimes complicate PEG placement.
Antibiotics, either prophylaxis or concurrent, can reduce the incidence of peristomal wound infection after PEG placement.
Seventy five patients outcome from Percutaneous Endoscopic Gastrostomy (PEG) were analysed in the period: September 1999 and October 2007 to the West Cumberland Hospital, Whitehaven (WCH) United Kingdom.
This paper was done to evaluate the practice in WCH and the outcome has helped us to implement the changes successfully to conform to the guidelines set out by the British Association of Gastroenterologists.
Our main objectives were to evaluate the antibiotic prophylaxis, the procedure and post procedure complications and the deaths after PEG tube insertion.
No immediate procedure complications; Infection was the most common postoperative complication; Antibiotics, either prophylaxis or concurrent, reduce the incidence of peristomal wound infection after PEG placement; Early PEG placement facilitates their transfer to a non-acute care environment.
PMID: 23504242
Influence of personality on the relationship between gray matter volume and neuropsychiatric symptoms in multiple sclerosis.
Research has revealed an association between personality traits and health outcomes, and in multiple sclerosis (MS), there are preliminary data showing a correlation between personality traits and brain volume.
We examined the general hypothesis that personality influences the relationship between gray matter volume (GMV) and cognitive/neuropsychiatric MS features.
Participants were 98 patients with MS who underwent magnetic resonance imaging and were tested with the Symbol Digit Modalities Test and the Neuropsychiatric Inventory, the latter providing measures of depression and euphoria that can be characteristic of MS, that is, cheerful indifference and disinhibition.
Personality traits were assessed with the NEO Five Factor Inventory.
We examined the correlation between personality traits and both GMV and symptoms, and then modeled mediation and moderation influences on the relationships between GMV and cognitive/neuropsychiatric features.
Linear regression modeling revealed that GMV (r = 0.54, p &lt; .001) and NEO Five Factor Inventory low conscientiousness (r = 0.36, p = .001) were associated with cognitive function, but no mediator or moderator effects were observed.
However, conscientiousness mediated the relationship between GMV and symptoms of euphoria (p = .002).
The moderator analysis revealed a significant influence of high neuroticism on the GMV-euphoria relationship (p = .029).
Low conscientiousness and high neuroticism are associated with neuropsychiatric complications in MS, and each influences the relationship between GMV and euphoria.
The findings suggest that patients with low conscientiousness are at higher risk for MS-associated cognitive dysfunction and neuropsychiatric symptoms, a conclusion that has implications for the emerging role of personality in clinical neuroscience.
PMID: 23668071
[Neuroimmunology: theoretical and clinical aspects].
The aspects of neuroimmune interactions (during cerebral ischemia and stroke--experimental and clinical data, demyelinating process in patients with multiple sclerosis,secondary immunodeficiency) are discussed in this article.
Literature overview and authors' experience are presented as well.
PMID: 22473770
Painful tonic spasm in neuromyelitis optica: incidence, diagnostic utility, and clinical characteristics.
To evaluate the diagnostic utility and clinical characteristics of painful tonic spasm (PTS) in neuromyelitis optica (NMO).
Retrospective study.
Two referral hospitals.
Forty patients who had NMO spectrum disorder with anti-aquaporin 4 autoantibody or met the revised diagnostic criteria for definite NMO; 35 patients with multiple sclerosis; and 41 patients with idiopathic acute transverse myelitis without anti-aquaporin 4 antibody.
The incidence and clinical characteristics of PTS in the different groups, diagnostic value of PTS in identifying patients with NMO, and predictors of PTS in NMO.
The incidence of PTS was significantly higher in the patients with NMO (10 patients [25.0%]) than in those with multiple sclerosis (1 patient [2.9%]) or idiopathic acute transverse myelitis without anti-aquaporin 4 antibody (1 patient [2.4%]).
Most PTS episodes (in 8 of 10 patients [80.0%]) in the NMO group occurred after a mean interval of 48.13 days from the onset of the first myelitis episode and were not accompanied by another demyelinating episode with its onset.
Painful tonic spasm associated with myelitis had a specificity of 98.7% for identifying the NMO group.
Myelitis at disease onset was a predictor of PTS in the NMO group (odds ratio = 6.545, presence vs absence).
Painful tonic spasm is a common symptom in NMO.
When associated with myelitis, it is relatively specific to patients with NMO and is most commonly observed during recovery from the first myelitis episode.
Patients with NMO presenting with myelitis at disease onset appear to be at higher risk for developing PTS compared with other patients with NMO.
PMID: 22555065
The development, preliminary validation and clinical utility of a shoe model to quantify foot and footwear kinematics in 3-D.
Functional electrical stimulation (FES) applied to the common peroneal nerve is commonly prescribed to correct both equinus and excessive foot inversion in swing and initial contact.
This paper presents the development of a simple shoe model, to allow quantification of 3-D shoe (foot and footwear) kinematics in clinical situations when footwear is required, e.g.
with FES systems requiring footswitches.
To preliminarily validate the shoe model, barefoot 'normal' adult data (n=11) processed using validated 3-D foot models, were reprocessed with the shoe model.
Outputs were compared through calculation of waveform similarity and correlation.
Clinical utility of the shoe model is demonstrated through the presentation of 3-D shoe kinematics, calculated from a cohort of existing unilateral common peroneal FES users (n=16), both with and without FES.
A trend of reduced inversion at mid-swing and initial contact was seen, although this was not found to be statistically significant (p≤0.0125).
The shoe model was found to be practical to use in a clinical environment, and has potential to contribute to the evidence base for interventions such as common peroneal FES.
Crown Copyright © 2012.
Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23478275
New markers of early cardiovascular risk in multiple sclerosis patients: oxidized-LDL correlates with clinical staging.
This study aimed to characterize a population of multiple sclerosis (MS) patients in terms of traditional and new cardiovascular risk factors and assess their putative correlation with clinical disease activity (evaluated by the Expanded Disability Status Scale [EDSS]).
Thirty relapsing MS patients and 66 subjects, matched by age and sex, were enrolled in this cross-sectional study.
For each subject, anthropometric data were collected and classical biochemical (including lipid profile, glucose and C reactive protein [CRP] levels) and novel markers (paraoxonase 1 [PON1] enzyme activity and contents of high-density lipoprotein [HDL] cholesterol, oxidized low-density lipoprotein [Ox-LDL], tumor necrosis factor [TNF]-alfa, vascular endothelial growth factor [VEGF] and adiponectin) were studied.
In patients group, 23 women and 7 men were included, aged 35.00 (28.25-40.25) years and scoring a median of 2.00 (1.50-3.13) in EDSS.
Comparing with controls, the most relevant differences encountered were: increased serum triglycerides (P&lt; 0.001), Ox-LDL (P&lt; 0.001) as well as Ox-LDL/LDL ratio and reduced small HDL (P=0.040), accompanied by a trend to increased VEGF concentration.
LDL content, especially Ox-LDL, showed positive and significant correlation with EDSS (r=0.458; P=0.011) and VEGF (r=0.453; P=0.014).
MS patients presented a profile of early CV risk, being Ox-LDL contents a putative good marker and having correlation with the clinical activity of the disease.
PMID: 21938671
Elliptical exercise improves fatigue ratings and quality of life in patients with multiple sclerosis.
Fatigue, reduced quality of life (QOL), and lower physical activity levels are commonly reported in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS).
This study evaluated the effects of elliptical exercise on fatigue and QOL reports in patients with MS.
Patients with MS (n = 26) completed the Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS), the Modified Fatigue Impact Scale (MFIS), and the Medical Outcomes Study 36-Item Short Form Health Survey (SF-36) before and after completing 15 elliptical exercise training sessions.
Changes in fatigue and QOL were assessed based on any changes in the fatigue and SF-36 questionnaires, and correlations between changes in each of the scales were made to determine whether a relationship was present between the fatigue and QOL measures.
Results showed significant improvement in FSS, MFIS, and five SF-36 subscales as a result of elliptical exercise.
The change in FSS correlated with change in two of the SF-36 subscales.
Elliptical exercise for patients with MS results in significant improvements in both fatigue and QOL.
These findings indicate that regular elliptical exercise could be a part of inpatient and outpatient MS rehabilitation programs.
PMID: 22295019
Environmental pathways to autoimmune diseases: the cases of primary biliary cirrhosis and multiple sclerosis.
The pathways leading to autoimmunity remain enigmatic despite numerous lines of experimental inquiry and epidemiological evidence.
The mechanisms leading to the initiation and perpetuation of specific diseases such as primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) or multiple sclerosis (MS) remain largely enigmatic, although it is established that a combination of genetic predisposition and environmental stimulation is required.
The growing number of genome-wide association studies and the largely incomplete concordance for autoimmune diseases in monozygotic twins concur to support the role of the environment (including infectious agents and chemicals) in the breakdown of tolerance leading to autoimmunity through different mechanisms.
In the present article we illustrate the current hypotheses related to an environmental impact on the onset of PBC and MS as two representative conditions investigated with complementary approaches.
Indeed, while a role of post-translational antigen modifications has been proposed for MS, this field remain unexplored in PBC where, conversely, most evidence is gathered from geoepidemiology and experimental data on xenobiotics or infectious agents.
PMID: 22461701
HLA-B7-restricted EBV-specific CD8+ T cells are dysregulated in multiple sclerosis.
It was hypothesized that the EBV-specific CD8(+) T cell response may be dysregulated in multiple sclerosis (MS) patients, possibly leading to a suboptimal control of this virus.
To examine the CD8(+) T cell response in greater detail, we analyzed the HLA-A2-, HLA-B7-, and HLA-B8-restricted EBV- and CMV-specific CD8(+) T cell responses in a high number of MS patients and control subjects using tetramers.
Content in cytolytic granules, as well as cytotoxic activity, of EBV- and CMV-specific CD8(+) T cells was assessed.
We found that MS patients had a lower or a higher prevalence of HLA-A2 and HLA-B7, respectively.
Using HLA class I tetramers in HLA-B7(+) MS patients, there was a higher prevalence of MS patients with HLA-B*0702/EBV(RPP)-specific CD8(+) T cells ex vivo.
However, the magnitude of the HLA-B*0702/EBV(RPP)-specific and HLA-B*0702/CMV(TPR)-specific CD8(+) T cell response (i.e., the percentage of tetramer(+) CD8(+) T cells in a study subject harboring CD8(+) T cells specific for the given epitope) was lower in MS patients.
No differences were found using other tetramers.
After stimulation with the HLA-B*0702/EBV(RPP) peptide, the production of IL-2, perforin, and granzyme B and the cytotoxicity of HLA-B*0702/EBV(RPP)-specific CD8(+) T cells were decreased.
Altogether, our findings suggest that the HLA-B*0702-restricted viral (in particular the EBV one)-specific CD8(+) T cell response is dysregulated in MS patients.
This observation is particularly interesting knowing that the HLA-B7 allele is more frequently expressed in MS patients and considering that EBV is associated with MS.
PMID: 22047971
Ocrelizumab in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: a phase 2, randomised, placebo-controlled, multicentre trial.
B lymphocytes are implicated in the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis.
We aimed to assess efficacy and safety of two dose regimens of the humanised anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody ocrelizumab in patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
We did a multicentre, randomised, parallel, double-blind, placebo-controlled study involving 79 centres in 20 countries.
Patients aged 18-55 years with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis were randomly assigned (1:1:1:1) via an interactive voice response system to receive either placebo, low-dose (600 mg) or high-dose (2000 mg) ocrelizumab in two doses on days 1 and 15, or intramuscular interferon beta-1a (30 μg) once a week.
The randomisation list was not disclosed to the study centres, monitors, project statisticians or to the project team at Roche.
All groups were double blinded to group assignment, except the interferon beta-1a group who were rater masked.
At week 24, patients in the initial placebo, 600 mg ocrelizumab, and interferon beta-1a groups received ocrelizumab 600 mg; the 2000 mg group received 1000 mg.
Our primary endpoint was the total number of gadolinium-enhancing lesions (GEL) and T1-weighted MRI at weeks 12, 16, 20, and 24.
Analyses were done on an intention-to-treat basis.
This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00676715.
218 (99%) of the 220 randomised patients received at least one dose of ocrelizumab, 204 (93%) completed 24 weeks of the study and 196 (89%) completed 48 weeks.
In the intention-to-treat population of 218 patients, at week 24, the number of gadolinium-enhancing lesions was 89% (95% CI 68-97; p&lt;0·0001) lower in the 600 mg ocrelizumab group than in the placebo group, and 96% (89-99; p&lt;0·0001) lower in the 2000 mg group.
In exploratory analyses, both 600 mg and 2000 mg ocrelizumab groups were better than interferon beta-1a for GEL reduction.
We noted serious adverse events in two of 54 (4%; 95% CI 3·0-4·4) patients in the placebo group, one of 55 (2%; 1·3-2·3) in the 600 mg ocrelizumab group, three of 55 (5%; 4·6-6·3) in the 2000 mg group, and two of 54 (4%; 3·0-4·4) in the interferon beta-1a group.
The similarly pronounced effects of B-cell depletion with both ocrelizumab doses on MRI and relapse-related outcomes support a role for B-cells in disease pathogenesis and warrant further assessment in large, long-term trials.
F Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Biogen Idec Inc.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22537857
Technology-aided programs for assisting communication and leisure engagement of persons with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: two single-case studies.
Technology-aided programs for assisting communication and leisure engagement were assessed in single-case studies involving two men with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Study I involved a 51-year-old man with a virtually total loss of his motor repertoire and assessed a technology-aided program aimed at enabling him to (a) write and send out text messages and have incoming messages read to him and (b) establish videophone connections with his children (i.e., establish video contact and communicate with them).
Study II involved a 66-year-old man with virtually no motor behavior and apparent depression and assessed a technology-aided program aimed at enabling him to (a) engage in leisure activities and make requests for basic needs and (b) use a low-demand messaging system.
The results of both studies were highly encouraging.
The participant of Study I could use the technology-aided program for effective communication and social interaction with multiple partners as well as for family interaction.
The participant of Study II could use the technology-aided program for leisure engagement, requests, and basic family contacts/communication.
The implications of technology for helping persons with severe ALS levels maintain an active and constructive role are discussed.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21902450
Factors influencing healthy aging with multiple sclerosis: a qualitative study.
The purpose of this study was to describe the factors influencing healthy aging from the perspective of the older person with multiple sclerosis (MS) in order to build curricula for MS self-management programs.
We sourced participants, older than 55 years with MS for more than 20 years, from a database of MS clinic and outpatient rehabilitation visits.
Recruitment continued until data saturation was reached (n = 18).
Semi-structured interviews explored perspectives on aging and health and lifestyle habits.
Demographic, lifestyle and perceived health status information was also gathered.
We analyzed the transcribed text for themes and theme relationships.
Work and social engagement, effective and accessible health care, healthy lifestyle habits, and maintaining independence at home were found to be critical proximal factors for healthy aging.
The presence of financial flexibility, social support, cognitive and mental health, and resilience provided a supporting foundation to these critical proximal factors.
These factors comprised a two-tiered model of healthy aging with MS.
This two-tiered conceptual model of health aging, based on the perspectives of older persons with MS, provides a potential framework for the development of MS self-management program curricula aimed at optimizing quality of life.
Further empirical testing may validate its utility in predicting healthy aging with MS.
PMID: 23204983
Tetracyclines and neuromuscular disorders.
Tetracyclines are a class of antibiotics which could act as neuroprotective molecules in several neurological disorders, such as Huntington disease, Parkinson disease, stroke and multiple sclerosis.
The main biological effects of tetracyclines are the inhibition of microglial activation, the attenuation of apoptosis and the suppression of reactive oxygen species production.
The anti-apoptotic effect of tetracyclines involves the mitochondrion, and the major target for neuroprotective effects of tetracyclines lies within the complex network that links mitochondria, oxidative stress and apoptosis.Neuromuscular disorders are due to dysfunction of motor neurons, peripheral nerves, neuromuscular junction, or skeletal muscle itself.
Animal studies have shown that minocycline could play neuroprotective effects in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, but these positive findings have not been replicated in patients.
Other neuromuscular disorders which tetracyclines may benefit are Guillain-Barré syndrome and other neuropathies, muscular dystrophies and mitochondrial disorders.
However, well-designed double-blind controlled trials are still needed.
Further studies are strongly needed to establish the most appropriate timing and dosage, as well as the indications for which tetracyclines could be effective and safe.Here, we review the neuroprotective effects of tetracyclines in animal models, the clinical studies in humans, and we focus on their potential application in patients with neuromuscular disorders.
PMID: 23312657
Neurobehavioral disorders.
Neurobehavioral disorders are composed of a large group of behavioral impairments seen in association with brain disease (e.g., stroke, multiple sclerosis, dementia, and neuro-oncological conditions), transient as well as permanent brain impairments (e.g., metabolic and toxic encephalopathies), and/or injury (e.g., trauma, hypoxia, and/or ischemia).
The neurorehabilitative assessment and management of such disorders is often poorly addressed in the context of overall neurological, psychiatric, and rehabilitative care.
Too often, more basic, yet critical, aspects of behavioral assessment and treatment are not addressed or only superficially addressed by evaluating clinicians.
Physicians often overly rely on pharmacological interventions as initial and/or sole treatment approaches rather than taking a pragmatic biopsychosocial approach that focuses on holistic disease state management.
This chapter provides readers with an overview of the common behavioral impairments associated with brain dysfunction due to disease, injury, or toxicity.
Details regarding the nature of impairments such as localization-related syndromes, affective disorders and personality disorders, among others are expounded.
Principles of neurobehavioral assessment and treatment are examined including general guidelines for eliciting a history and physical, behavioral analysis, and functional behavioral assessment.
General treatment caveats are provided including discussion of impairment and disability adaptation, and creation of positive behavioral supports.
The topic of pharmacological management of neurobehavioral disorders is covered in numerous other references including Chapter 33 of this text.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23204985
Cannabinoid modulation of neuroinflammatory disorders.
In recent years, a growing interest has been dedicated to the study of the endocannabinoid system.
The isolation of Cannabis sativa main psychotropic compound, Δ(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), has led to the discovery of an atypical neurotransmission system that modulates the release of other neurotransmitters and participates in many biological processes, including the cascade of inflammatory responses.
In this context, cannabinoids have been studied for their possible therapeutic properties in neuroinflammatory diseases.
In this review, historic and biochemical aspects of cannabinoids are discussed, as well as their function as modulators of inflammatory processes and therapeutic perspectives for neurodegenerative disorders, particularly, multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 24029182
Pediatric inflammatory diseases. Part I: multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory CNS disease characterized by multifocal areas of demyelination; usually it arises in young adults, but can also occur in children (under the age of 10) and adolescents (under the age of 18).
As in adult, pediatric MS (PMS) diagnosis is based on the demonstration of multiple demyelination episodes separated in time and spaces.
Diagnostic criteria realized for childhood are similar to those employed for adults.
Although clinical and imaging features of PMS can be similar to those of adults, the disease is often characterized by a more aggressive course and atypical imaging findings, with giant and pseudotumoral plaques.
Differential diagnosis between PMS and ADEM could be difficult: clinical findings and MRI are necessary; sometimes MRI follow-up is required for definitive diagnosis.
PMID: 22888087
Dealing with excess of zeros in the statistical analysis of magnetic resonance imaging lesion count in multiple sclerosis.
Lesion count observed on brain magnetic resonance imaging scan is a common end point in phase 2 clinical trials evaluating therapeutic treatment in relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis (MS).
This paper compares the performances of Poisson, zero-inflated poisson (ZIP), negative binomial (NB), and zero-inflated NB (ZINB) mixed-effects regression models in fitting lesion count data in a clinical trial evaluating the efficacy and safety of fingolimod in comparison with placebo, in MS.
The NB and ZINB models prove to be superior to the Poisson and ZIP models.
We discuss the advantages and limitations of zero-inflated models in the context of MS treatment.
Copyright © 2012 John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd.
PMID: 24029186
Pediatric Inflammatory Diseases. Part IV: Miscellaneous, Reye, PRES, Sarcoidosis.
Some rare neurological diseases affecting children have no well defined etiology and pathogenetic mechanisms.
In this article diseases like Reye syndrome, Behçet disease, pediatric neurosarcoidosis, Posterior Reversible Encephalopathy Syndrome are described.
Some of the main neuroradiological differential aspects are also critically considered.
Reye syndrome is characterized by symmetric thalamic, white matter and basal ganglia lesions, in children with recent history of salycilates or immunosuppressive drugs intake.
The most typical MRI feature of neurosarcoidosis is basilar meningeal thickening and enhancement with intraparenchymal enhancing nodules and white matter focal abnormalities.
The classical distribution of lesions helps differential diagnosis with infectious meningoencephalitis.
Differential diagnosis with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis his helped by the evidence of meningeal abnormalities.
Neuro-Behçet is characterized by mesodiencephalic lesions in children with encephalopathy and coexistence of oral and genital ulcers and ocular abnormalities.
PRES can be differentiated from vasculitis for the typical posterior white matter involvement and the different clinical features.
PMID: 22658530
[Neuro-encephalic features of tuberous sclerosis complex].
Tuberous sclerosis is a phacomatosis resulting from an autosomal dominant inheritance.
It is characterized by the presence of multiple hamartomas in various organs, especially the brain, the skin, the kidneys and the heart.
The diagnosis of tuberous sclerosis is based on imaging and clinical examination, where magnetic resonance imaging constitutes the key investigation showing characteristic brain lesions.
Neuro-encephalic manifestations may be particularly severe, and may even be life threatening.
The authors report personal cases series and review the literature highlighting epidemiology, clinical features and imaging of neuro-encephalic tuberous sclerosis.
Copyright © 2012 Société nationale française de médecine interne (SNFMI).
Published by Elsevier SAS.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22465283
Challenges in multi-plex and mono-plex platforms for the discovery of inflammatory profiles in neurodegenerative diseases.
Pro and anti-inflammatory cytokines are involved in disease onset and pathophysiology of multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease.
It is likely that panels of multiple cytokines provide a good reflection of disease status and can be used as biological markers in body fluids.
Different multi-plex platforms, Luminex-xMAP and Meso Scale Discovery, are able to detect multiple analytes in the same sample at the same time.
In this literature based review, we offer an overview of the multi-plex platforms and compare them with the golden standard ELISA in their ability to accurately and sensitively detect cytokines in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and blood (serum/plasma).
The detectability and levels of cytokines in multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease are promising but also show discrepancies between studies.
The current immuno-assays lack sensitivity for detection of various cytokines that have low concentrations of cytokines in CSF and blood, and therefore technical improvements are needed.
With such improvements the use of large panels of cytokines as inflammatory profiles may offer additional value in diagnosis, prognosis and therapeutic response in neurodegenerative diseases.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22835665
Invasive explorations in children younger than 3 years.
In children with drug-resistant focal epilepsy who are candidates for surgery, invasive exploration is sometimes required.
However, this is being controversially discussed for children younger than 3 years.
The question of its necessity, feasibility and its risks is often raised, since it concerns primarily lesional epilepsy and a lesionectomy might be proposed right away.
However, this attitude does not take into account the specificities of epilepsy at this age, including poor specificity of electroclinical semiology and the ongoing myelination challenging the interpretation of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
We retrospectively studied the records of children with drug-resistant epilepsy who were younger than 3 years of age at the time of their invasive exploration at our institution from 2000 to 2009.
We reviewed the clinical, imaging and electrophysiological data, and included post-operative outcome for those who underwent surgery.
26 Children met the inclusion criteria.
All had drug-resistant epilepsy that started at an average of 5.2 months (range 0-20 months) with multiple daily seizures in all and developmental delay in 16.
The average age at the time of exploration was 21.8 months (range 5-35).
In 20 children, subdural electrodes in combination with two or three depth electrodes were implanted, and in six children aged over 2 years a stereo-electro-encephalography (SEEG) was performed.
SEEG was considered technically difficult to achieve before the age of 2 years.
The tolerance of invasive exploration was good with a 3% morbidity consisting of one subdural hematoma during exploration by subdural electrodes, evacuated without any particular sequelae.
In 25 patients, the exploration permitted to propose a focal resection.
The surgical intervention was in the frontal lobe in 12 cases, the parietal lobe in six, the occipital lobe in two patients, and the temporal lobe in one child who underwent an additional resection.
Four children had a resection of two or three lobes.
Five underwent a second surgery, following a second invasive exploration.
Histologically, the resected tissue revealed focal cortical dysplasia in 21 cases (including three patients with tuberous sclerosis), two post-ischemic lesions, one dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor, and one gangliglioma associated with dysplasia.
The mean postoperative follow-up period was 51 months (range 4-110).
For the children operated on twice, follow-up was counted from the second surgery on.
Seventeen children (68%) had an outcome of Engel class 1.
In five (20%), seizure frequency was significantly improved (Engel class 3).
In two of three patients without improvement in seizure frequency (Engel class 4), a new SEEG is planned and the third is presently a candidate for hemispherotomy.
Invasive exploration is feasible, well tolerated and carries a low morbidity in children under 3 years of age.
At this age, it is indicated for drug-resistant lesional epilepsy associated with developmental delay.
It permits delineating the lesion, which is not possible with MRI.
The choice of the technique is in part age-dependent.
The discussion of its indication arises in the same way as in the older child.
Copyright © 2012 British Epilepsy Association.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22232355
Severe hypercalcemia following vitamin d supplementation in a patient with multiple sclerosis: a note of caution.
To describe a patient with multiple sclerosis (MS) who developed severe hypercalcemia, attributed to the additive effect of 5500 IU of cholecalciferol and 2020 mg of calcium daily.
Case report.
University hospital.
A 58-year-old woman with MS and osteoporosis presenting with acute-onset tremors and confusion.
Serum calcium and 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels.
The patient's corrected serum calcium level was 15.2 mg/dL (reference range, 8.7-10.1 mg/dL; to convert to millimoles per liter, multiply by 0.25), and her 25-hydroxyvitamin D level was 103 ng/mL (to convert to nanomoles per liter, multiply by 2.496).
The results of extensive laboratory tests to rule out hyperparathyroidism, malignant neoplasms, and other causes of hypercalcemia were unrevealing.
It is common practice to prescribe high-dose cholecalciferol to MS patients for its possible role in immunomodulation and relapse-rate reduction.
Nevertheless, cholecalciferol may increase serum calcium, and there seems to be an additive effect when patients simultaneously use calcium supplements.
This case underscores the need for physicians to be attentive to the possibility of hypercalcemia in patients treated with both high-dose cholecalciferol and calcium.
PMID: 22232353
Association between paroxysmal tonic spasms and neuromyelitis optica.
To determine the frequency of the association between tonic spasms and neuromyelitis optica (NMO) at our center.
An institutional review board-approved retrospective study of clinical, serological, and radiographic characteristics of patients with NMO.
Multiple sclerosis center.
Patients with NMO treated at our center between 1990 and 2008.
Records were examined for documentation of tonic spasms.
Of 110 patients with International Classification of Diseases code 341, 57 patients met diagnostic criteria for NMO.
Of these, 8 patients (14%) had documented typical tonic spasms (median age at onset, 39.5 years; range, 13.8-54.2 years).
Of those patients, 4 were African American, 3 were Hispanic, and 1 was white.
Only 1 was male.
The NMO-IgG antibody was found in 1 of 6 patients tested.
Tonic spasms appeared after a mean of 24.6 months (range, 0-91 months).
In 2 of 57 patients meeting NMO criteria, tonic spasms accompanied their initial episodes.
Seven of 8 patients who had tonic spasms responded to treatment with carbamazepine within 1 week.
Tonic spasms are associated with NMO more commonly than with multiple sclerosis and may be a presenting sign in both diseases.
PMID: 22253828
A functional variant in ERAP1 predisposes to multiple sclerosis.
The ERAP1 gene encodes an aminopeptidase involved in antigen processing.
A functional polymorphism in the gene (rs30187, Arg528Lys) associates with susceptibility to ankylosying spondylitis (AS), whereas a SNP in the interacting ERAP2 gene increases susceptibility to another inflammatory autoimmune disorder, Crohn's disease (CD).
We analysed rs30187 in 572 Italian patients with CD and in 517 subjects suffering from multiple sclerosis (MS); for each cohort, an independent sex- and age-matched control group was genotyped.
The frequency of the 528Arg allele was significantly higher in both disease cohorts compared to the respective control population (for CD, OR = 1.20 95%CI: 1.01-1.43, p = 0.036; for RRMS, OR = 1.26; 95%CI: 1.04-1.51, p = 0.01).
Meta-analysis with the Wellcome Trust Cases Control Consortium GWAS data confirmed the association with MS (p(meta) = 0.005), but not with CD.
In AS, the rs30187 variant has a predisposing effect only in an HLA-B27 allelic background.
It remains to be evaluated whether interaction between ERAP1 and distinct HLA class I alleles also affects the predisposition to MS, and explains the failure to provide definitive evidence for a role of rs30187 in CD.
Results herein support the emerging concept that a subset of master-regulatory genes underlay the pathogenesis of autoimmunity.
PMID: 22160641
Fingolimod potentiates the effects of sunitinib malate in a rat breast cancer model.
Most of the antiangiogenic strategies used in oncology principally target endothelial cells through the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) pathway.
Multiple kinase inhibitors can secondarily reduce mural cell stabilization of the vessels by blocking platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) activity.
However, sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), which is also implicated in mural cell recruitment, has yet to be targeted in clinical practice.
We therefore investigated the potential of a simultaneous blockade of the PDGF and S1P pathways on the chemotactic responses of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) and the resulting effects of this blockade on breast tumor growth.
Due to crosstalk between the S1P and PDGF pathways, we used AG1296 and/or VPC-23019 to inhibit PDGFR-β and S1PR1/S1PR3 receptors, respectively.
We showed that S1PR1 and S1PR3 are the principal receptors that mediate the S1P chemotactic signal on rat VSMCs and that they act synergistically with PDGFR-β during PDGF-B signaling.
We also showed that simultaneous blockade of the PDGFR-β and S1PR1/S1PR3 signals had a synergistic effect, decreasing VSMC migration velocity toward endothelial cell and breast carcinoma cell-secreted cytokines by 65-90%.
This blockade also strongly decreased the ability of VSMCs to form a three-dimensional cell network.
Similar results were obtained with the combination of sunitinib malate (a VEGFR/PDGFR kinase inhibitor) and fingolimod (an S1P analog).
Sunitinib malate is a clinically approved cancer treatment, whereas fingolimod is currently indicated only for treatment of multiple sclerosis.
Orally administered, the combination of these drugs greatly decreased rat breast tumor growth in a syngeneic cancer model (Walker 256).
This bi-therapy did not exert cumulative toxicity and histological analysis of the tumors revealed normalization of the tumor vasculature.
The simultaneous blockade of these signaling pathways with sunitinib malate and fingolimod may provide an effective means of reducing tumor angiogenesis, and may improve the delivery of other chemotherapies.
PMID: 22114753
The pathophysiology of chronic constipation.
Constipation is broadly defined as an unsatisfactory defecation characterized by infrequent stools, difficult stool passage or both.
The common approach to the pathophysiology of constipation groups the disorder into primary and secondary causes.
Primary causes are intrinsic problems of colonic or anorectal function, whereas secondary causes are related to organic disease, systemic disease or medications.
The normal process of colonic transit and defecation is discussed, and the etiology of constipation is reviewed.
PMID: 21828184
Progesterone and Nestorone facilitate axon remyelination: a role for progesterone receptors.
Enhancing the endogenous capacity of myelin repair is a major therapeutic challenge in demyelinating diseases such as multiple sclerosis.
We found that progesterone and the synthetic 19-norprogesterone derivative 16-methylene-17α-acetoxy-19-norpregn-4-ene-3,20-dione (Nestorone) promote the remyelination of axons by oligodendrocytes after lysolecithin-induced demyelination in organotypic cultures of cerebellar slices taken from postnatal rats or mice.
The intracellular progesterone receptors (PR) mediate the proremyelinating actions of Nestorone, because they are not observed in slices from PR knockout mice.
Notably, Nestorone was less efficient in heterozygous mice, expressing reduced levels of PR, suggesting PR haploinsufficiency in myelin repair.
Using mice expressing the enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) under the control of the proteolipid gene promoter, we showed that both progesterone and Nestorone strongly increased the reappearance of cells of the oligodendroglial lineage in the demyelinated slices.
In contrast to Nestorone, the pregnane derivative medroxyprogesterone acetate had no effect.
The increase in oligodendroglial cells by Nestorone resulted from enhanced NG2(+) and Olig2(+) oligodendrocyte progenitor cell (OPC) recruitment.
In cocultures of lysolecithin-demyelinated cerebellar slices from wild-type mice apposed to brain stem slices of proteolipid gene promoter-EGFP mice, Nestorone stimulated the migration of OPC towards demyelinated axons.
In this coculture paradigm, Nestorone indeed markedly increased the number of EGFP(+) cells migrating into the demyelinated cerebellar slices.
Our results show that Nestorone stimulates the recruitment and maturation of OPC, two steps which are limiting for efficient myelin repair.
They may thus open new perspectives for the use of progestins, which selectively target PR, to promote the endogenous regeneration of myelin.
PMID: 22220278
Validation of the danish version of functional assessment of multiple sclerosis: a quality of life instrument.
The functional assessment of multiple sclerosis (FAMS) is a disease-specific instrument that describes functional status of individuals with multiple sclerosis.
The instrument was originally developed in the US and has been adapted to different languages including Danish.
This study is a validation of the Danish version of FAMS in a sample of individuals referred to a four-week rehabilitation program at either of the two Multiple Sclerosis Rehabilitation centers in Denmark.
FAMS data were obtained through self-completed questionnaires from 190 individuals who attended the rehabilitation centers after referral by their general practitioner or specialist neurologist.
The validation of the FAMS included assessment of data quality, scale assumptions, acceptability, construct validity, and reliability.
Responsiveness was assessed by comparing individual FAMS scores at admission with the discharge score for groups of respondents who reported no change, improvement, or deterioration in their ability to cope with their illness.
The Danish version of FAMS appears to be an acceptable, valid, and reliable measure of current health and functional status of individuals with multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 22161990
Phagocytosis of neuronal debris by microglia is associated with neuronal damage in multiple sclerosis.
Neuroaxonal degeneration is a pathological hallmark of multiple sclerosis (MS) contributing to irreversible neurological disability.
Pathological mechanisms leading to axonal damage include autoimmunity to neuronal antigens.
In actively demyelinating lesions, myelin is phagocytosed by microglia and blood-borne macrophages, whereas the fate of degenerating or damaged axons is unclear.
Phagocytosis is essential for clearing neuronal debris to allow repair and regeneration.
However, phagocytosis may lead to antigen presentation and autoimmunity, as has been described for neuroaxonal antigens.
Despite this notion, it is unknown whether phagocytosis of neuronal antigens occurs in MS.
Here, we show using novel, well-characterized antibodies to axonal antigens, that axonal damage is associated with HLA-DR expressing microglia/macrophages engulfing axonal bulbs, indicative of axonal damage.
Neuronal proteins were frequently observed inside HLA-DR(+) cells in areas of axonal damage.
In vitro, phagocytosis of neurofilament light (NF-L), present in white and gray matter, was observed in human microglia.
The number of NF-L or myelin basic protein (MBP) positive cells was quantified using the mouse macrophage cell line J774.2.
Intracellular colocalization of NF-L with the lysosomal membrane protein LAMP1 was observed using confocal microscopy confirming that NF-L is taken up and degraded by the cell.
In vivo, NF-L and MBP was observed in cerebrospinal fluid cells from patients with MS, suggesting neuronal debris is drained by this route after axonal damage.
In summary, neuroaxonal debris is engulfed, phagocytosed, and degraded by HLA-DR(+) cells.
Although uptake is essential for clearing neuronal debris, phagocytic cells could also play a role in augmenting autoimmunity to neuronal antigens.
Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22870943
Active induction of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by MOG35-55 peptide immunization is associated with differential responses in separate compartments of the choroid plexus.
There is increasing awareness that, aside from producing cerebrospinal fluid, the choroid plexus (CP) might be a key regulator of immune activity in the central nervous system (CNS) during neuroinflammation.
Specifically, the CP has recently been posited to control entry of sentinel T cells into the uninflamed CNS during the early stages of neuroinflammatory diseases, like multiple sclerosis (MS) and its animal model experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE).
As the CP is compartmentalized into a stromal core containing fenestrated capillaries devoid of typical blood-brain barrier properties, surrounded by a tight junction-expressing choroidal epithelium, each of these compartments might mount unique responses that instigate the neuroinflammatory process.
To discern responses of the respective CP stromal capillary and choroidal epithelial tissues during evolving neuroinflammation, we investigated morphology and in situ expression of 93 immune-related genes during early stages of EAE induced by immunization with myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein peptide (MOG35-55).
Specifically, 3-D immunofluorescent imaging was employed to gauge morphological changes, and laser capture microdissection was coupled to an Immune Panel TaqMan Low Density Array to detail alterations in gene expression patterns at these separate CP sites on days 9 and 15 post-immunization (p.i.).
To resolve CP effects due to autoimmunity against MOG peptide, from those due to complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA) and pertussis toxin (PTX) included in the immunization, analysis was performed on MOG-CFA/PTX-treated, CFA/PTX-treated, and naïve cohorts.
The CP became swollen and displayed significant molecular changes in response to MOG-CFA/PTX immunization.
Both stromal capillary and choroidal epithelial tissues mounted vigorous, yet different, changes in expression of numerous genes over the time course analyzed - including those encoding adhesion molecules, cytokines, chemokines, statins, interleukins, T cell activation markers, costimulatory molecules, cyclooxygenase, pro-inflammatory transcription factors and pro-apoptotic markers.
Moreover, CFA/PTX-treatment, alone, resulted in extensive, though less robust, alterations in both CP compartments.
MOG-CFA/PTX immunization significantly affects CP morphology and stimulates distinct expression patterns of immune-related genes in CP stromal capillary and epithelial tissues during evolving EAE.
CFA/PTX treatment, alone, causes widespread gene alterations that could prime the CP to unlock the CNS to T cell infiltration during neuroinflammatory disease.
PMID: 23757766
Tobacco smoking and disability progression in multiple sclerosis: United Kingdom cohort study.
Tobacco smoking has been linked to an increased risk of multiple sclerosis.
However, to date, results from the few studies on the impact of smoking on the progression of disability are conflicting.
The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of smoking on disability progression and disease severity in a cohort of patients with clinically definite multiple sclerosis.
We analysed data from 895 patients (270 male, 625 female), mean age 49 years with mean disease duration 17 years.
Forty-nine per cent of the patients were regular smokers at the time of disease onset or at diagnosis (ever-smokers).
Average disease severity as measured by multiple sclerosis severity score was greater in ever-smokers, by 0.68 (95% confidence interval: 0.36-1.01).
The risk of reaching Expanded Disability Status Scale score milestones of 4 and 6 in ever-smokers compared to never-smokers was 1.34 (95% confidence interval: 1.12-1.60) and 1.25 (95% confidence interval: 1.02-1.51) respectively.
Current smokers showed 1.64 (95% confidence interval: 1.33-2.02) and 1.49 (95% confidence interval: 1.18-1.86) times higher risk of reaching Expanded Disability Status Scale scores 4 and 6 compared with non-smokers.
Ex-smokers who stopped smoking either before or after the onset of the disease had a significantly lower risk of reaching Expanded Disability Status Scale scores 4 (hazard ratio: 0.65, confidence interval: 0.50-0.83) and 6 (hazard ratio: 0.69, confidence interval: 0.53-0.90) than current smokers, and there was no significant difference between ex-smokers and non-smokers in terms of time to Expanded Disability Status Scale scores 4 or 6.
Our data suggest that regular smoking is associated with more severe disease and faster disability progression.
In addition, smoking cessation, whether before or after onset of the disease, is associated with a slower progression of disability.
PMID: 22530640
Discovery of fingolimod, the sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor modulator and its application for the therapy of multiple sclerosis.
Fingolimod (FTY720) is a first-in-class, orally active, sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P)-receptor modulator with a structure closely related to sphingosine.
The compound was discovered by chemical modification of a natural product, myriocin.
Phosphorylated form of FTY720 acts as a functional antagonist at S1P receptor type 1 (S1P(1)), inhibits lymphocyte egress from secondary lymphoid organs and shows immunomodulating effects.
Phase III studies in multiple sclerosis demonstrated that oral FTY720 had superior efficacy compared with intramuscular IFN-β1a (AVONEX(®)) with regard to reducing the rate of relapse and the number of inflammatory lesions in the CNS.
FTY720 has been approved as a new therapeutic drug for multiple sclerosis in more than 50 countries, including the USA, Japan and some of those in the EU.
PMID: 22034123
Validity of two new patient-reported outcome measures in systemic sclerosis: Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System 29-item Health Profile and Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy-Dyspnea short form.
Many patient-reported outcome (PRO) instruments used in systemic sclerosis (SSc) trials are limited by lack of validation, licensing fees, and complicated scoring systems.
We assessed the construct validity for discriminative purposes of 2 new PRO instruments, the Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System 29-item Health Profile (PROMIS-29) and the Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy-Dyspnea short form (FACIT-Dyspnea), measuring health status and dyspnea in SSc patients.
Seventy-three patients participated in a cross-sectional study at a tertiary SSc program.
PROMIS-29, FACIT-Dyspnea, and legacy PRO instruments used in clinical trials (Medical Research Council Dyspnea Score, St.
George's Respiratory Questionnaire, Health Assessment Questionnaire disability index, and Short Form 36) were administered.
Composite severity scores using an adaptation of the Medsger Disease Severity Index were generated using clinical, diagnostic, and laboratory information.
PROMIS-29 and FACIT-Dyspnea scores were compared with legacy PRO measures and composite severity scores.
The mean patient age (84% women) was 51 years (range 22-72 years).
The mean SSc disease duration from the onset of the first non-Raynaud's phenomenon symptom was 7.2 years (range 0-45 years).
Spearman's correlation coefficients across FACIT-Dyspnea and PROMIS physical functioning scores with legacy PRO instruments were generally high (range 0.50-0.86); those between PROMIS and FACIT-Dyspnea with composite disease severity scores were more modest, but statistically significant (range 0.33-0.48, P &lt; 0.01).
PROMIS-29 and FACIT-Dyspnea are valid instruments to measure the health status of SSc patients.
PROMIS-29 and FACIT-Dyspnea may be preferable to legacy instruments because they are freely available in multiple languages and simple to administer, score, and interpret.
Copyright © 2011 by the American College of Rheumatology.
PMID: 22606332
Water extract from the leaves of Withania somnifera protect RA differentiated C6 and IMR-32 cells against glutamate-induced excitotoxicity.
Glutamate neurotoxicity has been implicated in stroke, head trauma, multiple sclerosis and neurodegenerative disorders.
Search for herbal remedies that may possibly act as therapeutic agents is an active area of research to combat these diseases.
The present study was designed to investigate the neuroprotective role of Withania somnifera (Ashwagandha), also known as Indian ginseng, against glutamate induced toxicity in the retinoic acid differentiated rat glioma (C6) and human neuroblastoma (IMR-32) cells.
The neuroprotective activity of the Ashwagandha leaves derived water extract (ASH-WEX) was evaluated.
Cell viability and the expression of glial and neuronal cell differentiation markers was examined in glutamate challenged differentiated cells with and without the presence of ASH-WEX.
We demonstrate that RA-differentiated C6 and IMR-32 cells, when exposed to glutamate, undergo loss of neural network and cell death that was accompanied by increase in the stress protein HSP70.
ASH-WEX pre-treatment inhibited glutamate-induced cell death and was able to revert glutamate-induced changes in HSP70 to a large extent.
Furthermore, the analysis on the neuronal plasticity marker NCAM (Neural cell adhesion molecule) and its polysialylated form, PSA-NCAM revealed that ASH-WEX has therapeutic potential for prevention of neurodegeneration associated with glutamate-induced excitotoxicty.
PMID: 22713377
Early signs of memory impairment among multiple sclerosis patients with clinically isolated syndrome.
The study investigates primary and secondary verbal memory and motor/executive functions (response inhibition and strategy shifting ability) in multiple sclerosis (MS) patients with clinically isolated syndrome (CIS).
We studied 44 CIS patients and compared them to 49 patients with relapsing remitting MS (RR-MS) displaying mild disability and to a large cohort of age- and education level-matched healthy volunteers(n=230).
Results showed that both CIS and RR-MS patients evidenced a disproportionate impairment in the immediate and delayed recall of the second (as compared to the first) of two short narratives of the Logical Memory WMS-III subtest, and reduced performance on the Memory for Digits-Forward.
Performance of either group on the executive tasks was not impaired, showing evidence of a reversed speed-accuracy trade-off.
Illness duration emerged as a significant predictor of memory and executive task performance.
Clinical, psychoemotional, and brain imaging findings were also examined as potential correlates of memory deficits and disease progression among CIS patients.
These findings may signify early-onset decline of specific cognitive functions in CIS, which merits regular follow-up assessments and monitoring of psychoemotional adaptation and everyday functioning.
PMID: 22146604
The emerging relationship between neuromyelitis optica and systemic rheumatologic autoimmune disease.
Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) and NMO spectrum disorders (NMOSD) are associated with autoantibodies that target aquaporin-4 and, in many cases, multiple other autoantibodies, including antinuclear antibody and antibodies to extractable nuclear antigens.
The clinical syndromes that define NMO and NMOSD, especially longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis and optic neuritis, can also occur in the context of established rheumatologic diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus and Sjögren syndrome and other organ-specific autoimmune diseases.
These observations raise questions fundamental to both clinical practice and etiologic research.
For example, they could suggest that NMO is one manifestation of a genetic tendency toward humoral autoimmunity.
Alternatively, they might indicate that NMO is a central nervous system complication of a multisystem rheumatologic disease.
We describe the historical background of this controversy, summarize the current evidence that addresses NMO-systemic autoimmunity relationships, and discuss the practical implications for clinical management.
PMID: 22407028
Assessment of Epstein-Barr virus in blood from patients with multiple sclerosis.
Viruses such as Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) which can establish latent infections in the central nervous system or the immune system have been associated with chronic neurological disorders, including multiple sclerosis.
Results vary, therefore the aim of this study was to investigate the presence of EBV using both viral DNA and antibody screening techniques, using PCR and ELISA assays respectively, to evaluate viral presence in blood from control subjects and patients with multiple sclerosis.
Viral gene sequences for latent proteins EBNA-1 and LMP-1 and lytic gene BamH1-W were present equally in both patients and controls (&lt;7%).
Anti-EBV-VCA IgG positive cases were present in &gt;99% of all study subjects, and anti-EBV-VCA IgG immune status ratio showed a near-significant positive correlation with the EDSS in patients with multiple sclerosis.
In contrast, Anti-EBV-VCA IgM positive cases were significantly increased in patients (controls: 23.3%; patients; 41.9%; P = 0.046).
The IgM to IgG immune status ratio was near-significantly higher in patients with relapse episodes in the year preceding blood sampling (P = 0.058).
Results from this and previous studies have shown higher prevalence rates for EBV evaluating anti-EBV IgM positive cases against viral DNA positive cases.
Also, IgM, an innate immune response, showed an association with relapse episodes, suggesting viral re-activation as a contributing factor to these relapses.
PMID: 22286116
Epstein-Barr virus genotypes and strains in central nervous system demyelinating disease and Epstein-Barr virus-related illnesses in Australia.
To identify Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) genotypes and strains in samples from individuals with and without a first diagnosis of central nervous system (CNS) demyelinating disease (a possible precursor to multiple sclerosis) and patients with EBV-associated diseases in Australia.
Samples from 55 EBV DNA and serology positive subjects including individuals with (n = 17) and without (n = 21) a first clinical diagnosis of CNS demyelination and patients with EBV-related diseases (n = 17) were examined.
EBV genotype and strain were identified by sequence mutations within the Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen-2 region (EBNA-2) using DNA sequence analysis.
Both EBV genotypes, A and B, were detected (genotype A, 54/55, 98.2%; genotype B, 1/55, 1.8%).
Within genotype A, GD1 was the most commonly detected strain (42/54, 77.7%), followed by B95-8 (9/54, 16.7%) and M-ABA (3/54, 5.6%).
Genotype B, strain AG876, was found in one individual with CNS demyelinating disease.
EBV genotype A and the GD1 strain were the common EBV genotypes isolated from individuals with and without CNS demyelinating disease, and in subjects with various EBV-related diseases.
Although disease-specific genotypes or strains were not identified, this study provides useful insights into the molecular epidemiology of EBV infection in Australia.
Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.
PMID: 21699406
Angiotensin-converting enzyme gene polymorphism in patients with multiple sclerosis from Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Increased activity of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) in the blood and cerebrospinal fluid of patients with multiple sclerosis (MS), and the inhibition of ACE in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, suggested that ACE may play a role in the pathogenesis and progression of MS.
We recently published the first report on the potential association of MS and ACE I/D polymorphism in Slovenian and Croatian patients with MS, in which it was shown that the DD genotype might contribute to a higher risk of developing MS in men.
To confirm these findings in a similar ethnic population, we analyzed ACE I/D gene polymorphism in patients with MS from Bosnia and Herzegovina.
One hundred and seventy patients with MS and 170 healthy controls were genotyped by the polymerase chain reaction method.
There was no significant difference in the distribution of ACE I/D genotypes (p=0.783) or in the allelic frequencies (p=0.538) between patients with MS and control subjects.
When patients with MS were stratified by sex, no statistically significant differences in allele or genotype distributions were observed.
Finally, there was no indication of an impact of the ACE I/D genotype on disease course or severity.
The ACE I/D polymorphism is not a risk factor for development of MS, nor does it contribute to disease severity in this Bosnia and Herzegovina population.
PMID: 22732448
Genotype-phenotype correlation for non-HLA disease associated risk alleles in multiple sclerosis.
Recent advances in MS genetics have led to the successful identification of a number of novel disease associated non-HLA genes.
It is now becoming possible to begin to analyse the possible effects of these genes on aspects of disease phenotype where longitudinal clinical data is available.
We examined phenotypic impact of 10 non-HLA disease associated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 1003 patients with MS followed for an average of 14.1 years.
Association of SNPs with time to established disability milestones (Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) 4.0, 6.0, 8.0), onset of secondary progression and cross-sectional aspects of early phenotype were tested using survival analysis.
No SNP was associated with systematic deflection in time to disability milestones, age at onset or time to secondary progression.
Genotypic information from non-HLA associated SNPs is unlikely to inform individual patient prognosis in the clinical setting although minor phenotypic effects operative at specific phases of disease cannot be excluded.
This preliminary study provides a framework for future genotype-phenotype analysis in MS and will need to be replicated in independent patient cohorts.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22732449
CD5-positive B cell subsets in secondary progressive multiple sclerosis.
Previous studies have demonstrated that CD5(+) B cells produce more interleukin (IL)-10 than CD5(-) B cells and that CD5(+) B cells confer significant protection against experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE).
The objective of the present study was to determine whether CD5-positive B cell populations are associated with secondary progressive multiple sclerosis (SPMS) and to explore which subsets on CD5(+) B cells are associated with SPMS.
A total of 26 patients with SPMS, of whom 11 were treated with IFNβ (IFN-SPMS) and 15 were not treated (non-IFN-SPMS), and 19 healthy control (HC) subjects were included in the study.
Expression levels of CD11a, CD23, CD25, CD38, CD49d, CD80, CD86, CD138, CCR5, and CXCR5 on CD5(+) B cells in blood samples were examined by flow cytometry.
The percentage of CD5(+) B cells in the SPMS group was significantly lower than in the HC group.
Within the subsets of CD5(+) B cells, the expression of CD11a in the non-IFN-SPMS group was significantly decreased compared to the HC subjects.
Patients with SPMS showed lower CCR5, CD25, and CD138 positivity on CD5(+) B cells than HC subjects.
Our results indicate that CD5(+) B cell subsets might be associated with pathogenesis of SPMS.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21915943
Diffusion tensor imaging of the optic radiations after optic neuritis.
Trans-synaptic degeneration could exacerbate neurodegeneration in multiple sclerosis (MS).
We aimed to assess whether anterograde trans-synaptic degeneration could be identified in the primary visual pathway in vivo.
Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) was used to assess the optic radiations in 15 patients with previous optic nerve inflammation and 9 healthy volunteers.
A probabilistic atlas of the optic radiations was created from healthy diffusion tractography data.
Lengthwise profiles for DTI parameters (axial [λ(||) ], radial [λ(⟂) ] and mean diffusivity [MD], fractional anisotropy [FA] and the angle of deviation of the principal eigenvector [α]) were analyzed for patients and controls.
Patients also underwent multifocal visual evoked potential (mfVEP) assessments to characterize the latency and amplitude of cortical potentials.
Correlations were performed between mfVEP latency and amplitude in the left and right visual hemi-fields and DTI parameters in the contra-lateral optic radiations.
Patients displayed a significant decrease in λ(||) within the body of both optic radiations, which significantly correlated with loss of mfVEP amplitude.
Abnormal λ(⟂) and FA were detected bilaterally throughout the optic radiations in patients but the abnormality was not associated with amplitude reduction or latency prolongation of the mfVEP.
An abnormal α value was observed in the left optic radiations of patients, and the α value in the body of the optic radiations also correlated with mfVEP amplitude loss.
The assocation between bilateral DTI abnormalities within the optic radiations and loss of afferent electrical activity could indicate anterograde trans-synaptic degeneration occurs following optic neuritis.
Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 23291870
Ready or not: planning for health declines in couples with advanced multiple sclerosis.
This study explored how couples living with advanced multiple sclerosis approach planning for health changes together.
A qualitative descriptive approach was used, with multiple in-depth interviews.
Ten couples were interviewed, consisting of 10 participants with advanced multiple sclerosis and their 10 respective spouses.
Interviews were transcribed verbatim and analyzed for themes related to dyad decision making.
Particular focus was paid to how or if couples planned for worsening health, including advance care planning.
Characteristics of couples who had made plans for worsening health included a desire to make decisions ahead of time, work in a healthcare field, and a life-threatening health event for the care-giving partner.
Characteristics of couples who had not discussed plans for worsening health included diminished quality of communication between partners and hoping for a cure.
Findings suggest that providers may need to assess quality of communication between partners, because strained communication may negatively affect the process of informed healthcare decision making.
PMID: 23291872
An exploratory study of decision making by informal caregivers of individuals with multiple sclerosis.
The types of assistance informal caregivers provide has been well documented.
However, the day-to-day decisions and the resources caregivers use to make decisions have not been investigated.
This study explored the decisions made by informal caregivers of multiple sclerosis care recipients and the resources they use to inform those decisions.
A qualitative, exploratory-descriptive research design was used.
Two separate in-depth face-to-face, audiotaped interviews were completed with each caregiver.
Interviews were transcribed verbatim, and data were analyzed using thematic content analysis.
Results revealed that multiple sclerosis caregivers make decisions in four topic areas: healthcare, financial, social, and family.
Decisions increased in complexity and severity as the care recipient's disease progressed.
Triaging acute illnesses, managing medication side effects, and end-of-life decisions were the most difficult for caregivers.
Caregivers used a variety of resources to support their decision making and identified areas where resources were lacking.
By more fully understanding the types of decisions informal caregivers make and the resources they use to aid these decisions, healthcare professionals can develop interventions that support these devoted individuals, increasing the quality of life for both the caregiver and the care recipient.
PMID: 22547957
Can transcriptomics cut the gordian knot of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis?
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is an adult-onset degenerative disease characterized by the loss of upper and lower motor neurons, progressive muscle atrophy, paralysis and death, which occurs within 2-5 years of diagnosis.
Most cases appear sporadically but some are familial, usually inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.
It is postulated that the disease results from the combination of multiple pathogenic mechanisms, which affect not only motor neurons but also non-neuronal neighboring cells.
Together with the understanding of this intriguing cell biology, important challenges in the field concern the design of effective curative treatments and the discovery of molecular biomarkers for early diagnosis and accurate monitoring of disease progression.
During the last decade, transcriptomics has represented a promising approach to address these questions.
In this review, we revisit the major findings of the numerous studies that analyzed global gene expression in tissues and cells from biopsy or post-mortem specimens of ALS patients and related animal models.
These studies corroborated the implication of previously described disease pathways, and investigated the role of new genes in the pathological process.
In addition, they also identified gene expression changes that could be used as candidate biomarkers for the diagnosis and follow-up of ALS.
The limitations of these transcriptomics approaches will be also discussed.
PMID: 22952316
Pathogenesis of pediatric multiple sclerosis.
Onset of multiple sclerosis in childhood occurs in 3-5% of patients.
There is limited, but growing knowledge about the underlying pathobiology of pediatric MS.
It is crucial to better understand this area in order to address central questions in the field: 1) Can pediatric multiple sclerosis inform us about factors related to disease initiation and propagation? 2) What are the biomarkers of disease course in pediatric multiple sclerosis; 3) Does pediatric multiple sclerosis pathogenesis differ from adult-onset multiple sclerosis; 4) How can we optimize treatment in pediatric demyelinating diseases? 5) Can pediatric multiple sclerosis provide insights into the environmental risk factors for multiple sclerosis in general? Here we review the current knowledge of the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis in children, and address the five questions raised above.
PMID: 21777034
Brain lipid binding protein (FABP7) as modulator of astrocyte function.
Over a century ago, hyperplasia and hypertrophy of astrocytes was noted as a histopathological hallmark of multiple sclerosis and was hypothesized to play an important role in the development and course of this disease.
However until today, the factual contribution of astrocytes to multiple sclerosis is elusive.
Astrocytes may play an active role during degeneration and demyelination by controlling local inflammation in the CNS, provoking damage of oligodendrocytes and axons, and glial scarring but might also be beneficial by creating a permissive environment for remyelination and oligodendrocyte precursor migration, proliferation, and differentiation.
Recent findings from our lab suggest that brain lipid binding protein (FABP7) is implicated in the course of multiple sclerosis and the regulation of astrocyte function.
The relevance of our findings and data from other groups are highlighted and discussed in this paper in the context of myelin repair.
PMID: 22735460
Pharmacokinetics of fingolimod (FTY720) and a combined oral contraceptive coadministered in healthy women: drug-drug interaction study results.
Fingolimod has a novel mechanism of action in multiple sclerosis, being a first-in-class sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor modulator.
Because of a potential risk of fetal toxicity based on animal studies, women of childbearing potential are advised to take effective contraceptive measures during and for 2 months after stopping fingolimod therapy.
To assess whether the efficacy of a combined oral contraceptive (OC) could be compromised during fingolimod therapy, a steady-state, drug-drug interaction study of fingolimod with ethinylestradiol/levonorgestrel was performed in healthy female volunteers.
To assess the interaction between fingolimod 0.5 mg once daily and ethinylestradiol 30 μg/ levonorgestrel 150 μg once daily at a steady state.
31 healthy women received the combined OC only on Days 1 - 14, followed by OC plus fingolimod on Days 15 - 28.
In the presence of fingolimod, ethinylestradiol pharmacokinetics were unchanged, and levonorgestrel maximum plasma concentration at steady state and area under the concentration-time curve during a dosing interval increased by factors of 1.10 (90% CI 1.05 - 1.16) and 1.22 (90% CI 1.18 - 1.27), respectively.
Fingolimod therapy does not alter the pharmacokinetics of the combined OC ethinylestradiol/ levonorgestrel to a clinically significant degree.
Ethinylestradiol/levonorgestrel does not alter the pharmacokinetics of fingolimod.
Women receiving fingolimod therapy are able to use a combined OC as a means of effective birth control.
PMID: 22057152
Psychophysiological and electrophysiological testing of olfactory and gustatory function in patients with multiple sclerosis.
The olfactory (OF) and gustatory function in multiple sclerosis (MS) patients and possible influencing variables of the disease, such as depression or fatigue, were determined.
In an open prospective controlled clinical study 30 patients with MS and 30 healthy controls matched for age, sex and smoking-habits were investigated.
With Mini Mental State Examination cognitive dysfunction was excluded, with Expanded Disability Status Scale the patient's ability to accomplish the tests was ensured.
The severity of depression was measured with the self-reported Beck Depression Inventory.
The orthonasal olfactory function was derived with olfactory event related potentials (OERP) and TDI-score (Threshold, Discrimination and Identification, Sniffin' Sticks).
Retronasal olfactory function was tested with Taste-Powder-score, gustatory function with Taste-strip-score.
There was a significant loss of olfactory function measured with TDI-score [12/30 (40%), p = 0.002] and gustatory function [5/23 (21.7%), p &lt; 0.001] in MS-patients, 23.8% (5/21) of MS-patients showed hyposmia with OERPs, significantly correlating with the TDI-score (p = 0.03).
The Expanded Disability Status scale score inversely correlated with the TDI-score (p = 0.002).
This study confirms the incidence of olfactory disorder in MS-patients and reveals a frequent gustatory deficit.
The Identification subtest can be proposed as a marker of the OF in MS-patients: it includes complex cognitive tasks and may be influenced by depression and fatigue, which are common symptoms of MS.
It inversely correlates with the disability status.
PMID: 22806903
The extent of ultrastructural spinal cord pathology reflects disease severity in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) has been studied for decades as an animal model for human multiple sclerosis (MS).
Here we performed ultrastructural analysis of corticospinal tract (CST) and motor neuron pathology in myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) peptide 35-55- and MP4-induced EAE of C57BL/6 mice.
Both models were clinically characterized by ascending paralysis.
Our data show that CST and motor neuron pathology differentially contributed to the disease.
In both MOG peptide- and MP4-induced EAE pathological changes in the CST were evident.
While the MP4 model also encompassed severe motor neuron degeneration in terms of rough endoplasmic reticulum alterations, the presence of intracytoplasmic vacuoles and nuclear dissolution, both models showed motor neuron atrophy.
Features of axonal damage covered mitochondrial swelling, a decrease in nearest neighbor neurofilament distance (NNND) and an increase of the oligodendroglial cytoplasm inner tongue.
The extent of CST and motor neuron pathology was reflective of the severity of clinical EAE in MOG peptide- and MP4-elicited EAE.
Differential targeting of CNS gray and white matter are typical features of MS pathology.
The MOG peptide and MP4 model may thus be valuable tools for downstream studies of the mechanisms underlying these morphological disease correlates.
PMID: 22884303
Lysophospholipids and their receptors in the central nervous system.
Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) and sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P), two of the best-studied lysophospholipids, are known to influence diverse biological events, including organismal development as well as function and pathogenesis within multiple organ systems.
These functional roles are due to a family of at least 11 G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), named LPA(1-6) and S1P(1-5), which are widely distributed throughout the body and that activate multiple effector pathways initiated by a range of heterotrimeric G proteins including G(i/o), G(12/13), G(q) and G(s), with actual activation dependent on receptor subtypes.
In the central nervous system (CNS), a major locus for these signaling pathways, LPA and S1P have been shown to influence myriad responses in neurons and glial cell types through their cognate receptors.
These receptor-mediated activities can contribute to disease pathogenesis and have therapeutic relevance to human CNS disorders as demonstrated for multiple sclerosis (MS) and possibly others that include congenital hydrocephalus, ischemic stroke, neurotrauma, neuropsychiatric disorders, developmental disorders, seizures, hearing loss, and Sandhoff disease, based upon the experimental literature.
In particular, FTY720 (fingolimod, Gilenya, Novartis Pharma, AG) that becomes an analog of S1P upon phosphorylation, was approved by the FDA in 2010 as a first oral treatment for MS, validating this class of receptors as medicinal targets.
This review will provide an overview and update on the biological functions of LPA and S1P signaling in the CNS, with a focus on results from studies using genetic null mutants for LPA and S1P receptors.
This article is part of a Special Issue entitled Advances in Lysophospholipid Research.
Copyright © 2012.
Published by Elsevier B.V.
PMID: 23221338
IL-17A secretion by CD8+ T cells supports Th17-mediated autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
IL-17-producing CD8+ T (Tc17) cells are detectible in multiple sclerosis (MS) lesions; however, their contribution to the disease is unknown.
To identify functions of Tc17 cells, we induced EAE, a murine model of MS, in mice lacking IFN regulatory factor 4 (IRF4).
IRF4-deficient mice failed to generate Tc17 and Th17 cells and were resistant to EAE.
After adoptive transfer of WT CD8+ T cells and subsequent immunization for EAE induction in these mice, the CD8+ T cells developed a Tc17 phenotype in the periphery but could not infiltrate the CNS.
Similarly, transfer of small numbers of WT CD4+ T cells alone did not evoke EAE, but when transferred together with CD8+ T cells, IL-17-producing CD4+ (Th17) T cells accumulated in the CNS and mice developed severe disease.
Th17 accumulation and development of EAE required IL-17A production by CD8+ T cells, suggesting that Tc17 cells are required to promote CD4+ T cell-mediated induction of EAE.
Accordingly, patients with early-stage MS harbored a greater number of Tc17 cells in the cerebrospinal fluid than in peripheral blood.
Our results reveal that Tc17 cells contribute to the initiation of CNS autoimmunity in mice and humans by supporting Th17 cell pathogenicity.
PMID: 21945466
MRI signature in a novel mouse model of genetically induced adult oligodendrocyte cell death.
Two general pathological processes contribute to multiple sclerosis (MS): acute inflammation and degeneration.
While magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is highly sensitive in detecting abnormalities related to acute inflammation both clinically and in animal models of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), the correlation of these readouts with acute and future disabilities has been found rather weak.
This illustrates the need for imaging techniques addressing neurodegenerative processes associated with MS.
In the present work we evaluated the sensitivity of different MRI techniques (T(2) mapping, macrophage tracking based on labeling cells in vivo by ultrasmall particles of iron oxide (USPIO), diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and magnetization transfer imaging (MTI)) to detect histopathological changes in a novel animal model making use of intrinsic, temporally and spatially controlled triggering of oligodendrocyte cell death.
This mouse model allows studying the MRI signature associated to neurodegenerative processes of MS in the absence of adaptive inflammatory components that appear to be foremost in the EAE models.
Our results revealed pronounced T(2) hyperintensities in brain stem and cerebellar structures, which we attribute to structural alteration of white matter by pronounced vacuolation.
Brain areas were found devoid of significant macrophage infiltration in line with the absence of a peripheral inflammatory response.
The significant decrease in diffusion anisotropy derived from DTI measures in these structures is mainly caused by a pronounced decrease in diffusivity parallel to the fiber indicative of axonal damage.
Triggering of oligodendrocyte ablation did not translate into a significant increase in radial diffusivity.
Only minor decreases in MT ratio have been observed, which is attributed to inefficient removal of myelin debris.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22810870
Neurorehabilitation for other neurologic disorders.
Rehabilitation treatment and the interdisciplinary approach to care may improve the function of those with progressive neurologic disorders such as multiple sclerosis, Parkinson disease, ALS, muscular dystrophy, and neuropathy.
Appropriate goals and therapies are specific to the stage of the disease as well as the needs and values of the individual patient.
Preliminary evidence exists to support moderate aerobic and strengthening regimens in these patients.
Close monitoring and avoidance of fatigue are paramount.
Assistive technologies play an ever-increasing role in maintaining independence during all stages of the disease.
PMID: 23160276
Identification of a functional variant in the KIF5A-CYP27B1-METTL1-FAM119B locus associated with multiple sclerosis.
Several studies have highlighted the association of the 12q13.3-12q14.1 region with coeliac disease, type 1 diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis (MS); however, the causal variants underlying diseases are still unclear.
The authors sought to identify the functional variant of this region associated with MS.
Tag-single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis of the associated region encoding 15 genes was performed in 2876 MS patients and 2910 healthy Caucasian controls together with expression regulation analyses.
rs6581155, which tagged 18 variants within a region where 9 genes map, was sufficient to model the association.
This SNP was in total linkage disequilibrium (LD) with other polymorphisms that associated with the expression levels of FAM119B, AVIL, TSFM, TSPAN31 and CYP27B1 genes in different expression quantitative trait loci studies.
Functional annotations from Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) showed that six out of these rs6581155-tagged-SNPs were located in regions with regulatory potential and only one of them, rs10877013, exhibited allele-dependent (ratio A/G=9.5-fold) and orientation-dependent (forward/reverse=2.7-fold) enhancer activity as determined by luciferase reporter assays.
This enhancer is located in a region where a long-range chromatin interaction among the promoters and promoter-enhancer of several genes has been described, possibly affecting their expression simultaneously.
This study determines a functional variant which alters the enhancer activity of a regulatory element in the locus affecting the expression of several genes and explains the association of the 12q13.3-12q14.1 region with MS.
PMID: 23695501
A pragmatic parallel arm multi-centre randomised controlled trial to assess the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of a group-based fatigue management programme (FACETS) for people with multiple sclerosis.
Fatigue is a common and troubling symptom for people with multiple sclerosis (MS).
To evaluate the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of a six-session group-based programme for managing MS-fatigue (Fatigue: Applying Cognitive behavioural and Energy effectiveness Techniques to lifeStyle (FACETS)).
Three-centre parallel arm randomised controlled trial with economic evaluation.
Patients with MS and significant fatigue were randomised to FACETS plus current local practice (FACETS) or current local practice alone (CLP), using concealed computer-generated randomisation.
Participant blinding was not possible.
Primary outcomes were fatigue severity (Fatigue Assessment Instrument), self-efficacy (Multiple Sclerosis-Fatigue Self-Efficacy) and disease-specific quality of life (Multiple Sclerosis Impact Scale (MSIS-29)) at 1 and 4 months postintervention (follow-up 1 and 2).
Quality adjusted life years (QALYs) were calculated (EuroQoL 5-Dimensions questionnaire and the Short-form 6-Dimensions questionnaire).
Between May 2008 and November 2009, 164 patients were randomised; primary outcome data were available for 146 (89%).
Statistically significant differences favour the intervention group on fatigue self-efficacy at follow-up 1 (mean difference (MD) 9, 95% CI (4 to 14), standardised effect size (SES) 0.54, p=0.001) and follow-up 2 (MD 6, 95% CI (0 to 12), SES 0.36, p=0.05) and fatigue severity at follow-up 2 (MD -0.36, 95% CI (-0.63 to -0.08), SES -0.35, p=0.01) but no differences for MSIS-29 or QALYs.
No adverse events reported.
Estimated cost per person for FACETS is £453; findings suggest an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio of £2157 per additional person with a clinically significant improvement in fatigue.
FACETS is effective in reducing fatigue severity and increasing fatigue self-efficacy.
However, it is difficult to assess the additional cost in terms of cost-effectiveness (ie, cost per QALY) as improvements in fatigue are not reflected in the QALY outcomes, with no significant differences between FACETS and CLP.
The strengths of this trial are its pragmatic nature and high external validity.
Current Controlled Trials ISRCTN76517470.
PMID: 23447800
Cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis: a forgotten disability remembered.
Physicians first noted the presence of cognitive impairment in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) more than 160 years ago, yet it took clinicians until 2001 to codify a standard test to measure cognitive function.
We now know that cognitive impairment occurs in up to 65 percent of people with MS and usually lessens their ability to remember previously learned information.
So far, trials of drugs formulated to treat cognitive impairment have failed, but the authors remain optimistic that new approaches to diagnosis and drug development could lead to effective therapies in the future.
PMID: 23077021
Regulated microRNAs in the CSF of patients with multiple sclerosis: a case-control study.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs that regulate gene expression and serve as promising therapeutic targets in many diseases.
MiRNAs are also present in biological fluids and may be of use as disease biomarkers.
We evaluated whether miRNAs are differentially regulated in the CSF of patients with multiple sclerosis (MS).
The CSF of 53 patients with MS and 39 patients with other neurologic diseases (OND) was analyzed.
First, global miRNA profiling was assessed to screen for reported miRNAs, followed by quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR to validate candidate miRNAs.
After global miRNA profiling, we quantitatively confirmed miR-922 (p = 0.0001), miR-181c (p = 0.0007), and miR-633 (p = 0.0014) to be differentially regulated in patients with MS as compared with OND.
Importantly, miR-181c and miR-633 differentiated relapsing-remitting from secondary progressive MS courses with specificity up to of 82% and a sensitivity of 69%.
CSF-based miRNAs were differentially regulated in patients with MS as compared with OND and in different MS disease courses.
Despite the preliminary character of our case-control study, the results provide rationale for a confirmation study in larger MS cohorts.
PMID: 23202919
Relation between Pro-inflammatory Cytokines and Acetylcholine Levels in Relapsing-Remitting Multiple  Sclerosis Patients.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory, demyelinating and neurodegenerative disorder.
Since acetylcholine (ACh) is known to participate in the inflammatory response, we investigated the possible relationship between  pro-inflammatory cytokines and acetylcholine levels in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RR-MS) patients.
Levels of ACh and pro-inflammatory cytokines IL1-&amp;beta; and  IL-17 were measured both in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and sera of 22 RR-MS patients in the relapsing phase and in 17 control subjects affected by other non-neurological diseases (OND).
We observed higher levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1&amp;beta; and IL-17 in both CSF and serum of RR-MS patients compared to control subjects.
Moreover, ACh levels were lower in CSF and serum of RR-MS patients compared to levels of control subjects.
Although the relationship between high inflammatory cytokine levels and low ACh levels need to be further investigated in the future, our data suggest that IL-1&amp;beta;, and cytokines induced by it, such as IL-17 and ACh, may be involved in the pathogenesis  of MS.
PMID: 22074360
Mesenchymal stem cells prime proliferating adult neural progenitors toward an oligodendrocyte fate.
Oligodendrogenesis encompasses lineage specification of neural progenitor cells (NPCs) and differentiation into oligodendrocytes that ultimately culminates in the myelination of central nervous system axons.
Each individual process must be tightly regulated by extracellular and cell-intrinsic mechanisms, whose identities are barely understood.
We had previously demonstrated that soluble factors derived from rat mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) induce oligodendrogenesis in differentiating adult NPCs under differentiation conditions.
However, since lineage specification predominantly occurs in proliferating progenitors and not necessarily during early differentiation, we investigated if soluble factors derived from MSCs are able to prime NPCs to the oligodendroglial fate already under proliferation conditions.
Therefore, we analyzed the effects of a 3 weeks stimulation of adult NPCs under proliferation conditions with conditioned media derived from MSCs (MSC-CM) in terms of cell morphology, proliferation, cell-specific marker expression profile, response to growth factor withdrawal (GFW), cell-lineage restriction, and expression of glial fate determinants.
While MSC-CM did not affect the proliferation rate of NPCs, it boosted the formation of 2', 3'-cyclic-nucleotide-3'-phosphodieesterase (CNPase)- and myelin basic protein-expressing oligodendrocytes after GFW, even when cells were exposed to an astrogenic milieu.
Moreover, it reinforced the proper development of oligodendrocytes, since it ensured a sustained expression of the functional marker CNPase.
Finally, the presence of MSC-CM reduced the anti-oligodendrogenic determinant Id2 in proliferating NPCs, thus increasing the relative proportion of the pro-oligodendrogenic factor Olig2 expression.
In summary, MSCs prime proliferating progenitors and, thus, reinforce cell fate choice and accelerate differentiation toward the oligodendrocyte lineage.
The present findings underscore the potential use of MSCs in cell therapies for remyelination such as in multiple sclerosis and spinal cord injury.
Moreover, they urge the identification of the oligodendrogenic activity(ies) derived from MSCs to develop novel molecular therapies for demyelinating diseases.
PMID: 23095852
Utility of capture-recapture methodology to assess completeness of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis case ascertainment.
With the establishment of a national amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) registry in the United States, methods are needed to ascertain the completeness of case ascertainment, especially in view of the proposal to rely largely on existing data sources.
Data about ALS patients residing in the 5-county metropolitan Atlanta area (within the State of Georgia) from 2001 to 2005 were categorized according to their source--ALS Association, clinical (Emory Healthcare, community neurologist, Veterans Health Administration, Veterans Benefits Administration), Medicare and death certificates.
ALS diagnoses were verified using chart review.
Capture-recapture analyses were carried out using log-linear modeling, stratified by age and race.
The final model (based on 798 cases), which included the 4 main sources and 3 two-way interaction terms, yielded an estimated total population of 880 (95% CI 816-965), indicating that the combination of case-finding methods identified about 90.7% of cases.
The estimated 5-year period prevalence is 38.5/100,000 (95% CI 35.66-42.19).
This study highlights gaps in data based on existing data sources and illustrates a method for combining data from multiple sources to help facilitate the successful establishment of a US national ALS registry.
Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.
PMID: 21775715
Modulation of inhibitory strength and kinetics facilitates regulation of persistent inward currents and motoneuron excitability following spinal cord injury.
Spasticity is commonly observed after chronic spinal cord injury (SCI) and many other central nervous system disorders (e.g., multiple sclerosis, stroke).
SCI-induced spasticity has been associated with motoneuron hyperexcitability partly due to enhanced activation of intrinsic persistent inward currents (PICs).
Disrupted spinal inhibitory mechanisms also have been implicated.
Altered inhibition can result from complex changes in the strength, kinetics, and reversal potential (E(Cl(-))) of γ-aminobutyric acid A (GABA(A)) and glycine receptor currents.
Development of optimal therapeutic strategies requires an understanding of the impact of these interacting factors on motoneuron excitability.
We employed computational methods to study the effects of conductance, kinetics, and E(Cl(-)) of a dendritic inhibition on PIC activation and motoneuron discharge.
A two-compartment motoneuron with enhanced PICs characteristic of SCI and receiving recurrent inhibition from Renshaw cells was utilized in these simulations.
This dendritic inhibition regulated PIC onset and offset and exerted its strongest effects at motoneuron recruitment and in the secondary range of the current-frequency relationship during PIC activation.
Increasing inhibitory conductance compensated for moderate depolarizing shifts in E(Cl(-)) by limiting PIC activation and self-sustained firing.
Furthermore, GABA(A) currents exerted greater control on PIC activation than glycinergic currents, an effect attributable to their slower kinetics.
These results suggest that modulation of the strength and kinetics of GABA(A) currents could provide treatment strategies for uncontrollable spasms.
PMID: 23437178
Imatinib ameliorates neuroinflammation in a rat model of multiple sclerosis by enhancing blood-brain barrier integrity and by modulating the peripheral immune response.
Central nervous system (CNS) disorders such as ischemic stroke, multiple sclerosis (MS) or Alzheimers disease are characterized by the loss of blood-brain barrier (BBB) integrity.
Here we demonstrate that the small tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib enhances BBB integrity in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, an animal model of multiple sclerosis (MS).
Treatment was accompanied by decreased CNS inflammation and demyelination and especially reduced T-cell recruitment.
This was supported by downregulation of the chemokine receptor (CCR) 2 in CNS and lymph nodes, and by modulation of the peripheral immune response towards an anti-inflammatory phenotype.
Interestingly, imatinib ameliorated neuroinflammation, even when the treatment was initiated after the clinical manifestation of the disease.
We have previously shown that imatinib reduces BBB disruption and stroke volume after experimentally induced ischemic stroke by targeting platelet-derived growth factor receptor -α (PDGFR-α) signaling.
Here we demonstrate that PDGFR-α signaling is a central regulator of BBB integrity during neuroinflammation and therefore imatinib should be considered as a potentially effective treatment for MS.
PMID: 23441184
Blood-brain barrier permeability of normal appearing white matter in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) affects the integrity of the blood-brain barrier (BBB).
Contrast-enhanced T1 weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is widely used to characterize location and extent of BBB disruptions in focal MS lesions.
We employed quantitative T1 measurements before and after the intravenous injection of a paramagnetic contrast agent to assess BBB permeability in the normal appearing white matter (NAWM) in patients with relapsing-remitting MS (RR-MS).
Fifty-nine patients (38 females) with RR-MS undergoing immunomodulatory treatment and nine healthy controls (4 females) underwent quantitative T1 measurements at 3 tesla before and after injection of a paramagnetic contrast agent (0.2 mmol/kg Gd-DTPA).
Mean T1 values were calculated for NAWM in patients and total cerebral white matter in healthy subjects for the T1 measurements before and after injection of Gd-DTPA.
The pre-injection baseline T1 of NAWM (945±55 [SD] ms) was prolonged in RR-MS relative to healthy controls (903±23 ms, p = 0.028).
Gd-DTPA injection shortened T1 to a similar extent in both groups.
Mean T1 of NAWM was 866±47 ms in the NAWM of RR-MS patients and 824±13 ms in the white matter of healthy controls.
The regional variability of T1 values expressed as the coefficient of variation (CV) was comparable between the two groups at baseline, but not after injection of the contrast agent.
After intravenous Gd-DTPA injection, T1 values in NAWM were more variable in RR-MS patients (CV = 0.198±0.046) compared to cerebral white matter of healthy controls (CV = 0.166±0.018, p = 0.046).
We found no evidence of a global BBB disruption within the NAWM of RR-MS patients undergoing immunomodulatory treatment.
However, the increased variation of T1 values in NAWM after intravenous Gd-DTPA injection points to an increased regional inhomogeneity of BBB function in NAWM in relapsing-remitting MS.
PMID: 23983034
Epidemiology in multiple sclerosis: a pilgrim's progress.
There was more neurology taught under Harold G.
Wolff at Cornell University Medical College in New York than perhaps anywhere else in the country when I attended from 1948 to 1952.
I took my residency at the Veterans Administration Hospital in the Bronx, New York, a teaching hospital of Cornell, with Wolff as my Director of Training.
While a resident, we thought we had found a treatment for multiple sclerosis.
To test our conclusion, the first Class 1 treatment trial ever conducted for multiple sclerosis was performed.
This showed no effect, but the participants began investigating multiple sclerosis among the 16 million persons at prime age for symptom onset who had served in the military in World War II.
This led me to study its epidemiology worldwide, beginning with a detailed review of all published population-based estimates of frequency.
Among these were nationwide surveys from Sweden, Denmark, Switzerland and later Norway and Finland, which showed in each country a concentration of the significantly high regions into contiguous areas forming a single 'focus' in each land, maximal in Denmark under the age of 15 years.
The primary locus of high frequency multiple sclerosis seemed to be in the south-central inland lake region of Sweden, with spread to its contiguous neighbours.
These concentrations in time and space indicated that multiple sclerosis was a disease probably acquired in early adolescence.
Migration studies supported this: moves from high to low showed retention of birthplace risk only for those aged &gt;15 years, whereas opposite moves indicated susceptibility limited to some 11-45 year olds.
Epidemics of multiple sclerosis would suggest the disease is not only acquired but also infectious.
If an infectious origin were true, transmission would have to occur before clinical onset, and would have to involve a much greater number of subjects than clinically involved.
I believe there have been epidemics in Iceland, Shetland-Orkney and the Faroe Islands.
On the Faroes there were no cases of multiple sclerosis among native-born resident Faroese from 1900 until 1943, when the first of 21 cases had clinical onset, heralding a type 1 epidemic with peak incidence rates &gt;10 per 100,000 for 1945-46.
British troops who occupied the islands from April 1940 to September 1945 we believe brought a widespread (because of the scatter of Faroese cases), asymptomatic (because they were healthy troops), persistent infection we called the primary multiple sclerosis affection that involved a large proportion of Faroese, with clinical multiple sclerosis ensuing in a very small proportion.
Primary multiple sclerosis affection itself may have been manifest there as a newly introduced cause of acute infectious gastroenteritis and is possibly the underlying cause of multiple sclerosis in general.
PMID: 22258960
Interferon beta for secondary progressive multiple sclerosis.
Therapy with either recombinant beta-1a or beta-1b interferons (IFNs) is worldwide approved for Relapsing Remitting Multiple Sclerosis (RRMS).
A major unanswered question is whether this treatment is able to safely reverse or retard the progressive phase of the disease.
The main objective was to verify whether IFNs treatment in Secondary Progressive Multiple Sclerosis (SPMS) is more effective than placebo in reducing the number of patients who experience disability progression.
We searched the Cochrane Multiple Sclerosis Group's Trials Register (1995 to 15 February 2011), the reference lists of relevant articles and conference proceedings.
Regulatory agencies were used as additional sources of information.
We included all randomised, double or single blind, placebo-controlled trials (RCTs) evaluating the efficacy of IFNs versus placebo in SPMS patients.
Two review authors independently assessed all reports retrieved from the search.
They independently extracted clinical, safety and MRI data, using a predefined data extraction form, resolving disagreements after discussion with a third reviewer.
Risk of bias was evaluated to assess the quality of the studies.
Treatment effect was measured using Risk Ratio (RR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the binary outcomes and Standard Mean Difference with 95% CI for the continuous outcomes.
Five RCTs met the inclusion criteria, from which 3122 (1829 IFN and 1293 placebo) treated patients contributed to the analysis.
Included population was heterogeneous in terms of baseline clinical characteristics of the disease, in particular the percentage of patients affected by secondary progression with superimposed relapse ranging from 72% to 44%.
IFN beta 1a and 1b did not decrease the risk of progression sustained at 6 months (RR, 95% CI: 0.98, [0.82-1.16]) after three years of treatment.
A significant decrease of the risk of progression sustained at 3 months (RR, 95% CI: 0.88 [0.80, 0.97]) and of the risk of developing new relapses at three years (RR 0.91, [0.84-0.97]) were found.
The risk of developing new active brain lesions decreased over time but this data was obtained from single studies on Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), performed in subgroups of patients; in spite of no effect on progression, the radiological data supported an effect on MRI parameters.
The safety profile reflects what is commonly reported in MS IFN-treated patients.
Well designed RCTs, evaluating a high number of patients were included in the review.
Recombinant IFN beta does not prevent the development of permanent physical disability in SPMS.
We were unable to verify the effect on cognitive function for the lack of comparable data.
This treatment significantly reduces the risk of relapse and of short -term relapse-related disability.Overall, these results show that IFNs' anti-inflammatory effect is unable to retard progression, when established.
In the future, no new RCTs for IFNs versus placebo in SPMS will probably be undertaken, because research is now focusing on innovative drugs.
We believe that this review gives conclusive evidence on the clinical efficacy of IFNs versus placebo in SPMS.
PMID: 23463168
Protein fibrillation and nanoparticle interactions: opportunities and challenges.
Due to their ultra-small size, nanoparticles (NPs) have distinct properties compared with the bulk form of the same materials.
These properties are rapidly revolutionizing many areas of medicine and technology.
NPs are recognized as promising and powerful tools to fight against the human brain diseases such as multiple sclerosis or Alzheimer's disease.
In this review, after an introductory part on the nature of protein fibrillation and the existing approaches for its investigations, the effects of NPs on the fibrillation process have been considered.
More specifically, the role of biophysicochemical properties of NPs, which define their affinity for protein monomers, unfolded monomers, oligomers, critical nuclei, and other prefibrillar states, together with their influence on protein fibrillation kinetics has been described in detail.
In addition, current and possible-future strategies for controlling the desired effect of NPs and their corresponding effects on the conformational changes of the proteins, which have significant roles in the fibrillation process, have been presented.
PMID: 22897153
Dimethyl fumarate - only an anti-psoriatic medication?
Fumaric acid esters have been used successfully in the therapy of psoriasis vulgaris since 1959.
In the last 17 years, many of the underlying mechanisms of anti-psoriatic action, such as a Th1/Th2 shift, a suppression of important leukocyte adhesion molecules, the induction of pro-apoptotic pathways in T-cells and recently anti-angiogenic action, have been discovered.
Based on the knowledge of these immunomodulatory characteristics, fumaric acid esters have been shown to be effective or potentially effective in a multitude of dermatological as well as non-dermatological diseases.
The range of new therapeutic targets reaches from multiple sclerosis to illnesses such as necrobiosis lipoidica, granuloma annulare and sarcoidosis.
Experimental approaches offer promising, although preliminary, results on the treatment of cancer, malaria, chronic inflammatory lung diseases, and Huntington disease, to name but a few.
This valued and well-known drug mainly prescribed by dermatologists is now experiencing a renaissance far beyond dermatologic applications.
© The Authors • Journal compilation © Blackwell Verlag GmbH, Berlin.
PMID: 23739916
HLA-DR15-derived self-peptides are involved in increased autologous T cell proliferation in multiple sclerosis.
The HLA-DR15 haplotype confers the largest part of the genetic risk to develop multiple sclerosis, a prototypic CD4+ T cell-mediated autoimmune disease.
The mechanisms how certain HLA-class II molecules functionally contribute to autoimmune diseases are still poorly understood, but probably involve shaping an autoimmune-prone T cell repertoire during central tolerance in the thymus and subsequently maintaining or even expanding it in the peripheral immune system.
Self-peptides that are presented by disease-associated HLA-class II molecules most likely play important roles during both processes.
Here, we examined the functional involvement of the HLA-DR15 haplotype in autologous proliferation in multiple sclerosis and the contribution of HLA-DR15 haplotype-derived self-peptides in an in vitro system.
We observe increased autologous T cell proliferation in patients with multiple sclerosis in relation to the multiple sclerosis risk-associated HLA-DR15 haplotype.
Assuming that the spectrum of self-peptides that is presented by the two HLA-DR15 allelic products is important for sustaining autologous proliferation we performed peptide elution and identification experiments from the multiple sclerosis-associated DR15 molecules and a systematic analysis of a DR15 haplotype-derived self-peptide library.
We identify HLA-derived self-peptides as potential mediators of altered autologous proliferation.
Our data provide novel insights about perturbed T cell repertoire dynamics and the functional involvement of the major genetic risk factor, the HLA-DR15 haplotype, in multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 23739915
MANBA, CXCR5, SOX8, RPS6KB1 and ZBTB46 are genetic risk loci for multiple sclerosis.
A recent genome-wide association study reported five loci for which there was strong, but sub-genome-wide significant evidence for association with multiple sclerosis risk.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the role of these potential risk loci in a large and independent data set of ≈ 20,000 subjects.
We tested five single nucleotide polymorphisms rs228614 (MANBA), rs630923 (CXCR5), rs2744148 (SOX8), rs180515 (RPS6KB1), and rs6062314 (ZBTB46) for association with multiple sclerosis risk in a total of 8499 cases with multiple sclerosis, 8765 unrelated control subjects and 958 trios of European descent.
In addition, we assessed the overall evidence for association by combining these newly generated data with the results from the original genome-wide association study by meta-analysis.
All five tested single nucleotide polymorphisms showed consistent and statistically significant evidence for association with multiple sclerosis in our validation data sets (rs228614: odds ratio = 0.91, P = 2.4 × 10(-6); rs630923: odds ratio = 0.89, P = 1.2 × 10(-4); rs2744148: odds ratio = 1.14, P = 1.8 × 10(-6); rs180515: odds ratio = 1.12, P = 5.2 × 10(-7); rs6062314: odds ratio = 0.90, P = 4.3 × 10(-3)).
Combining our data with results from the previous genome-wide association study by meta-analysis, the evidence for association was strengthened further, surpassing the threshold for genome-wide significance (P &lt; 5 × 10(-8)) in each case.
Our study provides compelling evidence that these five loci are genuine multiple sclerosis susceptibility loci.
These results may eventually lead to a better understanding of the underlying disease pathophysiology.
PMID: 23089549
In vitro assessment of mesenchymal stem cells immunosuppressive potential in multiple sclerosis patients.
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) are promising for multiple sclerosis (MS) treatment.
However, clinical results remain controversial, and no criteria are available for predicting the efficiency of MSC therapy.
Using an in vitro model of lymphocytes and MSC cocultivation we revealed that the Index of MSC Suppression of myelin-induced memory T cells proliferation was stronger than that of PHA-stimulated proliferation and inversely correlated with patients'EDSS score.
In vitro expression of CD119 (IFNGR1) in mitogen/myelin-stimulated T cells increased in the presence of MSC being inversely correlated with T-lymphocytes proliferation.
The Index of MSC Suppression and CD119 expression in T-lymphocytes may be useful when assessing MSC immunosuppressive potential in MS patients.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23862098
The development of hematopoietic and mesenchymal stem cell transplantation as an effective treatment for multiple sclerosis.
This article examines the current use and future implications of stem cell therapy in treating Multiple Sclerosis (MS).
MS is the most common neurological disease in young adults, affecting approximately two million people worldwide.
Currently there is no cure for MS.
The standard treatment of MS involves disease-modifying drugs, which work to alleviate the symptoms of MS.
However, these drugs carry adverse side effects and are ineffective in preventing disease progression in many MS patients.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) was first used in 1995 to treat patients with severe rapidly progressing MS.
The HSCT treatment protocol has evolved into a less intense conditioning regimen that is currently demonstrating efficacy in treating patients with variable disease severity-with best results in early-stage rapidly progressing MS patients with active CNS inflammation.
Mesenchymal stem cell therapy (MSCT) is an experimental stem cell therapy currently undergoing clinical trials.
Animal models and early clinical trials have shown promise that MSCT might be a low risk treatment to precipitate neuroregeneration and immunomodulation in MS patients.
Specifically, neuroprogenitor and placental-derived mesenchymal stem cells offer the best hope for a practical treatment for MS.
Stem cell therapy, and perhaps a combinatorial therapeutic approach, holds promise for a better treatment for MS.
PMID: 21594697
Cerebrospinal fluid/serum gradient of IgG is associated with disability at acute attacks of neuromyelitis optica.
Increased blood-brain barrier (BBB) disruption can be found in patients with neuromyelitis optica (NMO); however, its clinical implication and association with disability at acute attack remains obscure.
The purpose of the study was to evaluate the clinical significance of BBB disruption and the subsequent cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)/serum IgG gradient in NMO.
Retrospective analysis was made of acute-stage CSF samples from NMO (n = 40) and multiple sclerosis (MS; n = 26) patients.
The CSF/serum IgG gradient (QIgG), albumin ratio (Qalb), and IgG index were calculated.
Multivariate regression analysis was used to identify clinical and CSF variables associated with disability at acute attacks (extended disability scale score, EDSS) in both groups.
The EDSS was significantly associated with the QIgG (p &lt; 0.001), Qalb (p = 0.012), and number of cumulative attacks (p = 0.012) in NMO but not in MS with univariate analysis.
Length of spinal cord involvement was also associated with EDSS in NMO (p = 0.030).
However, multivariate analysis revealed that the QIgG was only significantly associated with EDSS in NMO (0.580; 95% CI -0.257, 0.961; p = 0.002).
The QIgG was also highly associated with the Qalb in NMO (p &lt; 0.001).
The QIgG may reflect systemic IgG leakage into the CNS and is strongly associated with disability at acute attacks in NMO, suggesting that BBB disruption can aggravate disease activity by facilitating systemic IgG infiltration into the CNS.
PMID: 22151889
The immunosuppressant FTY720 (fingolimod) enhances glycosaminoglycan depletion in articular cartilage.
FTY720 (Fingolimod) is a novel immunosuppressive drug investigated in clinical trials for organ transplantation and multiple sclerosis.
It acts as a functional sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) receptor antagonist, thereby inhibiting the egress of lymphocytes from secondary lymphoid organs.
As S1P is able to prevent IL-1beta induced cartilage degradation, we examined the direct impact of FTY720 on cytokine induced cartilage destruction.
Bovine chondrocytes were treated with the bioactive phosphorylated form of FTY720 (FTY720-P) in combination with IL-1beta or TNF-alpha.
Expression of MMP-1,-3.-13, iNOS and ADAMTS-4,-5 and COX-2 was evaluated using quantitative real-time PCR and western blot.
Glycosaminoglycan depletion from cartilage explants was determined using a 1,9-dimethylene blue assay and safranin O staining.
FTY720-P significantly reduced IL-1beta and TNF-alpha induced expression of iNOS.
In contrast FTY720-P increased MMP-3 and ADAMTS-5 mRNA expression.
Furthermore depletion of glycosaminoglycan from cartilage explants by IL-1beta and TNF-alpha was significantly enhanced by FTY720-P in an MMP-3 dependent manner.
Our results suggest that FTY720 may enhance cartilage degradation in pro-inflammatory environment.
PMID: 23222689
Removal of valproic acid by plasmapheresis in a patient treated for multiple sclerosis.
We present a case of a patient with multiple sclerosis who was treated with plasmapheresis and valproic acid.
We used therapeutic drug monitoring to determine whether plasma concentrations of valproic acid were kept within the therapeutic window and to determine the amount of valproic acid that was removed by plasmapheresis.
PMID: 23640763
Lack of adiponectin leads to increased lymphocyte activation and increased disease severity in a mouse model of multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a presumed autoimmune disease directed against central nervous system (CNS) myelin, in which diet and obesity are implicated as risk factors.
Immune responses can be influenced by molecules produced by fat cells, called adipokines.
Adiponectin is an adipokine with anti-inflammatory effects.
We tested the hypothesis that adiponectin has a protective role in the EAE model for MS, that can be induced by immunization with myelin antigens or transfer of myelin-specific T lymphocytes.
Adiponectin deficient (ADPKO) mice developed worse EAE with greater CNS inflammation, demyelination, and axon injury.
Lymphocytes from myelin-immunized ADPKO mice proliferated more, produced higher amounts of IFN-γ, IL-17, TNF-α, IL-6, and transferred more severe EAE than wild type (WT) lymphocytes.
At EAE peak, the spleen and CNS of ADPKO had fewer regulatory T (Treg) cells than WT mice and during EAE recovery, Foxp3, IL-10 and TGF-β expression levels in the CNS were reduced in ADPKO compared with WT mice.
Treatment with globular adiponectin in vivo ameliorated EAE, and was associated with an increase in Treg cells.
These data indicate that adiponectin is an important regulator of T-cell functions during EAE, suggesting a new avenue of investigation for MS treatment.
© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH &amp; Co.
KGaA, Weinheim.
PMID: 23244811
Using the Multiple Sclerosis Impact Scale to estimate health state utility values: mapping from the MSIS-29, version 2, to the EQ-5D and the SF-6D.
The 29-item Multiple Sclerosis Impact Scale (MSIS-29) is a psychometrically validated patient-reported outcome measure increasingly used in trials of treatments for multiple sclerosis.
However, it is non-preference-based and not amenable for use across policy decision-making contexts.
Our objective was to statistically map from the MSIS-29, version 2, to the EuroQol five-dimension (EQ-5D) and the six-dimension health state short form (derived from short form 36 health survey) (SF-6D) to estimate algorithms for use in cost-effectiveness analyses.
The relationships between MSIS-29, version 2, and EQ-5D and SF-6D scores were estimated by using data from a cohort of people with multiple sclerosis in South West England (n=672).
Six ordinary least squares (OLS), Tobit, and censored least adjusted deviation (CLAD) regression analyses were conducted on estimation samples, including the use of subscale and item scores, squared and interaction terms, and demographics.
Algorithms from models with the smallest estimation errors (mean absolute error [MAE], root mean square error [RMSE], normalized RMSE) were then assessed by using separate validation samples.
Tobit and CLAD.
For the EQ-5D, the OLS models including subscale squared terms, and item scores and demographics performed comparably (MAE 0.147, RMSE 0.202 and MAE 0.147, RMSE 0.203, respectively), and estimated scores well up to 3 years post-baseline.
Estimation errors for the SF-6D were smaller (OLS model including squared terms: MAE 0.058, RMSE 0.073; OLS model using item scores and demographics: MAE 0.059, RMSE 0.08), and the errors for poorer health states found with the EQ-5D were less pronounced.
We have provided algorithms for the estimation of health state utility values, both the EQ-5D and SF-6D, from scores on the MSIS-29, version 2.
Further research is now needed to determine how these algorithms perform in practical decision-making contexts, when compared with observed EQ-5D and SF-6D values.
Copyright © 2012 International Society for Pharmacoeconomics and Outcomes Research (ISPOR).
Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22641580
Differential proteomic analysis of renal tissue in mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis using iTRAQ technology.
Mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis (MePGN) is characterized by excessive mesangial cell proliferation and mesangial matrix expansion, which lead to glomerular sclerosis and obliteration and, in turn, to deteriorating renal function.
To identify and quantify the total proteins in renal tissues of MePGN patients, we used isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) technology, and then looked for differentially expressed proteome profiles in MePGN patients.
Eight-plex iTRAQ coupled with multiple chromatographic fractionation and tandem mass spectrometry was used to analyze total proteins in renal tissues of MePGN patients.
Proteins were identified using Mascot, compared to show any differential expression.
Among 512 distinct proteins identified, 113 proteins were up-regulated or down-regulated with a onefold or more alteration in levels across groups.
Among of them, there was significant variation in our present iTRAQ study, which contains lamin A, actin, profilin-1, annexin-A1 and A2 up-regulated, and antiquitin and aldolase B down-regulated.
iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic technology is efficiently applicable for protein identification and relative quantitation of proteomes of renal tissue.
Differentially expressed proteome profiles of MePGN patients are determined.
Further investigation of the molecular mechanism of the involved proteins may help to better understand the pathogenesis of MePGN and to discover novel biomarker candidates, which may enable the development of new approaches to diagnosis of MePGN.
PMID: 21969411
Association between chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency and multiple sclerosis: a meta-analysis.
It has been proposed by Zamboni and colleagues that multiple sclerosis is caused by chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency, a term used to describe ultrasound-detectable abnormalities in the anatomy and flow of intra- and extracerebral veins.
We conducted a meta-analysis of studies that reported the frequency of chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency among patients with and those without multiple sclerosis.
We searched MEDLINE and EMBASE as well as bibliographies of relevant articles for eligible studies.
We included studies if they used ultrasound to diagnose chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency and compared the frequency of the venous abnormalities among patients with and those without multiple sclerosis.
We identified eight eligible studies: all included healthy controls, and four of them also included a control group of patients with neurologic diseases other than multiple sclerosis.
Chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency was more frequent among patients with multiple sclerosis than among the healthy controls (odds ratio [OR] 13.5, 95% confidence interval [CI] 2.6-71.4), but there was extensive unexplained heterogeneity among the studies.
The association remained significant in the most conservative sensitivity analysis (OR 3.7, 95% CI 1.2-11.0), in which we removed the initial study by Zamboni and colleagues and added a study that did not find chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency in any patient.
Although chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency was also more frequent among patients with multiple sclerosis than among controls with other neurologic diseases (OR 32.5, 95% CI 0.6-1775.7), the association was not statistically significant, the 95% CI was wide, and the OR was less extreme after removal of the study by Zamboni and colleagues (OR 3.5, 95% 0.8-15.8).
Our findings showed a positive association between chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency and multiple sclerosis.
However, poor reporting of the success of blinding and marked heterogeneity among the studies included in our review precluded definitive conclusions.
PMID: 24019748
The genetics of multiple sclerosis: review of current and emerging candidates.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a complex disease in which environmental, genetic, and epigenetic factors determine the risk of developing the disease.
The human leukocyte antigen region is the strongest susceptibility locus linked to MS, but it does not explain the whole heritability of the disease.
To find other non-human leukocyte antigen loci associated with the disease, high-throughput genotyping, sequencing, and gene-expression studies have been performed, producing a valuable quantity of information.
An overview of the genomic and expression studies is provided in this review, as well as microRNA-expression studies, highlighting the importance of combining all the layers of information in order to elucidate the causes or pathological mechanisms occurring in the disease.
Genetics in MS is a promising field that is presumably going to be very productive in the next decade understanding the cross talk between all the factors contributing to the development of MS.
PMID: 22217263
Burden of a multiple sclerosis relapse: the patient's perspective.
Relapses are a common feature of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) and increasing severity has been shown to be associated with higher healthcare costs, and to result in transient increases in disability.
Increasing disability likely impacts work and leisure productivity, and lowers quality of life.
The objective of this study was to characterize from the patient's perspective the impact of a multiple sclerosis (MS) relapse in terms of the economic cost, work and leisure productivity, functional ability, and health-related quality of life (HR-QOL), for a sample of patients with RRMS in the US treated with immunomodulatory agents.
A cross-sectional, web-based, self-report survey was conducted among members of MSWatch.com, a patient support website now known as Copaxone.com.
Qualified respondents in the US had been diagnosed with RRMS and were using an immunomodulatory agent.
The survey captured costs of RRMS with questions about healthcare resource utilization, use of community services, and purchased alterations and assistive items related to MS.
The Work and Leisure Impairment instrument and the EQ-5D were used to measure productivity losses and HR-QOL (health utility), respectively.
The Goodin MS neurological impairment questionnaire was used to measure functional disability; questions were added about relapses in the past year.
Of 711 qualified respondents, 67% reported having at least one relapse during the last year, with a mean of 2.2 ± 2.3 relapses/year.
Respondents who experienced at least one relapse had significantly higher mean annual direct and indirect costs compared with those who did not experience a relapse ($US38 458 vs $US28 669; p = 0.0004) [year 2009 values].
Direct health-related costs accounted for the majority of the increased cost ($US5201; 53%) and were mainly due to increases in hospitalizations, medications, and ambulatory care.
Indirect costs, including informal care and productivity loss, accounted for the additional 47% of increased cost ($US4588).
Accounting for the mean number of relapses associated with these increased costs, the total economic cost of one relapse episode could be estimated at about $US4449, exclusive of intangible costs.
The mean self-reported Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) score, derived from the Goodin MS questionnaire, was significantly higher with relapse than with a clinically stable state (EDSS 4.3 vs 3.7; p &lt; 0.0001), while the mean health utility score was significantly lower with relapse compared with a clinically stable state (0.66 vs 0.75; p = 0.0001).
The value of these intangible costs of relapse can be estimated at $US5400.
The overall burden (direct, indirect, and intangible costs) of one relapse in patients treated with immunomodulatory agents is therefore estimated conservatively at $US9849.
This study shows that from a patient's perspective an MS relapse is associated with a significant increase in the economic costs as well as a decline in HR-QOL and functional ability.
PMID: 21998006
Prevention and treatment of MS: studying the effects of vitamin D.
Observational studies suggest that adequate vitamin D nutrition may reduce the risk of MS and affect the course of the disease.
Inherent limitations in these studies, however, preclude a causal interpretation.
Randomized controlled clinical trials are the next step to addressing whether vitamin D prevents MS or can favorably affect the course and progression of MS.
Here we briefly review the current literature on vitamin D and MS, both as a risk factor and potential treatment for MS with a focus on the issues and challenges in designing prevention and treatment clinical trials.
PMID: 22385519
Diabetes, coeliac disease, multiple sclerosis and chronic arthritis in first-degree relatives of patients with juvenile idiopathic arthritis.
To evaluate the occurrence of autoimmune diseases in first-degree relatives of children with juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) and to compare the figures with published population data.
Families of the 362 children with recently diagnosed JIA admitted to Rheumatism Foundation Hospital, Finland, from 1996 to 2001 were contacted by questionnaires regarding autoimmune diseases in family members.
Data were collected on type 1 diabetes, coeliac disease, multiple sclerosis and chronic arthritis, consisting mainly of JIA, rheumatoid arthritis, spondyloarthropathy or psoriatic arthritis.
In all, 21.4% of the 355 families with a patient with JIA had members with type 1 diabetes, coeliac disease, multiple sclerosis or chronic arthritis.
Thirty-three mothers and 23 fathers had type 1 diabetes, coeliac disease, multiple sclerosis or chronic arthritis in 15.2% (95% CI 11.6-19.4) of the families, and 23 mothers and 15 fathers had chronic arthritis in 10.7% (95% CI 7.7-14.5) of the families.
When compared with available research data, the prevalences of rheumatoid arthritis, spondyloarthropathy, psoriatic arthritis, paediatric type 1 diabetes and JIA (in siblings) were increased in JIA families.
Coeliac disease was as prevalent as in the population.
Autoimmune diseases cluster in families with a child with JIA.
© 2012 The Author(s)/Acta Paediatrica © 2012 Foundation Acta Paediatrica.
PMID: 21511689
Suicide attempts in multiple sclerosis.
The purposes of the study were (1) to estimate the risk of suicide attempts in multiple sclerosis (MS) patients in Denmark and compare the risk to the background population in the County of Funen, Denmark; (2) to estimate the risk of suicide attempts in MS patients receiving immunomodulating therapy compared with untreated patients.
The Danish MS Registry, the Danish MS Treatment Registry and the Suicide Attempt Registry are linked and merged together using a person identification number given to all persons residing in Denmark.
Among 404 MS patients, 15 patients had attempted suicide, although no increased risk for suicide attempts was found in MS patients.
No difference in number of suicide attempts in treated and untreated patients was found.
PMID: 23358486
Multiple sclerosis: reprogramming the immune repertoire with alemtuzumab in MS.
Results from two phase III trials show the potency of alemtuzumab—a T-cell and B-cell depleting antibody—in reducing clinical and paraclinical measures of disease activity in relapsing–remitting multiple sclerosis.
The effects of this immunotherapeutic agent highlight the relevance of T lymphocytes in the early pathogenesis of disease.
PMID: 23450612
Non pharmacological interventions for spasticity in multiple sclerosis.
Spasticity is commonly experienced by people with multiple sclerosis (MS), and it contributes to overall disability in this population.
A wide range of non pharmacological interventions are used in isolation or with pharmacological agents to treat spasticity in MS.
Evidence for their effectiveness is yet to be determined.
To assess the effectiveness of various non pharmacological interventions for the treatment of spasticity in adults with MS.
A literature search was performed using the Specialised Register of the Cochrane Multiple Sclerosis and Rare Diseases of the Central Nervous System Review Group on using the Cochrane MS Group Trials Register which among other sources, contains CENTRAL, Medline, EMBASE, CINAHL, LILACS, PEDRO in June 2012.
Manual searching in the relevant journals and screening of the reference lists of identified studies and reviews were carried out.
Abstracts published in proceedings of conferences were also scrutinised.
Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that reported non pharmacological intervention/s for treatment of spasticity in adults with MS and compared them with some form of control intervention (such as sham/placebo interventions or lower level or different types of intervention, minimal intervention, waiting list controls or no treatment; interventions given in different settings), were included.
Three review authors independently selected the studies, extracted data and assessed the methodological quality of the studies using the Grades of Recommendation, Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) tool for best-evidence synthesis.
A meta-analysis was not possible due to methodological, clinical and statistical heterogeneity of included studies.
Nine RCTs (N = 341 participants, 301 included in analyses) investigated various types and intensities of non pharmacological interventions for treating spasticity in adults with MS.
These interventions included: physical activity programmes (such as physiotherapy, structured exercise programme, sports climbing); transcranial magnetic stimulation (Intermittent Theta Burst Stimulation (iTBS), Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (rTMS)); electromagnetic therapy (pulsed electromagnetic therapy; magnetic pulsing device), Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulation (TENS); and Whole Body Vibration (WBV).
All studies scored 'low' on the methodological quality assessment implying high risk of bias.
There is 'low level' evidence for physical activity programmes used in isolation or in combination with other interventions (pharmacological or non pharmacological), and for repetitive magnetic stimulation (iTBS/rTMS) with or without adjuvant exercise therapy in improving spasticity in adults with MS.
No evidence of benefit exists to support the use of TENS, sports climbing and vibration therapy for treating spasticity in this population.
There is 'low level' evidence for non pharmacological interventions such as physical activities given in conjunction with other interventions, and for magnetic stimulation and electromagnetic therapies for beneficial effects on spasticity outcomes in people with MS.
A wide range of non pharmacological interventions are used for the treatment of spasticity in MS, but more robust trials are needed to build evidence about these interventions.
PMID: 22335434
Deletion of beta-2-microglobulin ameliorates spinal cord lesion load and promotes recovery of brainstem NAA levels in a murine model of multiple sclerosis.
We used genetic deletion of β2-microglobulin to study the influence of CD8(+) T cells on spinal cord demyelination, remyelination, axonal loss and brainstem N-acetyl aspartate levels during the acute and chronic phases of Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus (TMEV) infection.
We used β2m(-/-) and β2m(+/+) B10.Q mice (of H-2(q) background) normally susceptible to TMEV-induced demyelination.
Over the disease course, β2m(+/+) mice had increasing levels of demyelination and minimal late-onset remyelination.
In contrast, β2m(-/-) mice had steady levels of demyelination from 45-390 dpi and remyelination was extensive and more complete.
Early in the disease, brainstem NAA levels drop in both strains, but accordingly with remyelination and axonal preservation, NAA recover in β2m(-/-) mice despite equivalent brainstem pathology.
At 270 dpi, β2m(+/+) mice had significantly fewer spinal cord axons than β2m(-/-) mice (up to 28% less).
In addition, β2m(+/+) mice lost axons of all calibers, whereas β2m(-/-) mice had a modest loss of only medium- and large-caliber axons.
This study further supports the hypothesis that CD8(+) T cells are involved in demyelination, and axonal loss following Theiler's virus-induced demyelination.
© 2012 The Authors; Brain Pathology © 2012 International Society of Neuropathology.
PMID: 22440485
Self-reported fatigue and energy cost during walking are not related in patients with multiple sclerosis.
To determine whether there is a relationship between self-reported fatigue and the energy cost of walking (ECw), and how self-reported fatigue and ECw relate to physical functioning in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS).
Cross-sectional cohort study, using structural equation modeling.
Home environment and at a university medical center.
Patients (N=75) were obtained from a longitudinal study on outcome measurement and functional prognosis in early MS.
Patients were included if they were able to walk for 6 minutes without being assisted by a person.
The age range was between 28.0 and 69.7 years and the median Expanded Disability Status Scale was 2.5 (range, 1.0-6.5).
Not applicable.
Self-reported fatigue was measured with the Fatigue Severity Scale, the vitality subscale of the Medical Outcomes Study 36-Item Short-Form Health Survey (SF-36), and a visual analog scale.
Physical functioning was determined with the physical functioning subscale of the SF-36, fast walking speed, and comfortable walking speed.
The ECw (J·kg(-1)·m(-1)) was measured with the energy cost of the walking test.
The relationship between ECw and latent variable fatigue had a β=-.188 (P=.236), that between ECw and physical functioning (SF-36 physical functioning) had a β=-.344 (P=.001), and that between fatigue and physical functioning had a β=-.448 (P=.000).
Fatigue and ECw are not related in patients with MS with mild to moderate walking problems.
ECw and fatigue are independent determinants of physical functioning.
Copyright © 2012 American Congress of Rehabilitation Medicine.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22979982
Comparison of the effect of aspirin and amantadine for the treatment of fatigue in multiple sclerosis: a randomized, blinded, crossover study.
The purpose of this study was to compare the relative efficacy of acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) and amantadine for the treatment of fatigue in multiple sclerosis (MS).
A 10-week, randomized double-blind crossover clinical trial conducted from October  2009 to September 2010.
Fifty-two patients with MS presenting fatigue at 21 to 53 years of age were randomly allocated to the two treatment groups.
The first group received amantadine (100 mg twice daily) for a total of 4 weeks.
The second group received ASA (500 mg once daily) for four weeks.
After a 2-week washout period, they crossed over to the alternative treatment for 4 weeks.
Patients were rated at baseline and the end of each phase with the Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS).
ASA appeared to be equivalent in efficacy and safety to amantadine.
A significant decrease  in FSS occurred in both groups.
Of the 26 patients treated with amantadine, the mean (SD) of FSS decreased from 4·8 (1·4) to 4·0 (1·4) (P&lt;0·001).
In the 26 patients treated with ASA, the mean (SD) of FSS decreased from 4·6 (1·4) to  3·5 (1·5) (P&lt;0·001).
This study demonstrates that both ASA and amantadine significantly reduce MS-related fatigue.
Both ASA and amantadine have previously been shown to reduce fatigue, and we postulate that treatment with ASA and amantadine  may have similar benefits.
PMID: 21864284
Selenium and clinical trials: new therapeutic evidence for multiple diseases.
The understanding of the essential role of selenium (Se) in human health has increased substantially in recent decades.
Micronutrient deficiencies are very common in the general population and may be even more common in patients with different pathologies due to genetic or environmental causes and prescription drug use.
Selenium is used by people in the prevention and/or treatment of different disorders including cardiovascular disease, osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, hypothyroidism, stroke, atherosclerosis, cancer susceptibility and treatment, HIV, AIDS, neuronal diseases such as Alzheimer or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, pancreatitis, depression, and diabetes amongst others.
Several mechanisms have been suggested to mediate the biological effects of Se and these include antioxidant defence systems, synthesis and stability of metabolites that act as intermediates implicated in diverse selenoproteins expression pathways oxidative metabolism, immune system modulation, DNA intercalators, kinase regulation, enzymatic cofactor, and gene expression.
A number of clinical trials in recent years have provided convincing evidence of the central role of this element, either alone or in combination with other micronutrients or antioxidants, in the prevention and treatment of multiple diseases.
Based on these studies this review focuses on the advances made so far in the study of mechanisms and applications of selenium compounds that could be suitable for chronic diseases.
PMID: 22982753
Prostaglandin E2 inhibits IL-23 and IL-12 production by human monocytes through down-regulation of their common p40 subunit.
The heterodimeric cytokine IL-23 is important for the maintenance of Th17 cells, which are pivotal mediators of autoimmune diseases like rheumatoid arthritis, colitis, and multiple sclerosis.
Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) is a soluble regulator of inflammation that has both pro- and anti-inflammatory properties.
PGE2 has been shown to elevate the IL-23 production by dendritic cells (DC).
Monocytes are also producers of IL-23 but the effect of PGE2 on IL-23 production by human monocytes has hardly been investigated.
We show here that PGE2 blocks the production of IL-23 by LPS-stimulated monocytes in an IL-10 and IL-1β independent manner.
This effect was due to the down-regulation of the p40 subunit of IL-23 on mRNA and protein level.
The p40 subunit is shared by IL-12 and, consistently, PGE2 also lowered the IL-12 production by monocytes.
These effects of PGE2 were cAMP-dependent since the cAMP enhancer forskolin strongly reduced IL-23 and IL-12 production by monocytes.
Taken together, PGE2 acts in an anti-inflammatory manner by lowering IL-23 production by monocytes while it has the opposite effect in DC.
Our data may help to reconcile controversial point of views on the pro- and anti-inflammatory nature of PGE2 by making a strong case for a cell type-dependent function.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22438029
A case of multiple sclerosis improvement following removal of heavy metal intoxication: lessons learnt from Matteo's case.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic progressive disease of the central nervous system (CNS) provoking disability and neurological symptoms.
The exact causes of SM are unknown, even if it is characterized by focal inflammatory lesions in CNS accompanied by autoimmune reaction against myelin.
Indeed, many drugs able to modulate the immune response of patients have been used to treat MS.
More recently, toxic metals have been proposed as possible causes of neurodegenerative diseases.
The objective of this study is to investigate in vivo the impact of heavy metal intoxication in MS progression.
We studied the case of a patient affected by MS, who has been unsuccessfully treated for some years with current therapies.
We examined his levels of toxic heavy metals in the urine, following intravenous challenge with the chelating agent calcium disodium ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA).The patient displayed elevated levels of aluminium, lead and mercury in the urine.
Indeed, he was subjected to treatment with EDTA twice a month.
Under treatment, the patient revealed in time improved symptoms suggestive of MS remission.
The clinical data correlated with the reduction of heavy metal levels in the urine to normal range values.
Our case report suggests that levels of toxic metals can be tested in patients affected by neurodegenerative diseases as MS.
PMID: 23548494
Differences between users and non-users of complementary and alternative medicine among people with multiple sclerosis in Denmark: a comparison of descriptive characteristics.
The aim of this study was to investigate differences in socio-economic characteristics between CAM users and CAM non-users among people with MS in Denmark as well as differences in characteristics related to the use of CAM among CAM users and the use of conventional treatments among CAM non-users.
An internet-based questionnaire was used to collect data from 3361 patient members of the Danish MS society.
A letter with a personal code was sent to all respondents, asking them to fill out the questionnaire online.
Reminders to non-respondents were sent twice and the final response rate was 55.5%.
Statistical associations were presented as odds ratios and with respective 95% confidence intervals.
People with MS in Denmark use a wide range of CAM treatments for a variety of reasons.
CAM users were more likely to be of female gender, 18-40 years of age, educated at bachelor level or above, and have a high income compared to CAM non-users (p &lt; 0.05).
CAM users more often addressed non-specific/preventive treatment purposes through their use of CAM treatments, they communicated less often with a medical doctor about the CAM treatments used, and they experienced less side effects as well as less positive effects from the CAM treatments used when compared with the use of conventional treatments among CAM non-users (p &lt; 0.05).
People with MS in Denmark reported use of a large range of CAM treatments.
CAM users differed from CAN non-users in relation to socio-economic factors as well as treatment characteristics.
PMID: 23423844
Immunotherapy of multiple sclerosis: the state of the art.
It is widely accepted that the main common pathogenetic pathway in multiple sclerosis (MS) involves an immune-mediated cascade initiated in the peripheral immune system and targeting CNS myelin.
Logically, therefore, the therapeutic approaches to the disease include modalities aiming at downregulation of the various immune elements that are involved in this immunologic cascade.
Since the introduction of interferons in 1993, which were the first registered treatments for MS, huge steps have been made in the field of MS immunotherapy.
More efficious and specific immunoactive drugs have been introduced and it appears that the increased specificity for MS of these new treatments is paralleled by greater efficacy.
Unfortunately, this seemingly increased efficacy has been accompanied by more safety issues.
The immunotherapeutic modalities can be divided into two main groups: those affecting the acute stages (relapses) of the disease and the long-term treatments that are aimed at preventing the appearance of relapses and the progression in disability.
Immunomodulating treatments may also be classified according to the level of the 'immune axis' where they exert their main effect.
Since, in MS, a neurodegenerative process runs in parallel and as a consequence of inflammation, early immune intervention is warranted to prevent progression of relapses of MS and the accumulation of disability.
The use of neuroimaging (MRI) techniques that allow the detection of silent inflammatory activity of MS and neurodegeneration has provided an important tool for the substantiation of the clinical efficacy of treatments and the early diagnosis of MS.
This review summarizes in detail the existing information on all the available immunotherapies for MS, old and new, classifies them according to their immunologic mechanisms of action and proposes a structured algorithm/therapeutic scheme for the management of the disease.
PMID: 22960049
Further validation of multiple sclerosis walking scale-12 scores based on spatiotemporal gait parameters.
To examine the association between Multiple Sclerosis Walking Scale-12 (MSWS-12) scores and spatiotemporal parameters of gait as indicators of gait quality among ambulatory persons with multiple sclerosis (MS).
Cross-sectional study.
University research laboratory.
Community-residing persons with MS (N=268).
Not applicable.
Main outcome measures included the MSWS-12 and spatial and temporal gait parameters (walking speed, cadence, step length, step time, base of support [ie, the distance between 1 footfall and the line of progression of the opposing foot], and percentage of gait cycle spent in double support).
Secondary outcomes included the timed 25-foot walk (T25FW), 6-minute walk (6MW), and Patient-Determined Disease Steps scale.
MSWS-12 scores were significantly correlated with walking speed (r=-.59), cadence (r=-.50), step length (r=-.53), step time (r=.46), base of support (r=.29), and percentage of the gait cycle spent in double support (r=.54).
MSWS-12 scores further were significantly correlated with T25FW (r=.57) and 6MW (r=-.75) scores.
Such findings suggest that the MSWS-12 captures aspects of walking quality, assessed as spatiotemporal parameters of gait, in addition to walking speed and endurance in persons with MS.
Copyright © 2013 American Congress of Rehabilitation Medicine.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21584674
Segmentation of multiple sclerosis lesions in MR images: a review.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory demyelinating disease that the parts of the nervous system through the lesions generated in the white matter of the brain.
It brings about disabilities in different organs of the body such as eyes and muscles.
Early detection of MS and estimation of its progression are critical for optimal treatment of the disease.
For diagnosis and treatment evaluation of MS lesions, they may be detected and segmented in Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scans of the brain.
However, due to the large amount of MRI data to be analyzed, manual segmentation of the lesions by clinical experts translates into a very cumbersome and time consuming task.
In addition, manual segmentation is subjective and prone to human errors.
Several groups have developed computerized methods to detect and segment MS lesions.
These methods are not categorized and compared in the past.
This paper reviews and compares various MS lesion segmentation methods proposed in recent years.
It covers conventional methods like multilevel thresholding and region growing, as well as more recent Bayesian methods that require parameter estimation algorithms.
It also covers parameter estimation methods like expectation maximization and adaptive mixture model which are among unsupervised techniques as well as kNN and Parzen window methods that are among supervised techniques.
Integration of knowledge-based methods such as atlas-based approaches with Bayesian methods increases segmentation accuracy.
In addition, employing intelligent classifiers like Fuzzy C-Means, Fuzzy Inference Systems, and Artificial Neural Networks reduces misclassified voxels.
PMID: 23045978
Treatment of neurological injury with thymosin β4.
Neurorestorative therapy targets multiple types of parenchymal cells in the intact tissue of injured brain tissue to increase neurogenesis, angiogenesis, oligodendrogenesis, and axonal remodeling during recovery from neurological injury.
In our laboratory, we tested thymosin β4 (Tβ4) as a neurorestorative agent to treat models of neurological injury.
This review discusses our results demonstrating that Tβ4 improves neurological functional outcome in a rat model of embolic stroke, a mouse model of multiple sclerosis, and a rat model of traumatic brain injury.
Tβ4 is a pleiotropic peptide exhibiting many actions in several different types of tissues.
One mechanism associated with improvement of neurological improvement from Tβ4 treatment is oligodendrogenesis involving the differentiation of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells to mature myelin-secreting oligodendrocytes.
Moreover, our preclinical data provide a basis for movement of Tβ4 into clinical trials for treatment of these devastating neurological diseases and injuries.
© 2012 New York Academy of Sciences.
PMID: 22647574
CAR/FoxP3-engineered T regulatory cells target the CNS and suppress EAE upon intranasal delivery.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease of the central nervous system (CNS).
In the murine experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) model of MS, T regulatory (Treg) cell therapy has proved to be beneficial, but generation of stable CNS-targeting Tregs needs further development.
Here, we propose gene engineering to achieve CNS-targeting Tregs from naïve CD4 cells and demonstrate their efficacy in the EAE model.
CD4+ T cells were modified utilizing a lentiviral vector system to express a chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) targeting myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) in trans with the murine FoxP3 gene that drives Treg differentiation.
The cells were evaluated in vitro for suppressive capacity and in C57BL/6 mice to treat EAE.
Cells were administered by intranasal (i.n.) cell delivery.
The engineered Tregs demonstrated suppressive capacity in vitro and could efficiently access various regions in the brain via i.n cell delivery.
Clinical score 3 EAE mice were treated and the engineered Tregs suppressed ongoing encephalomyelitis as demonstrated by reduced disease symptoms as well as decreased IL-12 and IFNgamma mRNAs in brain tissue.
Immunohistochemical markers for myelination (MBP) and reactive astrogliosis (GFAP) confirmed recovery in mice treated with engineered Tregs compared to controls.
Symptom-free mice were rechallenged with a second EAE-inducing inoculum but remained healthy, demonstrating the sustained effect of engineered Tregs.
CNS-targeting Tregs delivered i.n.
localized to the CNS and efficiently suppressed ongoing inflammation leading to diminished disease symptoms.
PMID: 23857303
Aquaporin 4 expression and tissue susceptibility to neuromyelitis optica.
To understand the predilection for optic nerve and spinal cord pathologic changes in neuromyelitis optica (NMO).
OBJECTIVE TO evaluate tissue-specific expression (RNA and protein) and supramolecular aggregation of aquaporin 4 (AQP4) in mouse, rat, and human tissues.
Quantitative polymerase chain reaction, sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and blue native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
Laboratory analysis of mouse, rat, and human tissue.
Tissues from control individuals and 1 patient with NMO obtained at autopsy.
Neuromyelitis optica in the patient.
Tissue-specific messenger RNA and protein expression and supramolecular aggregation of AQP4.
The AQP4 messenger RNA and proteins were much more highly expressed in the optic nerve and spinal cord relative to other regions of the brain and to non-central nervous system tissues in all species evaluated.
Large supramolecular aggregates of AQP4 were overrepresented in the optic nerve and spinal cord relative to other central nervous system tissue.
There was no difference in AQP4 expression between an individual with NMO and the control samples.
Optic nerve tissue from an individual with NMO did not differ in AQP4 expression from control samples.
The relatively high levels of expression and of supramolecular aggregation in the optic nerve and spinal cord may contribute to the predilection of these structures to NMO pathologic changes.
PMID: 23929922
The Scleroderma Patient-centered Intervention Network (SPIN) Cohort: protocol for a cohort multiple randomised controlled trial (cmRCT) design to support trials of psychosocial and rehabilitation interventions in a rare disease context.
Psychosocial and rehabilitation interventions are increasingly used to attenuate disability and improve health-related quality of life (HRQL) in chronic diseases, but are typically not available for patients with rare diseases.
Conducting rigorous, adequately powered trials of these interventions for patients with rare diseases is difficult.
The Scleroderma Patient-centered Intervention Network (SPIN) is an international collaboration of patient organisations, clinicians and researchers.
The aim of SPIN is to develop a research infrastructure to test accessible, low-cost self-guided online interventions to reduce disability and improve HRQL for people living with the rare disease systemic sclerosis (SSc or scleroderma).
Once tested, effective interventions will be made accessible through patient organisations partnering with SPIN.
SPIN will employ the cohort multiple randomised controlled trial (cmRCT) design, in which patients consent to participate in a cohort for ongoing data collection.
The aim is to recruit 1500-2000 patients from centres across the world within a period of 5 years (2013-2018).
Eligible participants are persons ≥18 years of age with a diagnosis of SSc.
In addition to baseline medical data, participants will complete patient-reported outcome measures every 3 months.
Upon enrolment in the cohort, patients will consent to be contacted in the future to participate in intervention research and to allow their data to be used for comparison purposes for interventions tested with other cohort participants.
Once interventions are developed, patients from the cohort will be randomly selected and offered interventions as part of pragmatic RCTs.
Outcomes from patients offered interventions will be compared with outcomes from trial-eligible patients who are not offered the interventions.
The use of the cmRCT design, the development of self-guided online interventions and partnerships with patient organisations will allow SPIN to develop, rigourously test and effectively disseminate psychosocial and rehabilitation interventions for people with SSc.
PMID: 22291032
Factors associated with emotional and behavioral outcomes in adolescents with multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) onset during adolescence has the potential to disrupt a key period of psychosocial maturation.
Objective: We aimed to examine the prevalence and risk factors associated with emotional and behavioral outcomes in adolescents with MS.
The Behavioral Assessment System for Children-2nd Edition (BASC-2) was completed by 31 adolescents with MS (mean age = 16.1 years), 31 age-matched controls, and parents of all participants.
BASC-2 outcomes were compared between groups.
Base rates were examined for scores falling at least one or two standard deviations below norm.
Associations between BASC-2 outcomes and features of disease severity and IQ were examined.
Youth with MS were reported by their parents to have more symptoms of depression and somatization and lower adaptive skills compared with reports by parents of controls.
On the self-report, patients endorsed more problems of inattention/hyperactivity and lower self-reliance relative to controls.
Behavioral concerns and reduced adaptive functioning in the MS group were associated with fatigue, poor relations with parents, and perceived social stress.
Psychosocial outcomes did not associate with number of relapses, Expanded Disability Status Scale score, disease duration, brain lesion volume or IQ.
Youth with MS are at risk of difficulties in behavioral and emotional health.
Relations with parents emerged as a key factor influencing the emotional well-being of youth with MS, suggesting an important role for family-centered care in this population.
PMID: 22291035
Color vision is strongly associated with retinal thinning in multiple sclerosis.
Multiple Sclerosis (MS) frequently causes injury to the anterior visual pathway (AVP), impairing quality of life due to visual dysfunction.
Development of biomarkers in MS is a high priority and both low-contrast visual acuity (LCVA) and time-domain optical coherence tomography (TD-OCT) have been proposed as candidates for this purpose.
We sought to assess whether psychophysical assessments of color vision are similarly correlated with structural measures of AVP injury, and therefore augment measures of visual disability in MS.
We studied the association between high-contrast visual acuity (HCVA), LCVA, color vision (Hardy-Rand-Rittler plates (HRR) and Lanthony D15 tests) and OCT, using both high-resolution spectral-domain OCT (SD-OCT; Spectralis, Heidelberg Engineering, Germany) and TD-OCT (Stratus, Carl Zeiss, US) in a cohort of 213 MS patients (52 with previous optic neuritis) and 47 matched controls in a cross-sectional study.
We found that MS patients have impairments in HCVA and LCVA (p &lt; 0.001) but that they suffer from even more profound abnormalities in color discrimination (p &lt; 0.0001).
We found strong correlation between color vision and SD-OCT measures of retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) thickness (average RNFL, r = 0.594, p &lt; 0.001) and papillomacular bundle thickness (r = -0.565, p &lt; 0.001).
The correlation between OCT scores and functional visual impairments of all types was much stronger for SD-OCT than for TD-OCT.
Our results indicate that color vision is highly correlated with these OCT scores when compared with traditional measures of visual acuity.
Also we found that SD-OCT is superior to TD-OCT for detecting anterior visual pathway damage in MS.
This makes both color-visual measures and SD-OCT strong candidate biomarkers of disease progression.