PMID: 22378346
T cells redirected by a CD3ζ chimeric antigen receptor can establish self-antigen-specific tumour protection in the long term.
A majority of cancer deaths are because of an uncontrolled relapse of the disease despite initial remission after therapy, asking for strategies to control tumour cells in the long term.
Adoptive therapy with chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-redirected T cells showed promising success in primary tumour elimination; the capacity of such engineered T cells to establish enduring tumour protection is currently a matter of discussion, in particular as most targeted 'tumour-associated antigens' are self-antigens.
To address the issue in a clinically relevant model that closely mimics the human situation, we recorded rejection of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)-positive pancreatic tumours in the CEA transgenic mouse that expressed CEA as self-antigen in healthy cells of the gastrointestinal tract.
Adoptive therapy with CD8(+) T cells, which were redirected by a CEA-specific, low-affinity CAR with CD3ζ endodomain, eliminated CEA(+) tumours in a primary response; cured mice produced an efficient recall response in the long term towards CEA(+) tumour cells upon rechallenge.
Secondary tumour rejection was CEA specific, mediated by engineered T cells and did not require host T cells.
No toxicity towards healthy tissues with CEA expression was recorded.
Data indicate that adoptive therapy with engineered T cells can establish self-antigen-specific tumour protection in the long term without autoimmunity.Gene Therapy advance online publication, 1 March 2012; doi:10.1038/gt.2012.21.
PMID: 22378302
Emodin potentiates the antitumor effects of gemcitabine in PANC-1 pancreatic cancer xenograft model in vivo via inhibition of inhibitors of apoptosis.
Pancreatic cancer is a highly aggressive malignant disease.
Gemcitabine is currently the standard first-line chemotherapeutic agent for pancreatic cancer.
As members of apoptosis inhibitors, Survivin and XIAP play an important role in chemotherapy resistance in pancreatic cancer.
Emodin has therapeutic potential against cancers.
This study was designed to investigate whether combination therapy with gemcitabine and emodin enhanced antitumor efficacy in pancreatic cancer.
The application of the combination therapy triggered significantly higher frequency of pancreatic cancer cell apoptosis.
Our research demonstrated that the combination of emodin and gemcitabine resulted in significantly reduced tumor volumes compared to gemcitabine or emodin treatment alone.
Immunohistochemistry and western immunoblot analyses showed that Survivin and XIAP expression were downregulated in emodin and the combination groups compared to the other two groups.
Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction analyses showed that Survivin and XIAP mRNA expression in emodin and the combination groups were downregulated significantly compared to the other two groups.
Furthermore, the expression of the nuclear transcription factor κB (NF-κB) protein and NF-κB mRNA were downregulated in the emodin and the combination groups.
DNA-binding activity of NF-κB was inhibited in emodin and combination groups compared to the other groups.
This study suggests that emodin potentiates the antitumor effects of gemcitabine in PANC-1 cell xenografts via promotion of apoptosis and IAP suppression.
PMID: 22375400
[Experimental study on anti-metastasis effect of emodin on human pancreatic cancer].
To investigate the anti-metastasis effect of emodin on the pancreatic cancer in vitro and in vivo.
Human pancreatic cancer cell line SW1990 was treated with different concentrations of emodin (10, 20, 40 micromol x L(-1)) for 2 h, the effects of emodin on the migration and invasion of SW1990 cells were examined by using wound assay and matrigel counting.
Western blot was used to detect the protein expression of NF-kappaB and MMP-9 in SW1990 cells after various concentrations of emodin (10, 20, 40 micromol x L(-1)) treatment for 48 h.
Metastatic model simulating human pancreatic cancer was established by orthotropic implantation of histologically intact human tumor tissue into pancreatic wall of nude mice, and then divided into three groups: control group, low-dose emodin group (L-EMO) and high-dose emodin group (H-EMO).
Eight weeks after implantation, the presences of metastasis were evaluated respectively after the mice were sacrificed.
Immunohistochemistry was used to detect the positive expression of CD34, NF-kappaB and MMP-9 in the tumors.
Emodin suppressed the migration and invasion of SW1990 cells in a dose-dependent manner.
Western bolt assay indicated that emodin down-regulated the expression of NF-kappaB and MMP-9 proteins in SW1990 cells.
The incidences of metastasis were decreased significantly in L-EMO group and H-EMO group as compared with that in control group.
The percentage of CD34, NF-kappaB and MMP-9-positive cells in the tumors were significantly reduced by the administration of emodin.
Emodin exerts anti-metastatic activity in pancreatic cancer both in vitro and in vivo, which may be related to down-regulation of NF-kappaB and MMP-9.
PMID: 22374509
Hepatic S4a + S5 and bile duct resection for gallbladder carcinoma.
In the surgical treatment of gallbladder cancer, segment 4a + 5 hepatic resection and bile duct resection is usually recommended for T2 and/or T3 gallbladder cancer involving hepatic parenchyma without hepatic biliary confluence.
This procedure does not affect liver function excessively, provided there is correct identification of hepatic S4a and S5, the most important aspect of this procedure.
In this paper, the technique of hepatic S4a + 5 and bile duct resection is described in detail.
This surgical procedure could be a useful option for the surgical treatment of the hepatobiliary pancreatic malignancies.
Surgeons should therefore master the surgical techniques for this procedure.
PMID: 22374460
Multicentre phase II trial of trastuzumab and capecitabine in patients with HER2 overexpressing metastatic pancreatic cancer.
Background:New therapeutic options for metastatic pancreatic cancer are urgently needed.
In pancreatic cancer, overexpression of the epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) has been reported in up to 45%.
This multicentre phase II study investigated the efficacy and toxicity of the HER2 antibody trastuzumab combined with capecitabine in the patients with pancreatic cancer and HER2 overexpression.Methods:Primary endpoint was progression-free survival (PFS) after 12 weeks.
A total of 212 patients were screened for HER2 expression.Results:Immunohistochemical (IHC) HER2 expression was: 83 (40%) grade 0, 71 (34%) grade 1, 31 (15%) grade 2, 22 (11%) grade 3.
A total of 17 patients with IHC +3 HER2 expression or gene amplification could be assessed for the treatment response.
Grade 3/4 treatment toxicities were: each 7% leucopenia, diarrhoea, nausea and hand-foot syndrome.
Progression-free survival after 12 weeks was 23.5%, median overall survival (OS) 6.9 months.Conclusion:This study demonstrates +3 HER2 expression or gene amplification in 11% of patients.
Contrary to breast and gastric cancer, only 7 out of 11 (64%) patients with IHC +3 HER2 expression showed gene amplification.
Although the therapy was well tolerated, PFS and OS did not perform favourably compared with standard chemotherapy.
Together, we do not recommend further evaluation of anti-HER2 treatment in patients with metastatic pancreatic cancer.British Journal of Cancer advance online publication, 28 February 2012; doi:10.1038/bjc.2012.18 www.bjcancer.com.
PMID: 22374239
Preoperative insulin secretion ability and pancreatic parenchymal thickness as useful parameters for predicting postoperative insulin secretion in patients undergoing pancreaticoduodenectomy.
Periampullary malignant neoplasms have been increasing in Japan, mainly in response to an increase in the incidences of pancreatic cancer, and glucose intolerance due to deterioration of insulin secretion is an important problem.
We investigated preoperative parameters to predict postoperative insulin secretion and the need for insulin therapy in patients undergoing pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD).
Thirty-six patients with malignant neoplasms of periampullary lesions were enrolled.
Preoperative pancreatic parenchymal thickness was evaluated by computed tomography.
Insulin secretion and glucose tolerance were evaluated by a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test and an intravenous glucagon loading test.
The relationships between postoperative insulin secretion and preoperative parameters and the cut-off values for predicting the need for postoperative insulin therapy for glycemic control were investigated.
Pancreatic parenchymal thickness and other preoperative parameters, including the increment of serum C-peptide (Δ C-peptide), fasting plasma C-peptide (F-CPR), insulinogenic index (I.I.) and fasting plasma glucose (FPG), were significantly associated with postoperative insulin secretion.
Multiple regression analyses revealed that preoperative Δ C-peptide or F-CPR was the most significant determinant of postoperative insulin secretion, followed by pancreatic parenchymal thickness.
In the receiver operating characteristic curve, the best preoperative cut-off values for predicting the need for postoperative insulin therapy were a Δ C-peptide of 0.65 ng/mL, a F-CPR of 0.85 ng/mL and a pancreatic parenchymal thickness of 6.0 mm.
Both preoperative insulin secretion and pancreatic parenchymal thickness effectively predict postoperative insulin secretion and identify subjects who need postoperative insulin therapy for glycemic control.
PMID: 22373539
European cancer mortality predictions for the year 2012.
BACKGROUND: Estimating current cancer mortality figures is important for defining priorities for prevention and treatment.Materials and methods:Using logarithmic Poisson count data joinpoint models on mortality and population data from the World Health Organization database, we estimated numbers of deaths and age-standardized rates in 2012 from all cancers and selected cancer sites for the whole European Union (EU) and its six more populated countries.
RESULTS: Cancer deaths in the EU in 2012 are estimated to be 1 283 101 (717 398 men and 565 703 women) corresponding to standardized overall cancer death rates of 139/100 000 men and 85/100 000 women.
The fall from 2007 was 10% in men and 7% in women.
In men, declines are predicted for stomach (-20%), leukemias (-11%), lung and prostate (-10%) and colorectal (-7%) cancers, and for stomach (-23%), leukemias (-12%), uterus and colorectum (-11%) and breast (-9%) in women.
Almost stable rates are expected for pancreatic cancer (+2-3%) and increases for female lung cancer (+7%).
Younger women show the greatest falls in breast cancer mortality rates in the EU (-17%), and declines are expected in all individual countries, except Poland.
CONCLUSION: Apart for lung cancer in women and pancreatic cancer, continuing falls are expected in mortality from major cancers in the EU.
PMID: 22373528
The emerging role of the TGFβ tumor suppressor pathway in pancreatic cancer.
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is one of the most aggressive human cancers.
It displays many different chromosomal abnormalities and mutations.
To design new therapeutic strategies, it is important to identify the signaling pathways and gene networks within this apparent complexity that are predominantly altered.
The TGFβ signaling pathway and associated transcription network emerges as a central actor of pancreatic oncogenesis.
Its tumor suppressor function in this tissue can be affected by several alterations.
PMID: 22372808
Differential diagnosis between autoimmune pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer about a case.
PMID: 22372505
Cytokine Network: New Targeted Therapy for Pancreatic Cancer.
Increasing evidence has shown that cytokines have a role in tumor biology.
The role of chemokines in tumor biology is important because these peptides may influence tumor growth, invasion, angiogenesis, and metastasis.
In this review, we demonstrated the role of cytokines (Interleukin-1α, hepatocyte growth factor, Interleukin-8, stromal cell-derived factor-1 and CXC-chemokines/CXCR2 biological axis) in pancreatic cancer angiogenesis, especially from the standpoint of the interaction between tumor and its microenvironments.
The cytokines are intimately related with cancer angiogenesis.
Blocking these cytokines could attenuate pancreatic cancer associated angiogenesis and further considered as a novel anti-angiogenic target in pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22372504
Role of Wnt/β-catenin Signaling in Drug Resistance of Pancreatic Cancer.
Pancreatic cancer is characterized by its intrinsic resistance to cytotoxic agents.
But the underlying molecular mechanism is unclear.
Studies demonstrate that angiogenesis, presence of highly resistant cancer stem cells (CSCs), dysregulation of cell cycle and apoptosis are main aspects of mechanisms of pancreatic cancer chemoresistance.
Interestingly, recent investigations of Wnt/β-catenin signaling suggest roles for the signaling in these four aspects and the pathogenesis of pancreatic cancer.
Conceivably, the dysregulation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway is involved in pancreatic cancer chemoresistance.
Though researchers have proven it in some other cancer types, however, there is no direct evidence for this reasoning in pancreatic cancer.
Designing effective experiment setups to define the function and mechanism of Wnt/β-catenin signaling in pancreatic cancer chemoresistance and subsequently targeting the signaling to improve the sensitivity of chemotherapy in pancreatic cancer require a full understanding of the molecular mechanisms of Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway in angiogenesis, maintaining of highly resistant CSCs, regulation of cell cycle and apoptosis in pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22372503
Sp/KLF Family and Tumor Angiogenesis in Pancreatic Cancer.
Tumor angiogenesis play a significant role in genesis, development and metastasis of pancreatic cancer though the process is different from angiogenesis in normal tissues.
VEGF, one of the most important angiogenesis factors, is modulated by inflammation factors as well as transcriptional factors, such as members of Sp/KLF family.
Recent research showed that VEGF related inflammation factors and Sp/KLF family members form a complex network structure, which causes genesis and development of tumor.
Conceivably, fully understanding the mechanism linking VEGF related inflammation factors and Sp/KLF family members would promote the concept of tumor angiogenesis.
Furthermore, it could also help to design effective strategies to target the key components of the network and control the development and progression of tumor.
PMID: 22372502
Advances in Biomarker Research for Pancreatic Cancer.
Pancreatic cancer (PC) is a leading cause of cancer related deaths in United States.
The lack of early symptoms results in late-stage detection and a high mortality rate.
Currently, the only potentially curative approach for PC is surgical resection, which is often unsuccessful because the invasive and metastatic nature of the tumor masses makes their complete removal difficult.
Consequently, patients suffer relapses from remaining cancer stem cells or drug resistance that eventually lead to death.
To improve the survival rate, the early detection of PC is critical.
Current biomarker research in PC indicates that a serum carbohydrate antigen, CA 19-9, is the only available biomarker with approximately 90% specificity to PC.
However, the efficacy of CA 19-9 for assessing prognosis and monitoring patients with PC remains contentious.
Thus, advances in technology and the detection of new biomarkers with high specificity to PC are needed to reduce the mortality rate of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22372501
Targeting the Cancer-Stroma Interaction: A Potential Approach for Pancreatic Cancer Treatment.
Recent studies have demonstrated that the interaction between the cancer and the stroma, play a key role in the development of pancreatic cancer.
The desmoplasia, which consists of fibroblasts, pancreatic stellate cells, lymphatic and vascular endothelial cells, immune cells, pathologic increased nerves, and the extracellular matrix (ECM), creates a complex tumor microenvironment that promotes pancreatic cancer development, invasion, metastasis, and resistance to chemotherapy.
Thus, the potential approach for targeting the components of this desmoplastic reaction or the pancreatic tumor microenvironment might represent a novel therapeutic approach to advanced pancreatic carcinoma.
Novel therapies that target on the pancreatic tumor microenvironment should become one of the more effective treatments for pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22372500
Therapeutic Potential of Perineural Invasion, Hypoxia and Desmoplasia in Pancreatic Cancer.
Pancreatic cancer is one of the most fatal human malignancies.
Though a relatively rare malignancy, it remains one of the deadliest tumors, with an extremely high mortality rate.
The prognosis of patients with pancreatic cancer remains poor; only patients with small tumors and complete resection have a chance of a complete cure.
Pancreatic cancer responds poorly to conventional therapies, including chemotherapy and irradiation.
Tumor-specific targeted therapy is a relatively recent addition to the arsenal of anti-cancer therapies.
It is important to find novel targets to distinguish tumor cells from their normal counterparts in therapeutic approaches.
In the past few decades, studies have revealed the molecular mechanisms of pancreatic tumorigenesis, growth, invasion and metastasis.
The proteins that participate in the pathophysiological processes of pancreatic cancer might be potential targets for therapy.
This review describes the main players in perineural invasion, hypoxia and desmoplasia and the molecular mechanisms of these pathophysiological processes.
PMID: 22372499
Mucin-based Targeted Pancreatic Cancer Therapy.
The prognosis of pancreatic cancer (PC) patients is very poor with a five-year survival of less than 5%.
One of the major challenges in developing new therapies for PC is the lack of expression of specific markers by pancreatic tumor cells.
Mucins are heavily O-glycosylated proteins characterized by the presence of short stretches of amino acid sequences repeated several times in tandem.
The expression of several mucins including MUC1, MUC4, MUC5AC, and MUC16 is strongly upregulated in PC.
Recent studies have also demonstrated a link between the aberrant expression and differential overexpression of mucin glycoproteins to the initiation, progression, and poor prognosis of the disease.
These studies have led to increasing recognition of mucins as potential diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets in PC.
In this focused review we present an overview of the therapies targeting mucins in PC, including immunotherapy (i.e.
vaccines, antibodies, and radioimmunoconjugates), gene therapy, and other novel therapeutic strategies.
PMID: 22372498
Molecular Mechanisms of Pancreatic Cancer Dissemination: The Role of the Chemokine System.
Over the last decade it has been established that cancer-associated inflammation affects many aspects of malignancy and in particular endorses tumor cell survival, proliferation and distant spread.
Chemokines and their receptors are major players of the cancer-related inflammation.
Our understanding of the chemokine role in tumor biology now ranges from their ability to recruit blood leukocytes within tumors, to direct effects on cancer cell survival, metastatization and regulation of angiogenesis.
Chemokines and their receptors are expressed in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma and are involved in its malignant behaviour.
Notably, the receptor CX3CR1 favours tumor perineural tropism which is typical of this neoplasm and is associated with early recurrence after surgery and with poor patient prognosis.
PMID: 22372497
Novel Therapeutic Approaches in Pancreatic Cancer Based on Genomic Alterations.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is an aggressive and devastating disease, which is characterized by invasiveness and dissemination to the lymphatic system and distant organs.
In the absence of effective screening methods considerable efforts have thus been made to identify better systemic treatments than gemcitabine, the standard of care for advanced PDAC for well over a decade.
However, until now only erlotinib, an epidermal growth-factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, has demonstrated a modest survival benefit in combination with gemcitabine in a phase III clinical trial.
More recently, detailed global genomic analyses have provided a snapshot of the landscape of tumor genomes by showing that they contain four high frequency mutated genes and many low frequency mutated genes that correspond to 12 core signaling pathways.
Strategies to target these frequently altered genes and their pathways, or low frequency mutated genes corresponding to the "personalized genome", offer novel therapeutic strategies.
In the near future, the complete sequencing of the coding genome, together with the dramatically reduced costs of whole genome sequencing, will provide new opportunities to treat PDAC.
PMID: 22372496
Targeted Therapies for Pancreatic Cancer.
PMID: 22371645
Expression of fibroblast activation protein in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma and its clinicopathological significance.
To examine fibroblast activation protein (FAP) expression in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and to analyze its relationship with the clinicopathology of PDAC.
FAP expression was examined in 134 PDAC specimens by immunohistochemistry, and in four pancreatic cancer cell lines (SW1990, Miapaca-2, AsPC-1 and BxPC-3) by Western blotting assay.
We also analyzed the association between FAP expression in PDAC cells and the clinicopathology of PDAC patients.
The results showed that the FAP was ex-pressed in both stromal fibroblast cells (98/134, 73.1%) and carcinoma cells (102/134, 76.1%).
All 4 pancreatic cancer cell lines expressed FAP protein at different levels.
Protein bands corresponding to the proteolytically active 170-kDa seprase dimer and its 88-kDa seprase subunit were identified.
Higher FAP expression in carcinoma cells was associated with tumor size (P < 0.001), fibrotic focus (P = 0.003), perineural invasion (P = 0.009) and worse clinical outcome (P = 0.0085).
FAP is highly expressed in carcinoma cells and fibroblasts in PDAC tissues, and its expression is associated with desmoplasia and worse prognosis.
PMID: 22371633
Developments in metastatic pancreatic cancer: Is gemcitabine still the standard?
In the past 15 years, we have seen few therapeutic advances for patients with pancreatic cancer, which is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related death in the United States.
Currently, only about 6% of patients with advanced disease respond to standard gemcitabine therapy, and median survival is only about 6 mo.
Moreover, phase III trials have shown that adding various cytotoxic and targeted chemotherapeutic agents to gemcitabine has failed to improve overall survival, except in cases in which gemcitabine combined with erlotinib show minimal survival benefit.
Several meta-analyses have shown that the combination of gemcitabine with either a platinum analog or capecitabine may lead to clinically relevant survival prolongation, especially for patients with good performance status.
Meanwhile, many studies have focused on the pharmacokinetic modulation of gemcitabine by fixed-dose administration, and metabolic or transport enzymes related to the response and toxicity of gemcitabine.
Strikingly, a phase III trial in 2010 showed that, in comparison to gemcitabine alone, the FOLFIRINOX regimen in patients with advanced disease and good performance status, produced better median overall survival, median progression-free survival, and objective response rates.
This regimen also resulted in greater, albeit manageable toxicity.
PMID: 22371378
Magnetic resonance imaging findings of the mass-forming type of autoimmune pancreatitis: Comparison with pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
PURPOSE: To determine the characteristic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) features of mass-forming autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP), which allow its differentiation from pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: MR images of 37 patients with either pathologically proven, mass-forming AIPs (n = 9) or PACs (n = 28) were retrospectively reviewed.
The pancreatic MR protocol included unenhanced images, contrast-enhanced dynamic images, diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), and MR-cholangiopancreatography (MRCP).
Two reviewers analyzed the MR images regarding the number, location, morphologic features, and enhancement degree and pattern of the lesions as well as secondary changes of the pancreatic parenchyma, the biliary and pancreatic ducts.
The size and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) values of the lesions were measured.
RESULTS: Although sensitivities were low (28.6%-44.4%), specificities of multiplicity, capsule-like rim enhancement, and skipped stricture of the biliary or pancreatic duct in mass-forming AIP were high (100%).
Sensitivities and specificities of irregular or geographic shape, delayed enhancement, and a low ADC value <1.26 × 10(-3) mm(2) /s in mass-forming AIP were favorable (71.4%-83.3% and 78.5%-89.3%).
CONCLUSION: Although to differentiate mass-forming AIP from pancreatic cancer is difficult, the combination of MRI findings including contrast-enhanced dynamic images, MRCP, and DWI can be a help.
J.
Magn.
Reson.
Imaging 2012;.
© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22369743
Tumor-Specific Fluorescence Antibody Imaging Enables Accurate Staging Laparoscopy in an Orthotopic Model of Pancreatic Cancer.
Background/Aims: Laparoscopy is important in staging pancreatic cancer, but false negatives remain problematic.
Making tumors fluorescent has the potential to improve the accuracy of staging laparoscopy.
Methodology: Orthotopic and carcinomatosis models of pancreatic cancer were established with BxPC-3 human pancreatic cancer cells in nude mice.
Alexa488-antiCEA conjugates were injected via tail vein 24 hours prior to laparoscopy.
Mice were examined under bright field laparoscopic (BL) and fluorescence laparoscopic (FL) modes.
Outcomes measured included time to identification of primary tumor for the orthotopic model and number of metastases identified within 2 minutes for the carcinomatosis model.
Results: FL enabled more rapid and accurate identification and localization of primary tumors and metastases than BL.
Using BL took statistically significantly longer time than FL (p<0.0001, fold change and 95% CI for BL vs.
FL: 8.12 (4.54,14.52)).
More metastatic lesions were detected and localized under FL compared to BL and with greater accuracy, with sensitivities of 96% vs.
40%, respectively, when compared to control.
FL was sensitive enough to detect metastatic lesions <1mm.
Conclusions: The use of fluorescence laparoscopy with tumors labeled with fluorophore-conjugated anti-CEA antibody permits rapid detection and accurate localization of primary and metastatic pancreatic cancer in an orthotopic model.
PMID: 22368299
CDKN2A is the main susceptibility gene in Italian pancreatic cancer families.
Background Most familial pancreatic cancer (FPC) remains unexplained.
The identification of individuals with a high genetic risk of developing pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PC) is important to elucidate its biological basis and is critical to better define emerging strategies for the detection of early pancreatic neoplasms.
Patients and methods A series of 225 consecutively enrolled patients with PC were tested for CDKN2A mutations.
After personal and family cancer histories of all the patients had been reviewed, a subset of the patients were classified as FPC and were also tested for mutations in PALLD, PALB2, BRCA1 and BRCA2 as FPC candidate genes.
Results The CDKN2A mutation rate in the 225 PC cases was 5.7%.
The CDKN2A founder mutations, p.E27X and p.G101W, were predominant, but the mutation spectrum also included p.L65P, p.G67R and two novel, potentially pathogenic variants, promoter variant c.-201ACTC>CTTT and p.R144C.
None of the patients with FPC harboured germline mutations in PALLD, PALB2 or BRCA2.
One family was positive for the BRCA1 UV variant p.P727L.
Strikingly, five of 16 patients with FPC (31%) carried CDKN2A mutations.
Conclusion These findings suggest that a sizeable subset of Italian FPC families may carry CDKN2A mutations.
This result may be of value for identifying the best candidates for future PC screening trials in Italy.
PMID: 22367402
Periodontal Disease, Porphyromonas Gingivalis (P. gingivalis) Serum Antibody Levels and Orodigestive Cancer Mortality.
Periodontitis, the progressive loss of the alveolar bone around the teeth and the major cause of tooth loss in adults, is due to oral microorganisms, including Porphyromonas gingivalis (P gingivalis).
Periodontitis is associated with a local overly aggressive immune response and a spectrum of systemic effects, but the role of this condition in orodigestive cancers is unclear.
We prospectively examined clinically ascertained periodontitis (N=12,605) and serum IgG immune response to P gingivalis (N=7,852) in relation to orodigestive cancer mortality among men and women in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III).
A detailed oral health exam was conducted from 1988-1994 in survey Phases I and II, while serum IgG for P gingivalis was measured from 1991-1994 in Phase II only.
One-hundred and five orodigestive cancer deaths were ascertained through December 31, 2006.
Periodontitis (moderate or severe) was associated with increased orodigestive cancer mortality (RR=2.28, 95%CI=1.17-4.45); mortality risks also increased with increasing severity of periodontal disease (p trend=0.01).
Periodontitis-associated mortality was in excess for colorectal (RR=3.58; 95% CI=1.15-11.16) and possibly for pancreatic cancer (RR=4.56; 95%CI=0.93-22.29).
Greater serum P gingivalis IgG tended to be associated overall with increased orodigestive cancer mortality (p trend=0.06); P gingivalis-associated excess orodigestive mortality was also found for healthy subjects not exhibiting overt periodontal disease (RR= 2.25; 95%CI=1.23-4.14).
Orodigestive cancer mortality is related to periodontitis and to the periodontal pathogen, P gingivalis, independent of periodontal disease.
P gingivalis is a biomarker for microbe-associated risk of death due to orodigestive cancer.
PMID: 22367292
Inhibitory effects of epigallocatechin-3-gallate on cell proliferation and the expression of HIF-1α and P-gp in the human pancreatic carcinoma cell line PANC-1.
The aim of this study was to verify the inhibitory effects of epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) on cell proliferation and the expression of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1α) and multidrug resistance protein 1 (MDR1/P-gp) in the human pancreatic carcinoma cell line PANC-1, thereby, reversing drug resistance of pancreatic carcinoma and improving its sensitivity to cancer chemotherapy.
The human pancreatic carcinoma cell line PANC-1 was incubated under hypoxic conditions with different concentrations of epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) for indicated hours.
The effects of EGCG on the mRNA or protein expression of HIF-1α and MDR1 were determined by RT-PCR or western blotting.
Cellular proliferation and viability assays were measured using Cell Counting Kit-8.
Western blotting revealed that EGCG inhibits the expression of the HIF-1α protein in a dose-dependent manner, while RT-PCR showed that it does not have any effects on HIF-1α mRNA.
In addition, EGCG attenuated the mRNA and protein levels of P-gp in a dose-dependent manner, reaching a peak at the highest concentration.
Furthermore, EGCG inhibited the proliferation of PANC-1 cells in a concentration- and time-dependent manner.
The attenuation of HIF-1α and the consequently reduced P-gp could contribute to the inhibitory effects of EGCG on the proliferation of PANC-1 cells.
PMID: 22367239
A phase I/II, non-randomized, feasibility/safety and efficacy study of the combination of everolimus, cetuximab and capecitabine in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer.
Background Improvements in knowledge of molecular mechanisms in cancer are the basis for new studies combining chemotherapy with targeted drugs.
Inhibition of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) by erlotinib or cetuximab has limited or no activity, respectively, in pancreatic cancer.
The crosstalk between EGFR and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathways is a potential mechanism of resistance; therefore we conducted a study to explore safety and efficacy of multiple pathway inhibition by cetuximab and everolimus in combination with capecitabine.
Methods Safety and efficacy of fixed standard dose cetuximab in combination with various dose levels of everolimus (5-10 mg/day) and capecitabine (600-800 mg/m(2) bid, 2 weeks every 3 weeks) were investigated in a phase I/II study in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer.
The primary endpoint was objective response.
Results Sixteen patients were treated in the phase I part at two dose levels.
Mucositis, rash and hand-foot syndrome were dose-limiting toxicities.
Dose level 1 (everolimus 5 mg/day, capecitabine 600 mg/m(2) bid for 2 weeks every 3 weeks and cetuximab 250 mg/m(2) weekly) was considered the maximum tolerated dose (MTD).
Of 31 patients in the phase II part, partial response was documented in two patients (6.5%) and five (16.1%) had stable disease.
Median overall survival was 5.0 months (CI 3.1-6.8).
Conclusion The schedule of capecitabine, everolimus and cetuximab resulted in considerable epidermal and mucosal toxicities and prevented escalation to optimal dose levels.
Because of toxicity and low efficacy this treatment combination cannot be recommended for treatment in pancreatic cancer patients.
PMID: 22365997
[Multi-slice computed tomography for diagnosis of mucinous cystic neoplasms and serous cystadenomas of the pancreas].
To assess the value of multi-slice computed tomography (MSCT) in the diagnosis and differential diagnosis of pancreatic mucinous cystic neoplasms and serous cystadenoma.
The MSCT images were reviewed for 19 pathologically confirmed cases of pancreatic mucinous cystadenomas and 13 cases of pancreatic serous cystadenomas (n=13) treated in our center between July, 2003 and December, 2009.
The CT features were analyzed including the tumor location, contour, dimension of the largest cyst, cystic wall, septation, presence of calcification, solid component, pancreatic atrophy, main pancreatic duct dilatation, and lesion margins.
Significant differences were found between the two groups in lesion diameter (P=0.009), cyst distribution of the largest cyst (>2 cm) (P=0.01), and the presence of solid component (P=0.02).
MSCT can be of important value in the diagnosis and differential diagnosis of pancreatic mucinous cystic neoplasms and serous cystadenomas.
PMID: 22365494
Variation in number of general practitioner consultations before hospital referral for cancer: findings from the 2010 National Cancer Patient Experience Survey in England.
BACKGROUND: Information from patient surveys can help to identify patient groups and cancers with the greatest potential for improvement in the experience and timeliness of cancer diagnosis.
We aimed to examine variation in the number of pre-referral consultations with a general practitioner between patients with different cancers and sociodemographic characteristics.
METHODS: We analysed data from 41 299 patients with 24 different cancers who took part in the 2010 National Cancer Patient Experience Survey in England.
We examined variation in the number of general practitioner consultations with cancer symptoms before hospital referral to diagnose cancer.
Logistic regression was used to identify independent predictors of three or more pre-referral consultations, adjusting for cancer type, age, sex, deprivation quintile, and ethnic group.
FINDINGS: We identified wide variation between cancer types in the proportion of patients who had visited their general practitioner three or more times before hospital referral (7·4% [625 of 8408] for breast cancer and 10·1% [113 of 1124] for melanoma; 41·3% [193 of 467] for pancreatic cancer and 50·6% [939 of 1854] for multiple myeloma).
In multivariable analysis, with patients with rectal cancer as the reference group, those with subsequent diagnosis of multiple myeloma (odds ratio [OR] 3·42, 95% CI 3·01-3·90), pancreatic cancer (2·35, 1·91-2·88), stomach cancer (1·96, 1·65-2·34), and lung cancer (1·68, 1·48-1·90) were more likely to have had three or more pre-referral consultations; conversely patients with subsequent diagnosis of breast cancer (0·19; 0·17-0·22), melanoma (0·34, 0·27-0·43), testicular cancer (0·47, 0·33-0·67), and endometrial cancer (0·59, 0·49-0·71) were more likely to have been referred to hospital after only one or two consultations.
The probability of three or more pre-referral consultations was greater in young patients (OR for patients aged 16-24 years vs 65-74 years 2·12, 95% CI 1·63-2·75; p<0·0001), those from ethnic minorities (OR for Asian vs white 1·73, 1·45-2·08; p<0·0001; OR for black vs white 1·83, 1·51-2·23; p<0·0001), and women (OR for women vs men 1·28, 1·21-1·36; p<0·0001).
We identified strong evidence of interactions between cancer type and age group and sex (p<0·0001 for both), and between age and ethnicity (p=0·0013).
The model including these interactions showed a particularly strong sex effect for bladder cancer (OR for women vs men 2·31, 95% CI 1·98-2·69) and no apparent ethnic group differences in young patients aged 16-24 years, whilst the only cancers without an apparent age gradient were testicular cancer and mesothelioma.
INTERPRETATION: Our findings could help to prioritise and stratify early diagnosis initiatives and research, focusing on patients with cancers and sociodemographic characteristics with the largest potential for improvement.
FUNDING: None.
PMID: 22364882
Characterisation of FAP-1 expression and CD95 mediated apoptosis in the A818-6 pancreatic adenocarcinoma differentiation system.
The present study investigated the expression and localisation of FAP-1 (Fas associated phosphatase-1) and CD95 in a 3D differentiation model in comparison to 2D monolayers of the pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell line A818-6.
Under non-adherent growth conditions, A818-6 cells differentiate into 3D highly organised polarised epithelial hollow spheres, resembling duct-like structures.
A818-6 cells showed a differentiation-dependent FAP-1 localisation.
Cells grown as 2D monolayers revealed FAP-1 staining in a juxtanuclear cisternal position, as well as localisation in the nucleus.
After differentiation into hollow spheres, FAP-1 was relocated towards the actin cytoskeleton beneath the outer plasma membrane of polarised cells and no further nuclear localisation was observed.
CD95 surface staining was found only in a subset of A818-6 monolayer cells, while differentiated hollow spheres appeared to express CD95 in all cells of a given sphere.
We rarely observed co-localisation of CD95 and FAP-1 in A818-6 monolayer cells, but strong co-localisation beneath the outer plasma membrane in polarised cells.
Analysis of surface expression by flow cytometry revealed that only a subset (36%) of monolayer cells showed CD95 surface expression, and after induction of hollow spheres, CD95 presentation at the outer plasma membrane was reduced to 13% of hollow spheres.
Induction of apoptosis by stimulation with agonistic anti-CD95 antibodies, resulted in increased caspase activity in both, monolayer cells and hollow spheres.
Knock down of FAP-1 mRNA in A818-6 monolayer cells did not alter resposiveness to CD95 agonistic antibodies.
These data suggested that CD95 signal transduction was not affected by FAP-1 expression in A818-6 monolayer cells.
In differentiated 3D hollow spheres, we found a polarisation-induced co-localisation of CD95 and FAP-1.
A tight control of receptor surface representation and signalling induced apoptosis ensures controlled removal of individual cells instead of a "snowball effect" of apoptotic events.
PMID: 22363741
M19 Modulates Skeletal Muscle Differentiation and Insulin Secretion in Pancreatic β-Cells through Modulation of Respiratory Chain Activity.
Mitochondrial dysfunction due to nuclear or mitochondrial DNA alterations contributes to multiple diseases such as metabolic myopathies, neurodegenerative disorders, diabetes and cancer.
Nevertheless, to date, only half of the estimated 1,500 mitochondrial proteins has been identified, and the function of most of these proteins remains to be determined.
Here, we characterize the function of M19, a novel mitochondrial nucleoid protein, in muscle and pancreatic β-cells.
We have identified a 13-long amino acid sequence located at the N-terminus of M19 that targets the protein to mitochondria.
Furthermore, using RNA interference and over-expression strategies, we demonstrate that M19 modulates mitochondrial oxygen consumption and ATP production, and could therefore regulate the respiratory chain activity.
In an effort to determine whether M19 could play a role in the regulation of various cell activities, we show that this nucleoid protein, probably through its modulation of mitochondrial ATP production, acts on late muscle differentiation in myogenic C2C12 cells, and plays a permissive role on insulin secretion under basal glucose conditions in INS-1 pancreatic β-cells.
Our results are therefore establishing a functional link between a mitochondrial nucleoid protein and the modulation of respiratory chain activities leading to the regulation of major cellular processes such as myogenesis and insulin secretion.
PMID: 22363658
DPEP1 Inhibits Tumor Cell Invasiveness, Enhances Chemosensitivity and Predicts Clinical Outcome in Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most lethal cancers worldwide.
To identify biologically relevant genes with prognostic and therapeutic significance in PDAC, we first performed the microarray gene-expression profiling in 45 matching pairs of tumor and adjacent non-tumor tissues from resected PDAC cases.
We identified 36 genes that were associated with patient outcome and also differentially expressed in tumors as compared with adjacent non-tumor tissues in microarray analysis.
Further evaluation in an independent validation cohort (N = 27) confirmed that DPEP1 (dipeptidase 1) expression was decreased (T: N ratio ∼0.1, P<0.01) in tumors as compared with non-tumor tissues.
DPEP1 gene expression was negatively correlated with histological grade (Spearman correlation coefficient = -0.35, P = 0.004).
Lower expression of DPEP1 in tumors was associated with poor survival (Kaplan Meier log rank) in both test cohort (P = 0.035) and validation cohort (P = 0.016).
DPEP1 expression was independently associated with cancer-specific mortality when adjusted for tumor stage and resection margin status in both univariate (hazard ratio = 0.43, 95%CI = 0.24-0.76, P = 0.004) and multivariate analyses (hazard ratio = 0.51, 95%CI = 0.27-0.94, P = 0.032).
We further demonstrated that overexpression of DPEP1 suppressed tumor cells invasiveness and increased sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agent Gemcitabine.
Our data also showed that growth factor EGF treatment decreased DPEP1 expression and MEK1/2 inhibitor AZD6244 increased DPEP1 expression in vitro, indicating a potential mechanism for DPEP1 gene regulation.
Therefore, we provide evidence that DPEP1 plays a role in pancreatic cancer aggressiveness and predicts outcome in patients with resected PDAC.
In view of these findings, we propose that DPEP1 may be a candidate target in PDAC for designing improved treatments.
PMID: 22363124
ABO blood type, diabetes and risk of gastrointestinal cancer in northern China.
To explore the potential risk factors related to gastrointestinal cancer in northern China.
A total of 3314 cases of gastrointestinal cancer (esophageal, gastric, pancreatic and biliary) and 2223 controls (including healthy individuals, glioma and thyroid cancer) were analyzed by case-control study.
Multivariable logistic regression analysis was applied to evaluate the association between different cancers and hepatitis B surface antigen, sex, age, blood type, diabetes, or family history of cancer.
Type 2 diabetes was significantly associated with gastric, biliary and pancreatic cancer with an OR of 2.0-3.0.
Blood type B was significantly associated with esophageal cancer [odd ratio (OR) = 1.53, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.10-2.14] and biliary cancer (OR = 1.49, 95% CI = 1.09-2.05).
The prevalence of type 2 diabetes was significantly higher in gastric, biliary and pancreatic cancers compared with other groups, with ORs ranging between 2.0 and 3.0.
Family history of cancer was strongly associated with gastrointestinal compared with other cancers.
Blood type B individuals are susceptible to esophageal and biliary cancer.
Type 2 diabetes is significantly associated with gastric, biliary and especially pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22363081
Pancreatic cancer: Animal model and molecular biology.
THE ABSTRACT IS AVAILABLE AT THE CLINICAL PANCREATIC DISORDER I: Acute pancreatitis.
North Am J Med Sci 2011; 3: 316-319.
doi: 10.4297/najms.2011.3316.
PMID: 22363072
Complications of pancreatic surgery.
Many diseases, including pancreatitis benign tumors and cancer, may require pancreas surgery.
Pancreatic resection can lead to a prolonged survival in pancreatic cancer and even a potential chance for cure.
However, the pancreatic surgery can result in complications, and high postoperative morbidity rates are still presence.
This article reviews the pancreatic abstracts of American Pancreas Club 2011, which involves the more common complications, their prevention and treatment.
PMID: 22362246
Minimally Invasive Treatment of Pancreatic Disease.
Minimally invasive surgery has been widely accepted as an alternative to conventional open surgery in many gastrointestinal fields and is now considered the standard of care in bariatric surgery as well as oncologic surgery of the colon and stomach.
Despite the advancements in laparoscopic surgery instrumentation and technique, the anatomic relationships of the pancreas and the need for complex reconstructions have slowed similar progress in management of pancreatic disease.
However, numerous recent studies show promising results in laparoscopic management of pancreatic pseudocyst, necrosis, and benign and malignant pancreatic neoplasms.
We present the current status of clinical application of minimally invasive techniques for the treatment of complicated pancreatitis, chronic pancreatitis, and pancreatic neoplasms, and provide a review of the relevant literature.
Present day and probable future developments, such as the use of robotics, natural orifice techniques, and major vascular reconstruction are also presented.
PMID: 22361500
Autoimmune pancreatitis mimicking pancreatic cancer.
Autoimmune pancreatitis is a particular type of pancreatitis of presumed autoimmune etiology, it is an entity distinct from all others forms of chronic pancreatitis, characterized by clinical, histopathological, radiographic, serologic and therapeutic features.
This benign disease resembles pancreatic carcinoma both clinically and radiographically.
A 27-year-old man presented with obstructive jaundice and evocative image of pancreatic tumor.
A pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple operation) was performed and pathological examination of the specimen diagnosed AIP.
Patient responded well to a course of corticosteroids with resolution of clinical and biological disorders.
Accurate and timely diagnosis of autoimmune pancreatitis is particularly important because steroid therapy is effective and pancreatic resection is not necessary.
PMID: 22360763
Assessment of Consecutive Neurolytic Celiac Plexus Block (NCPB) Technique Outcomes in the Management of Refractory Visceral Cancer Pain.
Objective.  The objective of this study was to assess outcomes and safety of consecutive neurolytic celiac plexus block (NCPB) technique.
Design.  Retrospective clinical data analysis.
Setting.  The study was conducted in three pain departments and academic medical center.
Patients.  The subject of this study was 12 patients with terminal visceral (mostly pancreatic) cancer who failed conservative measures.
Interventions.  Twelve celiac plexus alcohol neurolytic procedures were performed for pain control after a positive diagnostic block.
Materials and Methods.  Twelve patients with terminal visceral (mostly pancreatic) cancer who failed conservative measures were managed by consecutive NCPB guided by computed tomography at the pain department of Beijing Xuanwu Hospital between January 2005 and June 2010.
The present study evaluated the efficacy of consecutive NCPB technique with regard to pain relief, as well as its adverse effects and complications.
Results.  The efficacy of consecutive NCPB technique with regard to pain relief was observed by a marked decrease in the visual analog score and in opioid consumption, with preprocedural mean values dropping from (8.7 ± 1.0) and (155 ± 56) mg/day of morphine to (1.8 ± 1.1) and (0) mg/day at the first postprocedural visit, respectively.
These results persisted during the 6-month follow-up period or until death.
Minor adverse effects (moderate diarrhea and mild hypotension) were frequent (N = 3, and N = 4, respectively), and severe complications occurred in one patient with a transient paraparesis (N = 1).
No procedure-related mortality was observed.
Conclusions.  The consecutive NCPB technique can provide analgesia and the alleviation of the secondary undesirable effects of analgesic drugs resulting from the decrease of morphine consumption in patients with upper abdominal malignancies.
In the subject group, the reliability of its analgesic effect is high, with lower rate of severe complications.
PMID: 22360504
Breast cancer resistance protein expression is associated with early recurrence and decreased survival in resectable pancreatic cancer patients.
The prognosis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) remains dismal even after complete resection, with most recurrences occurring within 1-2 years postoperatively.
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-binding cassette (ABC) transporters have been demonstrated to play major roles in multidrug resistance (MDR) of cancers.
In this study, we evaluated the expression statuses and the clinical significance of MDR1 (ABCB1), MDR-associated proteins (MRPs/ABCC) 1, 2 and 3, and breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP/ABCG2) in 67 surgically resected PDACs by immunohistochemistry.
MDR1, MRP1, MRP2, MRP3 and BCRP were expressed in 35 (52.2%), 56 (83.6%), 61 (91.0%), 49 (73.1%) and 49 (73.1%) out of 67 cases, respectively.
The expression statuses of the MDR-related proteins were positively correlated with each other (P < 0.05).
Tumors expressing MRP1 (P= 0.015), MRP2 (P= 0.022) and MRP3 (P < 0.001) demonstrated more frequent perineural invasion.
MDR1 expression was significantly correlated with lymphatic invasion (P= 0.047).
High BCRP expression in PDAC was a significant prognostic factor for early tumor recurrence (HR = 2.43, P= 0.003) and poor survival (HR = 2.63, P= 0.001).
MDR-related proteins are frequently expressed in PDAC, and high BCRP expression is a significant independent predictor for early recurrence and poor survival.
Immunohistochemical analysis for BCRP expression in PDAC may be a useful test in identifying a subgroup of patients with a poor prognosis.
PMID: 22359542
Protein Kinase C Iota Regulates Pancreatic Acinar-to-Ductal Metaplasia.
Pancreatic acinar-to-ductal metaplasia (ADM) is associated with an increased risk of pancreatic cancer and is considered a precursor of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
Transgenic expression of transforming growth factor alpha (TGF-α) or K-ras(G12D) in mouse pancreatic epithelium induces ADM in vivo.
Protein kinase C iota (PKCι) is highly expressed in human pancreatic cancer and is required for the transformed growth and tumorigenesis of pancreatic cancer cells.
In this study, PKCι expression was assessed in a mouse model of K-ras(G12D)-induced pancreatic ADM and pancreatic cancer.
The ability of K-ras(G12D) to induce pancreatic ADM in explant culture, and the requirement for PKCι, was investigated.
PKCι is elevated in human and mouse pancreatic ADM and intraepithelial neoplastic lesions in vivo.
We demonstrate that K-ras(G12D) is sufficient to induce pancreatic ADM in explant culture, exhibiting many of the same morphologic and biochemical alterations observed in TGF-α-induced ADM, including a dependence on Notch activation.
PKCι is highly expressed in both TGF-α- and K-ras(G12D)-induced pancreatic ADM and inhibition of PKCι significantly reduces TGF-α- and K-ras(G12D)-mediated ADM.
Inhibition of PKCι suppresses K-ras(G12D)-induced MMP-7 expression and Notch activation, and exogenous MMP-7 restores K-ras(G12D)-mediated ADM in PKCι-depleted cells, implicating a K-ras(G12D)-PKCι-MMP-7 signaling axis that likely induces ADM through Notch activation.
Our results indicate that PKCι is an early marker of pancreatic neoplasia and suggest that PKCι is a potential downstream target of K-ras(G12D) in pancreatic ductal metaplasia in vivo.
PMID: 22359319
The functional cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated Protein 4 49G-to-A genetic variant and risk of pancreatic cancer.
BACKGROUND: Antitumor T lymphocytes play an essential part in immune surveillance of cancer cells.
Cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated Protein 4 (CTLA-4) is a negative regulator of T cell activation and proliferation and therefore influences immune surveillance of carcinogenesis of pancreas.
Thus, this study examined the association between functional CTLA-4 49G-to-A (49G>A) single-nucleotide polymorphism and pancreatic cancer risk.
METHODS: Genotypes were determined in 368 patients with pancreatic cancer and 926 controls, and odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated by logistic regression.
RESULTS: A significant increased risk of pancreatic cancer was found to be associated with the CTLA-4 49G>A single-nucleotide polymorphism.
Compared with noncarriers, the OR of developing pancreatic cancer for CTLA-4 49 GA or AA carriers was 1.75 (95% CI = 1.34-2.30, P = 4.83 × 10(-5) ) or 2.54 (95% CI = 1.67-3.87, P = 1.36 × 10(-5) ), respectively.
In stratified analyses, the association was more pronounced in GA and AA carriers aged ≤60 years (OR = 3.10, 95% CI = 2.15-4.47, P(interaction) = .002), smokers with GA and AA genotypes (OR = 3.92, 95% CI = 2.39-6.43, P(interaction) = .037), and drinkers with GA and AA genotypes (OR = 4.55, 95% CI = 2.65-7.82, P(interaction) = .042), compared with GG carriers.
Moreover, a supermultiplicative interaction between the CTLA-4 49AA genotype and smoking plus drinking was also evident in intensifying risk of pancreatic cancer (P(interaction) = 5.64 × 10(-12) ).
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that CTLA-4 49G>A polymorphism is involved in susceptibility to developing pancreatic cancer, alone and in a gene-environment interaction manner.
Cancer 2012;.
© 2012 American Cancer Society.
PMID: 22359299
DNA methylation in pancreatic cancer: protocols for the isolation of DNA and bisulfite modification.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is an aggressive tumor and still remains a challenge for its lack of effective therapeutic strategies, which is due to the late diagnosis of this disease.
Methylation markers might improve early detection and surveillance of PDAC.
Furthermore, analysis of hypermethylation in the tumor tissue might help to identify new targets for therapeutic intervention and improve the understanding of the pathophysiological changes occurring in pancreatic cancer.
Methylation specific PCR is the method of choice if a small number of genes will be tested in a larger set of patient samples.
After DNA isolation by standard procedure, the DNA is then modified using sodium bisulfite.
This DNA can then be used in qualitative and quantitative PCR assays.
PMID: 22357730
A New Era for the Systemic Therapy of Neuroendocrine Tumors.
AbstractCarcinoids and pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors are becoming increasingly common, with the majority of patients presenting with either lymph node involvement or metastatic disease.
An improved understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in these tumors has implicated several pathways that have led to new therapeutic approaches.
In this manuscript, we describe the biology of neuroendocrine tumors and approaches to systemic therapy.
We review early data regarding the use of cytotoxics and several recent studies employing more targeted approaches that promise to change the standard of care.
Specifically, phase III studies indicate that pharmacologic inhibition of the vascular endothelial growth factor pathway with sunitinib, and of the mammalian target of rapamycin pathway with everolimus, appears to have altered the natural history of these diseases.
These successes set the stage for further advances in the management of patients with neuroendocrine tumors.
PMID: 22357542
Family history of von Hippel-Lindau disease was uncommon in Chinese patients: suggesting the higher frequency of de novo mutations in VHL gene in these patients.
Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease is an autosomal dominant familial cancer syndrome caused by germline mutations in VHL tumor suppressor gene.
It is characterized by hemangioblastoma in central nervous system and retina, renal cell carcinoma or cyst, pheochromocytoma, pancreatic cyst and tumor, endolymphatic-sac tumor, and papillary cystadenoma in epididymis and broad ligament.
Here, we used PCR-direct sequencing and universal primer quantitative fluorescent multiplex PCR (UPQFM-PCR) to detect VHL mutations in 16 patients clinically diagnosed with VHL disease.
PCR-direct sequencing detected 12 germline mutations (75%, 12/16), in which a novel mutation of c.451A>T/p.Ile151Phe found in one proband had not been reported previously.
UPQFM-PCR found two large deletions (12.5%, 2/16).
The two remaining patients carried non-typical disease-causing mutations, including one silent mutation (c.481C>A/p.Arg161Arg) and one mutation in 3'-UTR (c.642+70C>A).
Remarkably, 56.3% (9/16) probands did not have family history of VHL disease, suggesting the higher frequency of de novo mutations in Chinese patients.
We also summarized Chinese VHL disease patients with VHL mutation findings published in the literature to provide information about the spectrum of VHL mutations in Chinese VHL disease patients.Journal of Human Genetics advance online publication, 23 February 2012; doi:10.1038/jhg.2012.10.
PMID: 22356315
Metastatic malignant melanoma of the gallbladder diagnosed by cytology of endoscopic naso-gallbladder drainage fluid.
PMID: 22355676
Whole-exome sequencing uncovers frequent GNAS mutations in intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas.
Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) is a common pancreatic cystic neoplasm that is often invasive and metastatic, resulting in a poor prognosis.
Few molecular alterations unique to IPMN are known.
We performed whole-exome sequencing for a primary IPMN tissue, which uncovered somatic mutations in KCNF1, DYNC1H1, PGCP, STAB1, PTPRM, PRPF8, RNASE3, SPHKAP, MLXIPL, VPS13C, PRCC, GNAS, KRAS, RBM10, RNF43, DOCK2, and CENPF.
We further analyzed GNAS mutations in archival cases of 118 IPMNs and 32 pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDAs), which revealed that 48 (40.7%) of the 118 IPMNs but none of the 32 PDAs harbored GNAS mutations.
G-protein alpha-subunit encoded by GNAS and its downstream targets, phosphorylated substrates of protein kinase A, were evidently expressed in IPMN; the latter was associated with neoplastic grade.
These results indicate that GNAS mutations are common and specific for IPMN, and activation of G-protein signaling appears to play a pivotal role in IPMN.
PMID: 22354549
Synthesis and biological investigation of the β-thiolactone and β-lactam analogs of tetrahydrolipstatin.
The synthesis of β-thiolactone and β-lactam analogs of tetrahydrolipstatin is described from a common late-stage β-lactone derivative.
These analogs, and a cis-disubstituted β-lactone analog of tetrahydrolipstatin, were screened for activity against porcine pancreatic lipase and for inhibition of cell growth of a panel of four human cancer lines.
PMID: 22354009
RGD-conjugated albumin nanoparticles as a novel delivery vehicle in pancreatic cancer therapy.
Integrin αvβ3 receptor is expressed on several types of cancer cells, including pancreatic cancer cells, and plays an important role in tumor growth and metastasis.
The ability to target the integrin αvβ3 receptor on cancer cells increases the efficacy of targeted therapy and reduces the side effects.
The aim of this study is to develop a novel arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD) peptide -conjugated albumin nanoparticle to enhance the intracellular uptake of anticancer drug into the pancreatic cancer cells through receptor-mediated endocytosis.
In the cellular uptake studies, the fluorescent signal of RGD-conjugated BSANPs in BxPC3 cells was higher than that of BSANPs without RGD conjugation as determined by fluorescence spectrophotometer.
We also found that BSANPs bound to BxPC3 cells in a time- and concentration-dependent manner.
The uptake of RGD-conjugated BSANPs by pancreatic cancer cells was inhibited by an excess amount of free RGD peptide, indicating that the binding and/or uptake were mediated by the αvβ3 receptor.
Furthermore, the nanoparticles were found to be located close to the nuclei by using laser scanning confocal microscopy.
Besides, no significant in vitro cytotoxicity was observed as measured with MTT assay.
Both in vitro and in vivo antitumor efficacy was improved by targeting gemcitabine-loaded nanoparticles to BxPC-3 cells using RGD peptides.
Therefore, the RGD-conjugated BSANPs hold great potential as an effective drug delivery system to deliver therapeutic agents to pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22353530
Radical Distal Gastrectomy in Laparoscopic and Open Surgery: Is it Necessary for Pancreatic Capsule Resection?
Background/Aims: To explore the involvement of the pancreatic capsule during radical gastrectomy in gastric cancer.
Methodology: Pancreatic capsule samples were collected from the 83 cases (56 men and 27 women) during open radical gastrectomy and laparoscopic resection between January 2007 and July 2008.
RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry were applied for tumor detection.
There was a 2-year follow-up; the relationship of the pancreatic capsule involvement, tumor stage and survival rate were evaluated.
Results from radical distal gastrectomy were combined with those of gastric cancer pancreatic capsule cleaning; clinical data, pathology, immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR were used to confirm the necessity of pancreatic capsule resection in laparoscopic radical gastrectomy.
Results: H&E staining of the pancreatic capsule showed no tumor existence in any of the 83 patients but immunohistochemistry showed CK20 positive cells in 20 patients (33.7%), while RT-PCR detected CK20 mRNA positive cells in 42 patients (50.6%).
Cases with stage T1 and T2 were negative for CK20 in both RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry and the few cases with T3 and T4 were also negative in both RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry.
The metastasis in the pancreatic capsule correlated mainly with the invasive serous membrane, lymph node metastasis and tumor stage (p<0.05) but not with gender and age (p>0.05).
Conclusions: For T1 and T2 stage, there was no evidence of pancreatic capsule metastasis, which may facilitate the decision making of the pancreatic capsule resection during radical distal gastrectomy.
PMID: 22353527
Pancreatic involvement in 11 cases of von hippel-lindau disease.
Background/Aims: Von Hippel-Lindau disease is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder characterized by neoplasms developing in multiple organs.
Although the pancreas is one of the most frequently involved organs, the frequency of pancreatic cysts, cystadenomas, neuroendocrine tumors and diabetes has not been sufficiently evaluated due to the low prevalence of this disease.
In this paper, we review and retrospectively analyze 11 patients with von Hippel-Lindau disease.
Methodology: Eleven patients (6 males, 5 females) who underwent CT or MRI scans at Okayama University Hospital between 2002 and 2009 were enrolled in this study.
Their pancreatic CT scans, MRI scans, biochemical test results and clinical histories were retrospectively reviewed.
Results: All patients had one or more pancreatic involvements.
Nine of the 11 patients had multiple pancreatic cysts, 2 had dilatation of the main pancreatic duct, 3 had a non-functioning pancreatic endocrine tumor (one patient required pancreatoduodenectomy due to the endocrine carcinoma) and 3 had diabetes mellitus.
Pancreatic cystadenomas were not detected in this case series.
Conclusions: The prevalence of pancreatic involvement was 100% in this study.
Regular screening and scheduled follow-up for pancreatic lesions and diabetes should be performed on individuals predisposed to von Hippel-Lindau disease.
PMID: 22353526
Beta-adrenoceptor action on pancreatic cancer cell proliferation and tumor growth in mice.
Background/Aims: There is growing evidence that some cancer progression is closely associated with beta- adrenoreceptors (β-ARs).
However, the underlying mechanisms for β-ARs mediated proliferation of pancreatic cancer cell are poorly understood.
In the current study, we evaluated the possible function of β-ARs on the proliferation of human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDAC) cell line Panc-1 and explored β-ARsmediated downstream signal pathway.
Methodology: Series of experiments, such as expression of β1- and β2-ARs on pancreatic cancer cell line Panc-1, β-ARsmediated downstream signal pathway activation as well as cell proliferation assay in vitro and in vivo were performed with immunofluorescence, Western blot analysis, BrdU incorporation assays and xenograft tumor growth respectively.
Results: Non-selective β-ARs agonist Isoproterenol (ISO) significantly increased cell proliferation via β-ARs in a dose-dependent manner, with concomitant activation of ERK/MAPK signal pathway in Panc-1 cells.
ISO increased expression level of phosphorylated ERK in Panc-1 cells.
Furthermore, in vivo study showed that ISO enhanced xenograft tumor growth and this effect was suppressed by non-selective β-ARs antagonist (β-blocker), propranolol (PRO) treatment.
Conclusions: These findings suggest that the development and progression of PDAC is subject to significant modulation by ISO and PRO and the treatment with PRO may be useful for marker-guided cancer intervention of PDAC.
Therefore, PRO may be developed a novel drug for the treatment and intervention of PDAC for its high specificity.
PMID: 22353525
Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas: clinicopathological features and long term outcome related to histopathological group.
Background/Aims: To investigate the clinicopathological features of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms and evaluate the prognosis between histopathological groups.
Methodology: Retrospective review of 55 consecutive patients operated between 1991 and 2006, analysis of clinicopathological features and survival.
Results: Group I comprised of 9 mild and 14 moderate dysplasias, group II of 11 carcinomas in situ and group III of 21 invasive cancers.
Age, diabetes, anorexia and jaundice were significantly more frequent in group III.
Thirty-two patients (58.2%) presented main duct type which was more frequently associated with invasive carcinoma.
Mean tumoral size progress from group I to group III (26.1mm vs.
27.4mm vs.
32.0mm p=0.015) as the mean size of the pancreatic duct (6.7mm vs.
7.9mm vs.
11.5mm p=0.008).
Median follow-up was 154 months with 5-year survival rate of 60.7 %.
For group I, II and III it was 76.3 %, 100 % and 25.8 % respectively (p=0.00007).
Lymph node positivity was associated with poor outcome: 44.1% vs.
0% (N0 vs.
N+) (p=0.0019).
Conclusions: The prognosis of non-invasive intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas is favourable.
For patients with invasive cancer, nodal invasion is a factor of worst prognosis.
PMID: 22351932
Gamma secretase inhibition promotes hypoxic necrosis in mouse pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is a highly lethal disease that is refractory to medical intervention.
Notch pathway antagonism has been shown to prevent pancreatic preneoplasia progression in mouse models, but potential benefits in the setting of an established PDA tumor have not been established.
We demonstrate that the gamma secretase inhibitor MRK003 effectively inhibits intratumoral Notch signaling in the KPC mouse model of advanced PDA.
Although MRK003 monotherapy fails to extend the lifespan of KPC mice, the combination of MRK003 with the chemotherapeutic gemcitabine prolongs survival.
Combination treatment kills tumor endothelial cells and synergistically promotes widespread hypoxic necrosis.
These results indicate that the paucivascular nature of PDA can be exploited as a therapeutic vulnerability, and the dual targeting of the tumor endothelium and neoplastic cells by gamma secretase inhibition constitutes a rationale for clinical translation.
PMID: 22351878
Fate of the Pancreatic Remnant After Resection for an Intraductal Papillary Mucinous Neoplasm: A Longitudinal Level II Cohort Study.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the occurrence of new disease in the pancreatic remnant after resection for intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms.
DESIGN: A longitudinal level II cohort study.
SETTING: Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, Washington.
PATIENTS: The primary cohort was a "resection cohort" of 203 patients who underwent partial pancreatic resection for an intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The occurrence rate of lesions in the pancreatic remnant after resection for an intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm, determined by use of an annual computed tomographic scan of the pancreas.
RESULTS: New lesions were observed in the remnant of 17 of the 203 patients (8%) after a median follow-up of 40 months and a median interval of 38 months from the initial resection.
Only 1 of these 17 patients with new lesions had a surgical margin that was positive for an adenoma at the time of resection.
Comparing the 17 patients with new lesions with the 186 patients without new lesions, we found no difference in age, sex, procedure type, location in ductal system, original histology, or original margin status.
In the new lesion group, no treatment was used for 12 patients who had side-branch disease detected by imaging (6% of all patients).
Surgical treatment was used for 5 patients (2% of all patients): 2 with adenomas, 1 with a carcinoma in situ, and 2 with an invasive ductal carcinoma (1 with liver metastases).
CONCLUSIONS: We found that, following a partial pancreatic resection for an intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm and a 40-month follow-up with an annual computed tomographic scan of the pancreas, 17 of 203 patients (8%) developed a new intraductal papillary mucinous neoplastic lesion in the pancreatic remnant.
As follow-up time increases, we suspect that new lesions will constantly appear regardless of whether the surgical margin was negative at initial resection.
PMID: 22351874
Clinical Calculator of Conditional Survival Estimates for Resected and Unresected Survivors of Pancreatic Cancer.
OBJECTIVE: To calculate conditional survival estimates for patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
DESIGN: We constructed separate multivariate survival models adjusted for 7 clinicopathologic factors for patients who did and did not undergo radical surgical resection.
PARTICIPANTS: Patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma diagnosed between 1988 and 2005 included in the Surveillance Epidemiology End Results cancer registry.
Main Outcome Measure  Internet browser-based calculator to compute personalized survival estimates.
RESULTS: Conditional survival probabilities increased over time for all patients with pancreatic cancer regardless of patient characteristics, disease stage, or treatment.
For patients with resected stage I, II, or III disease, 3-year conditional cancer-specific survival increased from 38% to 70%, 19% to 54%, and 8% to 39%, respectively, over the 3 years following diagnosis.
The relative improvement in survival over time was larger for patients with advanced disease.
A customizable, Internet browser-based clinical calculator was implemented that may be used to compute in real time personalized conditional survival estimates based on an individual's unique clinicopathologic profile.
CONCLUSIONS: Conditional survival estimates provide a more accurate-and typically more optimistic-assessment of prognosis for patients with pancreatic cancer than traditional survival estimates that apply only at the initial diagnosis.
PMID: 22351743
Mesothelin-Targeted Agents in Clinical Trials and in Preclinical Development.
Mesothelin is a tumor differentiation antigen that is highly expressed in several malignant diseases in humans, including malignant mesothelioma and pancreatic, ovarian, and lung adenocarcinomas.
The limited expression of mesothelin on normal human tissues and its high expression in many common cancers make it an attractive candidate for cancer therapy.
Several agents, including an immunotoxin, monoclonal antibody, antibody drug conjugate, and tumor vaccine, are in various stages of development to treat patients with mesothelin-expressing tumors.
This review highlights ongoing clinical trials, as well as other approaches to exploit mesothelin for cancer therapy, that are in preclinical development.
Mol Cancer Ther; 11(3); 1-9.
©2012 AACR.
PMID: 22350841
Autoimmune Pancreatitis: An Update on Classification, Diagnosis, Natural History and Management.
Autoimmune Pancreatitis (AIP) is a recently recognized chronic fibro-inflammatory disease of the pancreas.
Although rare, its recognition continues to increase worldwide.
Patients often present with painless obstructive jaundice mimicking pancreatic cancer.
Two subtypes of AIP are known-type 1 is a multi-organ disease associated with IgG4; type 2 appears to be a pancreas-specific disorder.
Dramatic response to steroid treatment is characteristic of both forms.
A non-invasive diagnosis of type 1 AIP may be possible using diagnostic criteria (in ~70% cases) while diagnosis of type 2 requires histology.
These subtypes differ in natural history- type 1 often relapses while initial reports suggest that type 2 does not.
Long term complications include endocrine and exocrine insufficiency and in case of type 1, disease relapses and complications from extra-pancreatic involvement.
Neither form affects long term survival.
The treatment and follow-up guidelines continue to evolve with our increasing experience in AIP.
PMID: 22350780
SEL1L, an UPR Response Protein, a Potential Marker of Colonic Cell Transformation.
BACKGROUND: SEL1L gene product is implicated in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated protein degradation and Unfolded Protein Response pathways.
This gene and associated miRNAs have been indicated as predictive and prognostic markers of pancreatic cancer.
AIM: Explore the role of SEL1L in colorectal cancer (CRC) progression.
METHODS: SEL1L expression was analysed immunohistochemically in 153 adenomas and 71 CRCs from African American and North Italian patients.
The distribution of stained cells was determined by computing median and inter quartile range.
The receiver operating characteristics plot was used as discriminate power of SEL1L expression, CRC diagnosis and the effects on patient survival.
RESULTS: SEL1L was low in normal mucosa and confined to few scattered cells at the base crypt of the villi and in the foveolar glandular compartment.
The highest levels were in Paneth cells within the lysosomes.
The enterocytic progenitor cells and mature enterocytes showed less cytoplasmic staining.
In CRCs, SEL1L expression significantly correlated with the progression from adenoma to carcinoma (P = 0.0001) being stronger in well-to-moderately differentiated cancers.
No correlation was found with other clinicopathological characteristics or ethnicity.
CONCLUSIONS: SEL1L expression is a potential CRC tissue biomarker since its expression is significantly higher in adenoma cells with respect to normal mucosa.
The levels of expression decrease sensibly in undifferentiated CRC cancers.
Interestingly, Paneth cells contain high levels of SEL1L protein that could indicate pre-neoplastic mucosa undergoing neoplastic transformation.
Since SEL1L's major function lies within ER stress and active ERAD response, it may identify CRCs with differentiated secretory phenotype and acute cellular stress.
PMID: 22350613
Chemoprevention of pancreatic cancer-one step closer.
BACKGROUND: Since for pancreatic cancer the mortality rate approaches the incidence rate with only 1-4% of all patients surviving 5 years, it would be would be of great value to provide chemopreventive treatment for high-risk individuals.
DISCUSSION: The preclinical study of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanINs) has recently been made possible by the generation of genetically modified animal models, which recapitulate human PanINs and invasive pancreatic cancer on a genetic and histomorphologic level.
Very recently, several groups have reported first evidence of chemoprevention of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22350605
Incidental Detection of Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors: An Analysis of Incidence and Outcomes.
BACKGROUND: Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) are increasingly discovered incidentally during radiologic or endoscopic examinations.
The frequency of incidental detection is unknown.
It is also unclear whether patients with incidentally discovered, early-stage, asymptomatic tumors should be treated similarly to patients who present with tumor-related symptoms.
METHODS: Patients with nonmetastatic pancreatic NETs treated at the H.
Lee Moffitt Cancer Center between 1999 and 2010 were assigned a stage (I-III) on the basis of the new American Joint Committee on Cancer classification.
The frequency of incidentally diagnosed tumors was evaluated and stratified by stage.
Progression-free survival was measured by log rank testing to compare patients with incidentally detected versus symptomatic tumors.
Multivariate analysis was performed controlling for other prognostic factors including tumor stage, grade, and location, and patient age.
RESULTS: Among 143 patients with nonmetastatic pancreatic NETs, 56 patients (40%) had tumors that were discovered incidentally.
Most stage I tumors (55%) were incidental.
The 5-year progression-free survival rate was 86% for incidentally diagnosed tumors, versus 59% for symptomatic tumors (P = 0.007).
On multivariate analysis, incidental detection of tumors was the strongest prognostic factor for progression.
CONCLUSIONS: A sizable fraction of patients with early-stage pancreatic NETs are diagnosed incidentally during evaluations for other conditions or unrelated symptoms.
This study highlights the necessity of developing guidelines for management of patients with incidentally discovered early-stage tumors.
PMID: 22350603
Association of Type O Blood with Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors in Von Hippel-Lindau Syndrome.
BACKGROUND: ABO blood type antigens are expressed not only on human red blood cells, but also throughout the gastrointestinal tract and in normal pancreatic tissue.
Previous studies have identified an association between ABO blood type and various malignancies.
We analyzed the association of ABO blood type with pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PNETs) in a high-risk cohort of patients with Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) syndrome.
METHODS: A retrospective review was performed of 798 patients with VHL syndrome.
Blood type was confirmed for 181 patients.
Fisher's exact test and Mehta's modification to Fisher's exact test were used to test for an association between ABO blood type and manifestations of VHL syndrome.
RESULTS: We found a strong trend for association between O blood type and pancreatic disease manifestation in patients with VHL syndrome (P = 0.047).
More importantly, there was a significant association of O blood type with solid pancreatic lesions consistent with PNETs (P = 0.0084).
Patients with solid pancreatic lesions who met criteria for surgical resection at the National Institutes of Health also had a higher rate of O blood type than those who did not require surgery (P = 0.051).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest an association between O blood type and pancreatic manifestation of disease in patients with VHL syndrome, especially for PNETs.
Screening and surveillance approaches for pancreatic lesions in patients with VHL syndrome should also consider patient blood type.
The possibility of A, B, H misexpression in PNETs should also be explored to determine whether the serologic association with disease translates into a relationship with tissue pathology.
PMID: 22350599
Clinical Significance of Folate Receptor β-expressing Tumor-associated Macrophages in Pancreatic Cancer.
PURPOSE: To examine the appearance and distribution of folate receptor β-expressing (FRβ(+)) macrophages in the pancreatic tumor microenvironment and their relationship to metastasis and prognosis in pancreatic cancer patients.
METHODS: Tumor samples were obtained from 76 patients with pancreatic cancer who underwent curative resection.
None of these patients had received any preoperative chemotherapy or radiotherapy.
Both FRβ(+) and tumor-infiltrating (CD68(+)) macrophages were examined in each tumor specimen by immunohistochemical and immunofluorescence staining using a newly developed anti-human FRβ monoclonal antibody and CD68 antibody.
The appearance, distribution, expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) on FRβ-expressing or CD68(+) macrophages, and tumor microvessel density (MVD) were assessed.
Log rank test and Cox proportional hazard regression were used to investigate the associations among CD68(+) or FRβ(+) macrophages, clinicopathologic factors, and overall survival.
RESULTS: FRβ(+) macrophages were prominent in the perivascular regions of the tumor-invasive front and a specific subset with VEGF expression in the CD68(+) macrophages.
A high number of FRβ(+) macrophages showed a positive association with high MVD, a high incidence of hematogenous metastasis, and a poor prognosis in pancreatic cancer patients.
CONCLUSIONS: FRβ(+) macrophages are a novel subset of tumor-associated macrophages in pancreatic cancer and may play an important role in the tumor microenvironment in association with systemic metastasis through the interaction with tumor cells and vessels.
FRβ(+) macrophages may be promising a targeting therapy for pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22350478
Pancreatectomy Combined with Superior Mesenteric Vein-Portal Vein Resection for Pancreatic Cancer: A Meta-analysis.
BACKGROUND: Pancreatectomy combined with superior mesenteric vein-portal vein resection (VR) for pancreatic cancer remains a matter of debate.
The present study is a meta-analysis of the available evidence.
METHODS: Articles published until end of March 2011, comparing the results of pancreatic resections with VR versus without VR, were searched.
Pooled odds ratios (OR) and weighted mean differences (WMD; with 95% Confidence Intervals [95% CI]) were calculated using either the fixed effects model or the random effects model.
RESULTS: Nineteen nonrandomized studies met the inclusion criteria, comprising 2,247 patients.
There was no difference in perioperative morbidity (OR: 0.95; 95% CI: 0.74-1.21; P = 0.67), mortality (OR: 1.19; 95% CI: 0.73-1.96; P = 0.48), or 5-year overall survival (OR: 0.57; 95% CI: 0.32-1.02; P = 0.06) between patients with VR and those without VR.
CONCLUSIONS: Pancreatectomy combined with VR resection for pancreatic cancer is justified because it can result in good perioperative outcome and long-term survival comparable to that obtained with standard resection.
Owing to the selection bias and low level of clinical evidence available so far, the results should be interpreted with caution.
PMID: 22350300
Periductal infiltrating type of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma: a rare macroscopic type without any apparent mass.
PURPOSE: This study was undertaken to elucidate the clinicopathological characteristics and surgical outcome of the periductal infiltrating (PI) type of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC), which is a distinct macroscopic type of ICC arising from the second-order of the intrahepatic bile ducts without apparent invasion of the surrounding liver parenchyma.
METHODS: All patients with the PI type of ICC were identified from a database of patients with intrahepatic cholangiocellular carcinoma that underwent surgical resection between 1983 and 2009.
The clinicopathological data of these patients were analyzed retrospectively.
RESULTS: Sixteen of 203 patients (7.9%) had the PI type of ICC.
The median survival was 7.7 years with 5-year survival rate of 62.1%.
The PI type of ICC showed a significantly better survival than the mass-forming (MF) type (P = 0.0293) or MF plus PI type of ICC (P = 0.0001).
Microscopic examinations showed intrahepatic metastasis to be absent in all the patients with PI type ICC.
The incidence of intrahepatic metastases in patients with PI type was significantly lower in comparison to that of patients with MF type (P = 0.0030) and MF plus PI type (P = 0.0533), respectively.
CONCLUSION: Surgery could therefore provide a favorable outcome in patients with the PI type of ICC, probably due to its lower incidence of intrahepatic metastases.
PMID: 22348348
An orally active lysophosphatidic acid receptor antagonist attenuates pancreatic cancer invasion and metastasis in vivo.
Pancreatic cancer is highly metastatic and has a poor prognosis.
However, there is no established treatment for pancreatic cancer.
Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) has been shown to be present in effluents of cancers and involved in migration and proliferation in a variety of cancer cells, including pancreatic cancer cells, in vitro.
In the current study, we examined whether an orally active LPA antagonist is effective for pancreatic cancer tumorigenesis and metastasis in vivo.
Oral administration of Ki16198, which is effective for LPA(1) and LPA(3) , into YAPC-PD pancreatic cancer cell-inoculated nude mice significantly inhibited tumor weight and remarkably attenuated invasion and metastasis to lung, liver, and brain, in association with inhibition of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) accumulation in ascites in vivo.
Ki16198 inhibited LPA-induced migration and invasion in several pancreatic cancer cells in vitro, which was associated with the inhibition of LPA-induced MMP production.
In conclusion, Ki16198 is a promising orally active LPA antagonist for inhibiting the invasion and metastasis of pancreatic cancer cells.
The inhibitory effects of the antagonist on invasion and metastasis in vivo may be partially explained by the inhibition of motility activity and MMP production in cancer cells.
© 2012 Japanese Cancer Association.
PMID: 22348286
Tissue factor expression determines tumour cell coagulation kinetics.
Introduction:  Cancers are associated with varying degrees of an increased risk of venous thromboembotic events (VTE) occurring.
This increased risk is tumour driven and associated with tumour expression of tissue factor (TF) and tumour-derived microparticles (MP).
In this study, cancer cell lines from phenotypically distinct tumours were assessed for cell surface TF expression and prothrombin time (PT) taken as a measure of procoagulant potential.
Methods:  Breast (T47D, MCF-7), colorectal (Colo320 and LoVo), head and neck (USCC 11b, 12, 81b and SIHN-011A) and pancreatic tumour cell lines (ASPC-1 and CFPAC-1) were assessed for TF expression by flow cytometry and relative mean fluorescence determined.
Procoagulant potential of the cells was then determined by PT assay.
Results:  Cell-supported coagulation was shown to be cell number dependent, defined by a logarithmic relationship that was consistent across all cell lines.
Single cell PT was determined for each cell line from the slope of a logarithmically transformed data plot.
A near linear relationship was observed between TF expression and single cell clotting time where a higher expression of TF results in a proportionally faster PT (P < 0.001).
Conclusions:  This study shows that across a range of tumour sites a consistent relationship is seen between procoagulant potential and both cell number and TF cell surface expression.
PMID: 22348173
Recombinant human arginase toxicity in mice is reduced by citrulline supplementation.
Human recombinant arginase I cobalt coupled to polyethylene glycol 5000 (HuArg I [Co]-PEG5000) achieved potent in vitro depletion of arginine from tissue culture medium and cytotoxicity to many cancer cell lines.
The recombinant enzyme also produced tumor growth inhibition of hepatocellular carcinoma and pancreatic carcinoma xenografts.
Although these results were promising, the therapeutic index was narrow.
Toxicities were seen in normal cells in tissue culture.
In vivo normal tissue injury occurred at doses twice the effective dose.
The current study was conducted to define, in greater detail, the maximum tolerated dose (MTD), pharmacodynamics, and dose-limiting toxicities (DLTs) of twice-weekly intraperitoneal HuArg I [Co]-PEG5000 in Balb/c mice.
Animal weight and survival were monitored, serum arginine levels measured, and complete blood cell counts, chemistries, necropsies, and histologies were performed.
In addition, methods to ameliorate the HuArg I [Co]-PEG5000 adverse effects were tested.
Supplemental l-citrulline was given concurrently with the arginase drug.
The HuArg I [Co]-PEG5000 MTD in mice was 5 mg/kg twice weekly, and DLTs included weight loss and marrow necrosis.
No other organ damage or changes in blood cell counts or chemistries were observed.
Arginase reduced serum arginine levels from 60 µM to 4 to 6 µM.
Supplemental l-citrulline given per os or daily subcutaneously reduced and delayed toxicities, and l-citrulline given twice daily subcutaneously completely prevented animal toxicities.
On the basis of these results, we hypothesize that HuArg I [Co]-PEG5000, particularly with supplemental l-citrulline, may be an attractive therapeutic agent for argininosuccinate synthetase-deficient tumors.
PMID: 22348081
Losartan Slows Pancreatic Tumor Progression and Extends Survival of SPARC-Null Mice by Abrogating Aberrant TGFβ Activation.
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma, a desmoplastic disease, is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related death in the Western world due, in large part, to locally invasive primary tumor growth and ensuing metastasis.
SPARC is a matricellular protein that governs extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition and maturation during tissue remodeling, particularly, during wound healing and tumorigenesis.
In the present study, we sought to determine the mechanism by which lack of host SPARC alters the tumor microenvironment and enhances invasion and metastasis of an orthotopic model of pancreatic cancer.
We identified that levels of active TGFβ1 were increased significantly in tumors grown in SPARC-null mice.
TGFβ1 contributes to many aspects of tumor development including metastasis, endothelial cell permeability, inflammation and fibrosis, all of which are altered in the absence of stromal-derived SPARC.
Given these results, we performed a survival study to assess the contribution of increased TGFβ1 activity to tumor progression in SPARC-null mice using losartan, an angiotensin II type 1 receptor antagonist that diminishes TGFβ1 expression and activation in vivo.
Tumors grown in SPARC-null mice progressed more quickly than those grown in wild-type littermates leading to a significant reduction in median survival.
However, median survival of SPARC-null animals treated with losartan was extended to that of losartan-treated wild-type controls.
In addition, losartan abrogated TGFβ induced gene expression, reduced local invasion and metastasis, decreased vascular permeability and altered the immune profile of tumors grown in SPARC-null mice.
These data support the concept that aberrant TGFβ1-activation in the absence of host SPARC contributes significantly to tumor progression and suggests that SPARC, by controlling ECM deposition and maturation, can regulate TGFβ availability and activation.
PMID: 22348037
EGCG Enhances the Therapeutic Potential of Gemcitabine and CP690550 by Inhibiting STAT3 Signaling Pathway in Human Pancreatic Cancer.
Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 3 (STAT3) is an oncogene, which promotes cell survival, proliferation, motility and progression in cancer cells.
Targeting STAT3 signaling may lead to the development of novel therapeutic approaches for human cancers.
Here, we examined the effects of epigallocathechin gallate (EGCG) on STAT3 signaling in pancreatic cancer cells, and assessed the therapeutic potential of EGCG with gemcitabine or JAK3 inhibitor CP690550 (Tasocitinib) for the treatment and/or prevention of pancreatic cancer.
Cell viability and apoptosis were measured by XTT assay and TUNEL staining, respectively.
Gene and protein expressions were measured by qRT-PCR and Western blot analysis, respectively.
The results revealed that EGCG inhibited the expression of phospho and total JAK3 and STAT3, STAT3 transcription and activation, and the expression of STAT3-regulated genes, resulting in the inhibition of cell motility, migration and invasion, and the induction of caspase-3 and PARP cleavage.
The inhibition of STAT3 enhanced the inhibitory effects of EGCG on cell motility and viability.
Additionally, gemcitabine and CP690550 alone inhibited STAT3 target genes and synergized with EGCG to inhibit cell viability and induce apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells.
Overall, these results suggest that EGCG suppresses the growth, invasion and migration of pancreatic cancer cells, and induces apoptosis by interfering with the STAT3 signaling pathway.
Moreover, EGCG further enhanced the therapeutic potential of gemcitabine and CP690550 against pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22347826
Pancreatic tumor: when is it not pancreatic adenocarcinoma?
PMID: 22347717
More than 7-year survival of a patient following repeat hepatectomy for total 20 colon cancer liver metastases.
A 54-year-old man was transferred with sigmoid colon cancer combined with multiple bilobar liver metastases.
Nine metastases were in the left lobe and 5 metastases were in the right lobe.
After low anterior resection, all 9 lesions in the left lobe were completely removed by wedge resections.
Because the remnant liver volume after multiple wedge resection of the left lobe was not sufficient to perform a right hepatectomy simultaneously, we planned a two-stage hepatectomy.
Right portal vein embolization was performed one week after the first liver operation.
A right hepatectomy was safely performed 22 days after the first hepatectomy.
A recurrent mass developed in the segment III 18 months after the right hepatectomy.
Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) was performed to remove that lesion.
Five other metastases developed 18 months after RFA whereby multiple wedge resections were performed.
The patient has survived for more than 7 years after the first liver operation.
PMID: 22347323
The therapeutic effect of cytokine-induced killer cells on pancreatic cancer enhanced by dendritic cells pulsed with k-ras mutant Peptide.
Objective.
This study is to investigate the role of the CIKs cocultured with K-ras-DCs in killing of pancreatic cancer cell lines, PANC-1 (K-ras(+)) and SW1990 (K-ras(-)).
Methods.
CIKs induced by IFN-γ, IL-2, and anti-CD3 monoantibody, K-ras-DCCIKs obtained by cocultivation of k-ras-DCs and CIKs.
Surface markers examined by FACS.
IFN-γ IL-12 ,CCL19 and CCL22 detected by ELISA.
Proliferation of various CIKs tested via 3H-TdR.
Killing activities of k-ras-DCCIKs and CTLs examined with 125IUdR.
Results.
CD3(+)CD56(+) and CD3(+)CD8(+) were highly expressed by K-ras-DCCIKs.
In its supernatant, IFN-γ, IL-12, CCL19 and CCL22 were significantly higher than those in DCCIK and CIK.
The killing rate of K-ras-DCCIK was greater than those of CIK and CTL.
CTL induced by K-ras-DCs only inhibited the PANC-1 cells.
Conclusions.
The k-ras-DC can enhance CIK's proliferation and increase the killing effect on pancreatic cancer cell.
The CTLs induced by K-ras-DC can only inhibit PANC-1 cells.
In this study, K-ras-DCCIKs also show the specific inhibition to PANC-1 cells, their tumor suppression is almost same with the CTLs, their total tumor inhibitory efficiency is higher than that of the CTLs.
PMID: 22344880
MR imaging of human pancreatic cancer xenograft labeled with superparamagnetic iron oxide in nude mice.
The aim of this work was to investigate the MRI findings on tumor xenografts induced in nude mice by the inoculation of human pancreatic cancer cells labeled with superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPIO), and to monitor the kinetics of SPIO distribution in tumor xenografts.
The labeled cancer cells were subcutaneously inoculated into 11 nude mice to induce tumor xenograft.
The unlabeled cancer cells served as a control inoculated into nine nude mice.
MR imaging was performed with a 1.5 T MR scanner for the tumor xenograft at the first, second and third week after the inoculation.
We found that the tumor xenograft was induced in 100% nude mice on MR imaging for both groups in the first week after the inoculation.
In the SPIO group, the tumors showed homogeneous hypointensity on T(1) - and T(2) -weighted and FIESTA images 1 week after inoculation.
Two and 3 weeks after inoculation, the center of the tumors was still hypointense on all the above sequences.
The tumor periphery was isointense on T(1) -weighted, and hyperintense on T(2) -weighted and FIESTA images.
The tumors in control group were homogeneously hypointense or isointense on T(1) -weighted, and hyperintense on T(2) -weighted and FIESTA images in the first, second and third week after the inoculation.
The size and signal-to-noise ratio of the tumor center in the SPIO group had decreased subsequent to the inoculation in all T(1) - and T(2) -weighted images and FIESTA.
Our results showed the human pancreatic cancer cells labeled with SPIO can induce tumor xenograft in nude mice and MRI can monitor the kinetics of SPIO distribution in tumor xenografts.
Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
PMID: 22344632
Both inhibition and enhanced expression of miR-31 lead to reduced migration and invasion of pancreatic cancer cells.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short single-stranded RNA molecules that have a critical role in the regulation of gene expression.
Alterations in miRNA expression levels have been observed in multiple tumor types and there is clear evidence on their active involvement in cancer development.
Here, a comprehensive miRNA expression profiling in 16 pancreatic cancer cell lines and four normal pancreatic samples provided a specific molecular signature for pancreatic cancer and enabled us to identify 72 differentially expressed miRNAs with approximately half of them being up- and half downregulated in cancer cells as compared with normal samples.
Of these, miR-31 was selected for further functional analyses based on its interesting "on-off" type expression profile, i.e., very low or even absent expression in normal pancreas and in six of the pancreatic cancer samples but extremely high expression in the remaining 10 cell lines.
Quite unexpectedly, both the inhibition of miR-31 in AsPC-1 and HPAF-II pancreatic cancer cells with high endogenous expression and forced expression of miR-31 in MIA PaCa-2 with low endogenous levels led to reduced cell proliferation, migration, and invasion.
More importantly, in AsPC-1 cells further enhancement of miR-31 also resulted in reduced cell migration and invasion, implicating that the level of miR-31 is critical for these phenotypes.
This study highlights a specific miRNA expression pattern in pancreatic cancer and reveals that manipulation of miR-31 expression leads to reduced cell migration and invasion in pancreatic cancer.
© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22344252
Keratin 8 phosphorylation regulates keratin reorganization and migration of epithelial tumor cells.
Cell migration and invasion are largely dependent on the complex organization of the various cytoskeletal components.
Whereas the role of actin filaments and microtubules in cell motility is well established, the role of intermediate filaments (IF) in this process is incompletely understood.Organization and structure of the keratin cytoskeleton consisting of heteropolymers of at least one type 1 and one type 2 IF, are in part regulated via posttranslational modifications.
In particular, phosphorylation events influence the properties of the keratin network.
Sphingosylphosphorylcholine (SPC) is a bioactive lipid with the exceptional ability to change the organization of the keratin cytoskeleton, leading to reorganization of keratin filaments, increased elasticity, and subsequently increased migration of epithelial tumor cells.Here we investigate the signaling pathways that mediate SPC-induced keratin reorganization and the role of keratin phosphorylation in this process.
We establish that the MEK-ERK signaling cascade regulates both SPC-induced keratin phosphorylation and reorganization in human pancreatic and gastric cancer cells and identify Ser(431) in K8 as the critical residue whose phosphorylation is required and sufficient to induce keratin reorganization and consequently enhanced migration of human epithelial tumor cells.
PMID: 22343984
Long-term results of surgical resection after preoperative chemoradiation in patients with pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22343980
Pancreatic Endocrine Microadenomatosis in a Patient With Oculofaciocardiodental (OFCD) Syndrome.
PMID: 22342769
Intraoperative consultation in digestive surgery. A consecutive series of 800 frozen sections.
AIM: To assess indications and quality of frozen sections in digestive surgery.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: All the frozen sections from the department of digestive surgery from Amiens hospital performed between 01/07/2006 and 01/07/2010 were assessed.
Assessment of frozen section forms, reading of pathology reports, and reviewing of frozen section slides were performed.
RESULTS: Eight hundred frozen sections were performed in 349 patients.
From one to 14 surgical specimens were sent for frozen section (mean 2.3).
Frozen sections were performed in 77% of the cases for cancer surgery (n=268), most of the time pancreatic surgery (28.4%) and liver surgery (24.6%).
Frozen sections were performed in 69% of the cases for diagnosis, in 29% of the cases to assess surgical margins and in 2% of the cases to assess if tissue specimen was appropriate for pathological diagnosis.
Frozen sections were sent all days of the week (except Saturday and Sunday), during all the year, between 8H30 and 17H15.
Thirty-seven percent of the cases were sent between 12H and 14H.
Response time was 15minutes (3 to 57minutes).
Rate of differed diagnoses was 2%.
Rate of discordant diagnoses was 3.4%.
CONCLUSION: Frozen section is a rapid and accurate tool in digestive surgery.
Local adjustment of the organization of the Pathology Department could enhance the rapidity and the quality of pathology diagnoses.
PMID: 22342683
K-Ras mutation-mediated IGF-1-induced feedback ERK activation contributes to the rapalog resistance in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas.
Mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) is frequently activated in human cancers; however, clinical trials of rapalog (the mTORC1 inhibitors) have shown that pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDACs) resist to the treatment.
Rapalog treatment activated the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathway in K-Ras mt PDAC cells.
K-Ras knockdown abolished the insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1)-induced ERK pathway in the K-Ras mt PDAC cells and enhanced the therapeutic efficacy of everolimus in treating K-Ras mt PDAC cells-derived mouse xenografts.
The results indicate that targeting of K-Ras mutation may lead to the development of therapies that overcome rapalog resistance in PDAC.
PMID: 22342309
Crosstalk of Sp1 and Stat3 signaling in pancreatic cancer pathogenesis.
Pancreatic cancer progression is attributed to genetic and epigenetic alterations and a chaotic tumor microenvironment.
Those diverse "upstream signal" factors appear to converge on specific sets of central nuclear regulators, namely, transcription factors.
Specificity Protein 1 (Sp1) and signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (Stat3) are central transcription factors that regulate a number of pathways important to tumorigenesis, including tumor cell-cycle progression, apoptosis, angiogenesis, metastasis, and evasion of the immune system.
Recently, researchers demonstrated many types of crosstalk of Sp1 and Stat3 in tumor signal transduction and that these factors function cooperatively to activate targeted genes and promote tumorigenesis in pancreatic cancer.
Therefore, targeting both Sp1 and Stat3 is a potential preventive and therapeutic strategy for pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22341261
Endoscopic palliation of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22341260
Modern radiation therapy techniques for pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22341259
The surgical management of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22341258
Pancreatic cancer: medical management (novel chemotherapeutics).
PMID: 22341257
The role of endoscopic ultrasonography in the diagnosis and management of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22341256
Pancreatic cancer: radiologic imaging.
PMID: 22341255
Pancreatic cancer screening.
PMID: 22341252
Pancreatic cystic neoplasms: diagnosis and management.
PMID: 22340650
[Altered expressions of embryonic stem-related genes in pancreatic cancer stem cell].
To explore the altered expressions of embryonic stem-related genes Oct4 and Nanog in pancreatic cancer stem cells (CSCs).
The uni-cell suspension of human pancreatic cancer cell line PANC-1 was prepared and incubated with CD24 and CD44 antibodies.
Flow cytometer was used to separate CD24(+)CD44(+) pancreatic cancer stem cells.
Tumor cell spheres were observed under light microscope.
Then CSCs were induced to differentiate with 10% fetal bovine serum and the expressions of CD24 and CD44 re-evaluated by flow cytometer.
Finally the cells were divided into 2 groups, group 1: CD24(+)CD44(+) and group 2: non-separated group.
RT-PCR (reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction) and Q-PCR (quantitative-polymerase chain reaction) were used to examine the transcriptions of Oct4 and Nanog in CSCs.
The immunofluorescence was employed to examine the expressions of Oct4 and Nanog.
Chemo-sensitivity to gemcitabine was determined by CCK8 assay in each group.
About 1%-3% CD24(+)CD44(+) CSCs were separated from cell line PANC-1.
The sorted cells were cultured in a stem cell culture medium to observe the spheroid-forming capacity.
And they showed a higher colony-forming efficiency than the unsorted cells [(122 ± 6)‰, P < 0.05].
When cultured in medium with serum, these cells gradually returned to the status of parental cells with a low expression of CD24 and CD44.
Both Oct4 and Nanog were highly expressed in CD24(+)CD44(+) stem cells.
And the CD24(+)CD44(+) subgroup demonstrated a higher resistance to gemcitabine.
Subpopulation cells CD44(+)CD24(+) have the properties of tumor stem cells.
The up-regulated levels of Oct4 and Nanog may be highly correlated with the multi-potency and a higher drug-resistance of pancreatic CSCs.
PMID: 22340649
[Regulatory mechanisms of Hedgehog signaling pathway for epithelial-mesenchymal transition in pancreatic cancer cells].
To explore the blocking effects of hedgehog signaling pathway on the processes of cell migration, invasion and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human pancreatic cancer cells and elucidate its possible mechanisms.
The lentiviral expression vector for RNA interference of human Smoothened (SMO) gene was constructed to silence the expression of SMO.
And RNAi against SMO was used to suppress the hedgehog signaling pathway in human pancreatic cancer Panc-1 cells.
The in vitro invasion capacity in Panc-1 cells was assessed by Matrigel/Transwell chamber assay.
Real-time PCR (polymerase chain reaction) and Western blot were used to detect the expressions of such EMT markers as E-cadherin, N-cadherin, β-catenin, vimentin and fibronectin and such transcription factors as Snail, Slug, Twist1 and Sip1.
The stable interference of SMO could suppress the hedgehog signaling activity in Panc-1 cells.
The inhibition of hedgehog signaling reduced the in vitro invasion capacity significantly in Panc-1 cells.
The expression of E-cadherin significantly increased while N-cadherin, vimentin and fibronectin were significantly down-regulated in the RNAi group.
Compared to the control group, the expressions of Snail and Slug were significantly reduced in the SMO knock-down group.
The inhibition of hedgehog signaling pathway reduces the in vitro invasion capacity in human pancreatic cancer cells.
And the EMT process is significantly suppressed.
The mechanism is partially correlated with the down-regulations of Snail and Slug.
PMID: 22340648
[How to operate successfully for pancreatic cancer].
PMID: 22340105
[Surgical treatment for cancer of the pancreatic head].
To explore and evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of surgical treatment for cancer of the pancreatic head.
The clinical data of 96 patients with cancer of the pancreatic head admitted in our hospital from January 2002 to December 2009 were retrospectively analyzed.
pancreatoduodenectomy was performed in 48 cases, extended pancreatoduodenectomy in 30 cases, and Roux-Y cholangiojejunostomy in 18 cases.
The 1, 2 and 3-year survival rates were 59.2%, 41.8% and 13.2%, respectively, in the patients treated with pancreatoduodenectomy, and 73.2%, 58.2% and 24.1%, respectively, in the patients treated with extended pancreatoduodenectomy.
The 1, 2 and 3-year survival rates were 36.8%, 15.8% and 5.3%, respectively, in the patients with unresectable tumor who received radiotherapy and (or) chemotherapy in Roux-Y cholangiojejunostomy.
The postoperative morbidity was 29.2%, 30.0% and 27.8% in the patients treated with pancreatoduodenectomy, extended pancreatoduodenectomy and Roux-Y cholangiojejunostomy, respectively.
Pancreatoduodenectomy is the most effective treatment.
Extended pancreatoduodenectomy can improve the surgical resection rate, reduce the recurrence rate and improve the survival rate.
Internal drainage is an important palliative measure.
PMID: 22339744
High management impact of Ga-68 DOTATATE (GaTate) PET/CT for imaging neuroendocrine and other somatostatin expressing tumours.
Introduction: Ga-68 DOTATATE (Ga-octreotate, GaTate) positron emission tomography (PET)/CT has multiple advantages compared with conventional and In-111 octreotide imaging for neuroendocrine tumours and other somatostatin-receptor expressing tumours.
This study assesses the management impact of incremental diagnostic information obtained from this technique compared with conventional staging.
Methods: Fifty-nine GaTate PET/CT studies were performed over an 18-month period (52 proven or suspected gastro-entero-pancreatic or bronchial neuroendocrine tumours and seven neural crest/mesenchymal tumours).
A retrospective blinded review was performed on the number of abnormalities (1, 2-5 or >5) within defined regions with comparison to conventional imaging to assess incremental diagnostic information.
Subsequent management impact (high, moderate or low) was determined by clinical review and follow up to assess pre-PET stage, treatment intent and post-PET management change.
Results: Eighty-eight percent of GaTate studies were abnormal.
Compared with conventional and In-111 octreotide imaging, additional information was provided by GaTate PET/CT in 68 and 83% of patients, respectively.
Management impact was high (inter-modality change) in 47%, moderate (intra-modality change) in 10% and low in 41% (not assessable in 2%).
High management impact included directing patients to curative surgery by identifying a primary site and directing patients with multiple metastases to systemic therapy.
Conclusion: GaTate PET/CT imaging provides additional diagnostic information in a high proportion of patients with consequent high management impact.
GaTate PET/CT could replace (1) In-111 octreotide scintigraphy at centres where it is available given its superior accuracy, faster acquisition and lower radiation exposure.
Rapid implementation could be achieved by allowing substitutional funding in the Medicare Benefit Schedule.
PMID: 22330162
[The latest advances in pancreatic tumors].
Pancreatic cancer (PC) continues to have a poor prognosis.
New epidemiological trials have suggested that there may be protective factors, such as aspirin or oleic acid intake.
The main diagnostic tool for PC is endoscopic ultrasound (EUS), and new EUSrelated technologies have appeared, such as quantitative elastography (strain ratio and hue histogram analysis), intravenous contrasts, and the new procore needles to help in the differential diagnosis with other diseases (mainly chronic pancreatitis).
In the next few years, intratumoral confocal endomicroscopy will be used for the diagnosis of PC and cystic tumors, by inserting a miniprobe inside the 19G needle of the echoendoscope.
Notable therapeutic developments are studies on the safety, feasibility and accuracy of intratumoral gemcitabine administration by EUS-fine needle injection in the treatment of locally advanced PC.
In the treatment of cystic tumors of the pancreas, mainly intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN), most studies aim to optimize follow up by assessing predictive factors of malignant transformation and evaluating the natural history of this neoplasm.
PMID: 22338609
Statistical considerations of optimal study design for human plasma proteomics and biomarker discovery.
A mass spectrometry-based plasma biomarker discovery workflow was developed to facilitate biomarker discovery.
Plasma from either healthy volunteers or patients with pancreatic cancer was 8-plex iTRAQ labelled, fractionated by 2-dimensional reversed phase chromatography and subjected to MALDI ToF/ToF mass spectrometry.
Data were processed using a q-value based statistical approach in order to maximise protein quantification and identification.
Technical (between duplicate samples) and biological variance (between and within individuals) were calculated and power analysis was thereby enabled.
An a priori power analysis was carried out using samples from healthy volunteers to define sample sizes required for robust biomarker identification.
The result was subsequently validated with a post hoc power analysis using a real clinical setting involving pancreatic cancer patients.
This demonstrated that six samples per group (e.g.
pre- vs.
post-treatment) may provide sufficient statistical power for most proteins with changes >2 fold.
A reference standard allowed direct comparison of protein expression changes between multiple experiments.
Analysis of patient plasma prior to treatment identified 29 proteins with significant changes within individual patient.
Changes in Peroxiredoxin II levels were confirmed by western blot.
This q-value based statistical approach in combination with reference standard samples can be applied with confidence in the design and execution of clinical studies for predictive, prognostic, and/or pharmacodynamic biomarker discovery.
The power analysis provides information required prior to study initiation.
PMID: 22338018
New Strategies for Advanced Neuroendocrine Tumors in the Era of Targeted Therapy.
Low to intermediate grade neuroendocrine tumor (NET) constitutes a group of indolent malignancies that share the capacity for secreting hormones and neuroamines.
Until recently, there were few therapeutic options for oncologic control.
The PROMID study demonstrated that octreotide LAR can delay tumor growth in midgut NETs.
And, recent phase III studies showed both everolimus and sunitinib improved progression free survival in pancreatic NETs validating the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway and angiogenesis as important targets for further advances.
Ongoing and planned pivotal studies targeting these pathways in other NET subtypes may widen their therapeutic application.
Development of rational combinations may further improve therapeutic outcome.
These successes and our improved understanding of the underlying molecular biology are likely to lead to further important advances on the horizon.
PMID: 22338014
Phase 1 study of rigosertib, an inhibitor of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and polo-like kinase 1 pathways, combined with gemcitabine in patients with solid tumors and pancreatic cancer.
PURPOSE: Rigosertib (R), a dual non-ATP inhibitor of polo-like kinase and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathways, and gemcitabine (G) have synergistic anti-tumor activity when combined in preclinical studies.
This phase 1 study aimed to determine the recommended phase 2 dose (RPTD) of the combination of rigosertib and gemcitabine in cancer patients.Methods: Patients with solid tumors who failed standard therapy or were candidates for gemcitabine-based therapy were eligible.
Gemcitabine was administered on days 1, 8 and 15 on a 28-day cycle; rigosertib on days 1, 4, 8, 11, 15 and 18.
Pharmacokinetic studies were performed during an expansion cohort of advanced pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) patients.RESULTS: Forty patients were treated, 19 in the dose escalation phase and 21 in the expansion cohort.
Dose levels evaluated were (G/R mg/m2): 750/600 (n=4), 750/1200 (3), 1000/600 (3), 1000/1200 (3) and 1000/1800 (6+21).
One dose limiting toxicity (death) occurred at the highest dose level (1000/1800) tested.
Non-dose limiting ≥grade 2-3 toxicities included neutropenia, lymphopenia, thrombocytopenia, fatigue, and nausea.
Grade 3/4 neutropenia, thrombocytopenia and fatigue were seen in 2, 1, and 2 patients in the expansion cohort.
Partial responses were observed in PDA, thymic cancer and Hodgkin's lymphoma, including gemcitabine-pretreated PDA.
Rigosertib's pharmacokinetic profile was not affected by gemcitabine.CONCLUSION: The RPTD established in this study is rigosertib 1800 mg/m2 and gemcitabine 1000 mg/m2.
This regimen is well tolerated with a toxicity profile of the combination similar to the profile of gemcitabine alone.
Antitumor efficacy was observed in patients who previously progressed on gemcitabine-based therapy.
PMID: 22336159
[Colloid carcinoma of pancreas: a clinicopathologic study of 4 cases].
To study the pathologic features, diagnosis, differential diagnosis and molecular characteristics of colloid carcinoma of the pancreas.
The clinical findings, morphologic features, immunophenotype and K-ras gene alterations were investigated in 4 cases of pancreatic colloid carcinoma.
In the 4 cases of colloid carcinoma of the pancreas, three tumors were located in the head of the pancreas, one was located in the body and tail.
The average age was 56.5 years old.
The presenting symptom was abdominal pain in 2 cases, increased level of U-GLU in 1 patient, and an accidental finding presented in 1 patient.
Grossly, 3 cases were cystic and solid, with mucin in the cyst; 1 case was solid.
Microscopically, the colloid carcinoma was characterized by large pools of extracellular mucin, containing neoplastic cells, which were in the pattern of cuboidal, cribriform or irregular clusters, or formed an incomplete lining separating mucin pools from the stroma.
Three cases developed from pre-existing pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (IPMN), intestinal-type, and 1 from IPMN, pancreatobiliary-type.
Immunohistochemical studies showed that MUC2 was positive in 3 cases, and MUC1 in 1 case.
K-ras gene mutation was identified in 2 cases, showing a single-amino-acid substitution in codon 12, as Gly12Asp (GGT > GAT) and Gly12Arg (GGT > CGT).
Pancreatic colloid carcinoma is a rare variant of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, which is associated with IPMN and mucinous cystic neoplasms.
Positive MUC2 staining and absent MUC1 expression are commonly found, and K-ras gene mutation is occasionally identified in these tumors.
PMID: 22335903
[Role of connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) in proliferation and migration of pancreatic cancer cells].
To explore the expression of connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) in pancreatic cancer and its influence on the proliferation and migration of cancer cells.
The expression of CTGF in pancreatic cell line PANC-1 cells was analyzed by real-time PCR and in pancreatic carcinoma (50 cases) tissues by immunohistochemistry.
The ability of proliferation and migration in vitro of PANC-1 cells was tested by MTT assay, scratch test and Boyden chamber test after the CTGF gene was overexpressed by Ad5-CTGF or silenced with Ad5-siCTGF transfection.
CTGF was overexpressed in both pancreatic cancer cells and tissues.
Overxpression of CTGF leads to increased proliferation and migration of PANC-1 cells.
The CTGF-transfected PANC-1 cells showed apparent stronger proliferation ability and scratch-repair ability than that of empty vector controls.
The results of Boyden chamber test showed that there were 34 cells/field (200× magnificantion) of the CTGF-transfected overexpressing cells, much more than the 11 cells/field of the empty vector control cells; and 6 cells/microscopic field of the Ad5-siCTGF-transfected silenced cells, much less than the 15 cells/field of the control cells.
CTGF is overexpressed in both pancreatic cancer cells in vitro and in vivo, indicating that it may play an important role in the cell proliferation and migration in pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22335271
Identification of Glycoprotein Markers for Pancreatic Cancer CD24(+)CD44(+) Stem-like Cells Using Nano-LC-MS/MS and Tissue Microarray.
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is characterized by late diagnosis due to lack of early symptoms, extensive metastasis, and high resistance to chemo/radiation therapy.
Recently, a subpopulation of cells within pancreatic cancers, termed cancer stem cells (CSCs), has been characterized and postulated to be the drivers for pancreatic cancer and responsible for metastatic spread.
Further studies on pancreatic CSCs are therefore of particular importance to identify novel diagnosis markers and therapeutic targets for this dismal disease.
Herein, the malignant phenotype of pancreatic cancer stem-like CD24(+)CD44(+) cells was isolated from a human pancreatic carcinoma cell line (PANC-1) and demonstrated 4-fold increased invasion ability compared to CD24(-)CD44(+) cells.
Using lectin microarray and nano LC-MS/MS, we identified a differentially expressed set of glycoproteins between these two subpopulations.
Lectin microarray analysis revealed that fucose- and galactose-specific lectins, UEA-1 and DBA, respectively, exhibit distinctly strong binding to CD24(+)CD44(+) cells.
The glycoproteins extracted by multilectin affinity chromatography were consequently analyzed by LC-MS/MS.
Seventeen differentially expressed glycoproteins were identified, including up-regulated Cytokeratin 8/CK8, Integrin β1/CD29, ICAM1/CD54, and Ribophorin 2/RPN2 and down-regulated Aminopeptidase N/CD13.
Immunohistochemical analysis of tissue microarrays showed that CD24 was significantly associated with late-stage pancreatic adenocarcinomas, and RPN2 was exclusively coexpressed with CD24 in a small population of CD24-positive cells.
However, CD13 expression was dramatically decreased along with tumor progression, preferentially present on the apical membrane of ductal cells and vessels in early stage tumors.
Our findings suggest that these glycoproteins may provide potential therapeutic targets and promising prognostic markers for pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22334019
Radiation-inducible Immunotherapy for Cancer: Senescent Tumor Cells as a Cancer Vaccine.
Radiotherapy offers an effective treatment for advanced cancer but local and distant failures remain a significant challenge.
Here, we treated melanoma and pancreatic carcinoma in syngeneic mice with ionizing radiation (IR) combined with the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor (PARPi) veliparib to inhibit DNA repair and promote accelerated senescence.
Based on prior work implicating cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) as key mediators of radiation effects, we discovered that senescent tumor cells induced by radiation and veliparib express immunostimulatory cytokines to activate CTLs that mediate an effective antitumor response.
When these senescent tumor cells were injected into tumor-bearing mice, an antitumor CTL response was induced which potentiated the effects of radiation, resulting in elimination of established tumors.
Applied to human cancers, radiation-inducible immunotherapy may enhance radiotherapy responses to prevent local recurrence and distant metastasis.
PMID: 22334000
Effect of a combination of S-1 and gemcitabine on cell cycle regulation in pancreatic cancer cell lines.
In a previous study, we showed that a combination of an oral fluoropyrimidine anticancer agent (S-1) and gemcitabine (GEM) had synergistic effects on cell growth and cell cycle arrest in the pancreatic cancer cell line MIA PaCa-2.
Therefore, we conducted further mechanistic studies using the pancreatic cancer cell lines MIA PaCa-2 and SUIT-2.
The combined effect of S-1 and GEM in SUIT-2 cells was evaluated using an 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay, and the effects of S-1, GEM and S-1 plus GEM on cell cycle regulation were assessed using flow cytometry.
We also examined the expression of several cell cycle regulatory proteins in both MIA PaCa-2 and SUIT-2 cells by western blotting.
Classical isobolographic analysis of the MTT assay results showed that the combination of S-1 and GEM had a synergistic effect in SUIT-2 cells, and flow cytometric analysis of the cell cycle showed that the combination of S-1 plus GEM induced S-phase arrest to a greater degree than did either S-1 or GEM alone.
Also, the combination of S-1 and GEM resulted in the downregulation of cyclin D1 expression and upregulation of cyclin A, p21 and p27 expression levels.
Treatment of MIA PaCa-2 and SUIT-2 cells with a combination of both drugs also led to the increased phosphorylation of checkpoint kinase 1.
Combined treatment with S-1 and GEM resulted in more prolonged S-phase arrest than with either treatment alone.
This difference is shown to be potentially due to the higher levels of phosphorylated checkpoint kinase 1 in pancreatic cancer cell lines treated with the two agents.
PMID: 22333707
A phase I, dose-escalation study of TB-403, a monoclonal antibody directed against PlGF, in patients with advanced solid tumours.
Background:TB-403 (RO 5323441), a humanised monoclonal antibody, is a novel antiangiogenesis agent directed against placental growth factor.
The safety, pharmacokinetics (PK), and antitumour activity of TB-403 were assessed in a phase I, dose-escalation study in patients with advanced solid tumours.Methods:Patients in sequential dose groups received either weekly doses of 1.25, 5.0, or 10 mg kg(-1) or doses of 20 or 30 mg kg(-1) every third week.Results:Twenty-three patients were enrolled and received TB-403.
The most common adverse events (AEs) were fatigue, constipation, pyrexia, dyspnoea, and nausea.
One serious AE, a lung embolus in a patient with non-small cell lung cancer treated with 10 mg kg(-1) weekly, was deemed possibly related to TB-403.
No dose-limiting toxicities were observed, and a maximum-tolerated dose was not reached.
The PK parameters were dose linear and the terminal half-life values ranged from 9 to 14 days.
Six patients exhibited stable disease for at least 8 weeks.
Two patients, (oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma and pancreatic adenocarcinoma) both treated with 5 mg kg(-1) weekly, remained stable for 12 months.Conclusion:TB-403 treatment in this patient population is well tolerated, with a safety profile distinct from that of vascular endothelial growth factor-axis inhibitors.
PMID: 22333642
[A Case of Pancreatic Cancer with Celiac Trunk and Common Hepatic Artery Invasion Successfully Resected after Gemcitabine+S-1Therapy].
We present a case of a 59-year-old female who was admitted to our hospital for upper abdominal pain.
She was diagnosed with pancreatic body carcinoma by computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging.
We started gemcitabine+S-1 chemotherapy because the tumor had invaded the celiac trunk, common hepatic artery, superior mesenteric vein, and splenic vein.
We reduced the S-1 to 100mg/body after the third course of gemcitabine(1, 000mg/m2 on days 1 and 8, every 21 days)+S-1(120mg/body on days 1-14, every 21 days)because of side effects.
The tumor became smaller, and the celiac trunk and common hepatic artery were released.
Thus, we conducted a distal pancreatectomy with a D2 lymph node dissec- tion.
PMID: 22333441
Diagnostic accuracy of cyst fluid amphiregulin in pancreatic cysts.
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Accurate tests to diagnose adenocarcinoma and high-grade dysplasia among mucinous pancreatic cysts are clinically needed.
This study evaluated the diagnostic utility of amphiregulin (AREG) as a pancreatic cyst fluid biomarker to differentiate non-mucinous, benign mucinous, and malignant mucinous cysts.
METHODS: A single-center retrospective study to evaluate AREG levels in pancreatic cyst fluid by ELISA from 33 patients with a histological gold standard was performed.
RESULTS: Among the cyst fluid samples, the median (IQR) AREG levels for non-mucinous (n = 6), benign mucinous (n = 15), and cancerous cysts (n = 15) were 85 pg/ml (47-168), 63 pg/ml (30-847), and 986 pg/ml (417-3160), respectively.
A significant difference between benign mucinous and malignant mucinous cysts was observed (p = 0.025).
AREG levels greater than 300 pg/ml possessed a diagnostic accuracy for cancer or high-grade dysplasia of 78% (sensitivity 83%, specificity 73%).
CONCLUSION: Cyst fluid AREG levels are significantly higher in cancerous and high-grade dysplastic cysts compared to benign mucinous cysts.
Thus AREG exhibits potential clinical utility in the evaluation of pancreatic cysts.
PMID: 22333204
[3.0 T magnetic resonance imaging of pancreatic cancer in an orthotopic nude murine model].
To assess the methods of establishing an orthotopic nude murine model of human pancreatic cancer and explore the manifestations of MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) and its pathological fundamentals so as to provide research rationales for human pancreatic cancer.
The BXPC-3 cell of human pancreatic cancer was orthotopically planted in nude mice.
And the animals were examined by a clinical 3.0 T magnetic resonance imager.
The MRI examinations were analyzed along with their pathological findings.
Among 18 mice, 15 of them grew tumors with a success ratio of 83.3%.
The pathological findings conformed to those of high differentiation pancreatic parenchyma cancer.
Comparing with the neighbor muscles, the tumors were homogeneous (66.7%, 10/15) or heterogeneous (33.3%, 5/15) of hypointense on T1-weighted images while homogeneous (26.7%, 4/15) or heterogeneous (73.3%, 11/15) hyperintense on T2-weighted images with heterogeneous enhancement.
The border became obviously enhanced and there was mild central enhancement while the necrotic part showed no enhancement.
3.0T MRI can detect pancreatic neoplasms ≥ 2 mm and visualize clearly their locations, shapes, dimensions and internal structures in an orthotopic nude murine model.
Thus it provides a visible framework for further studies of human pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22332746
The establishment of the duplex real-time RT-PCR assay for the detection of CD44v6 in pancreatic cancer patients and clinical application.
Cell adhesion molecule CD44v6 has been found to be associated with the progression and metastasis of numerous cancers.
In this study, a novel duplex real-time quantitative reverse-transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) assay was developed to quantitatively detect the CD44v6 gene expression in pancreatic cancer patients.
The primers and probes of CD44v6 and β-actin genes were designed and standard curve of the duplex qRT-PCR was constructed by optimizing the reaction conditions.
The specificity and reproducibility of this assay were satisfactory and the detection limit was 100 copies, which was 10 times more sensitive than the conventional RT-PCR assay.
This assay was also used to detect the expression levels of CD44v6 messenger RNA in peripheral blood mononuclear cell in 37 pancreatic cancer patients and 12 healthy people.
The results showed that 37 clinical samples were tested positive by the duplex qRT-PCR compared with only 30 by the conventional RT-PCR.
The levels of CD44v6 expression showed significant correlation with sex, tumor size, tumor differentiation, clinical stage, lymph node, and liver metastasis (P < 0.05).
Compared with the control group, CD44v6 levels in patients prior and 10 days post cryosurgery were significantly increased (P < 0.05) but had no significant change in those 1 month post cryosurgery (P > 0.05).
The duplex qRT-PCR assay may provide a useful tool for the evaluation of prognosis and curative effect of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22332734
Pancreatic metastasis arising from a a BRAFV600E-positive papillary thyroid cancer: the role of endoscopic ultrasound-guided biopsy and response to sorafenib therapy.
ABSTRACT Background: Lungs and bones are the most common sites for distant metastases from papillary thyroid cancer (PTC).
Metastases to the pancreas are extremely rare.
Here we present a man with pancreatic metastases from PTC, report our experience with sorafenib therapy, and discuss the role of Endoscopic Ultrasound (EUS)-guided Biopsy in its diagnosis.
Patient findings: A 56-year-old man underwent total thyroidectomy, right-modified neck dissection, and radioactive iodine (RAI) remnant ablation for PTC at age 47 years (in 2002).
Between 2002 and 2007, he had 3 more neck surgeries, 2 RAI therapies, and external beam radiotherapy for persistent and subsequently metastatic PTC.
In 2008, a computed tomography/positron emission tomography (CT/PET) scan showed an FDG-avid pancreatic focus.
MRI revealed a pancreatic nodule at the same location.
An EUS-guided biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of pancreatic metastasis from PTC, and molecular studies showed positive BRAFV600E mutation.
He was treated with sorafenib for 6 months.
Although a lung CT scan done 2 months after initiation of sorafnib suggested stability of the disease, MRI studies done at 3 and 6 months showed clear progression with an increase in the size of the lung and pancreatic metastases.
Subsequently, he developed liver, bone and omental metastases.
He died in July 2011, 9 years and 8 months after the initial diagnosis of PTC and 20 months after discovery of the pancreatic metastasis.
Summary: A middle-aged man with PTC developed lung metastases despite multiple surgeries and RAI therapies.
Seven years after the initial diagnosis, a pancreatic metastasis was accidentally discovered.
Both the metastasis and the primary thyroid tumor are positive for BRAFV600E mutation.
The lung and pancreatic metastases progressed while the patient was receiving sorafenib for 6 months and the patient died 20 months after diagnosis of pancreatic metastasis.
Conclusion: PTC rarely metastasizes to the pancreas.
In this patient, an FDG PET scan and EUS-guided biopsy played important roles in the diagnosis.
PTC metastases to the pancreas usually occur in otherwise advanced disease.
In the patient presented here sorafenib may have slowed disease progression but the overall utility of tyrosine kinase inhibitors in pancreatic metastases from PTC is not clear.
PMID: 22331944
Colorectal and Other Cancer Risks for Carriers and Noncarriers From Families With a DNA Mismatch Repair Gene Mutation: A Prospective Cohort Study.
PURPOSETo determine whether cancer risks for carriers and noncarriers from families with a mismatch repair (MMR) gene mutation are increased above the risks of the general population.
PATIENTS AND METHODSWe prospectively followed a cohort of 446 unaffected carriers of an MMR gene mutation (MLH1, n = 161; MSH2, n = 222; MSH6, n = 47; and PMS2, n = 16) and 1,029 their unaffected relatives who did not carry a mutation every 5 years at recruitment centers of the Colon Cancer Family Registry.
For comparison of cancer risk with the general population, we estimated country-, age-, and sex-specific standardized incidence ratios (SIRs) of cancer for carriers and noncarriers.ResultsOver a median follow-up of 5 years, mutation carriers had an increased risk of colorectal cancer (CRC; SIR, 20.48; 95% CI, 11.71 to 33.27; P < .001), endometrial cancer (SIR, 30.62; 95% CI, 11.24 to 66.64; P < .001), ovarian cancer (SIR, 18.81; 95% CI, 3.88 to 54.95; P < .001), renal cancer (SIR, 11.22; 95% CI, 2.31 to 32.79; P < .001), pancreatic cancer (SIR, 10.68; 95% CI, 2.68 to 47.70; P = .001), gastric cancer (SIR, 9.78; 95% CI, 1.18 to 35.30; P = .009), urinary bladder cancer (SIR, 9.51; 95% CI, 1.15 to 34.37; P = .009), and female breast cancer (SIR, 3.95; 95% CI, 1.59 to 8.13; P = .001).
We found no evidence of their noncarrier relatives having an increased risk of any cancer, including CRC (SIR, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.33 to 2.39; P = .97).
CONCLUSIONWe confirmed that carriers of an MMR gene mutation were at increased risk of a wide variety of cancers, including some cancers not previously recognized as being a result of MMR mutations, and found no evidence of an increased risk of cancer for their noncarrier relatives.
PMID: 22331587
Knock-down of plasminogen-activator inhibitor-1 enhances expression of E-cadherin and promotes epithelial differentiation of human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells.
High levels of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), which is produced by stromal, endothelial and cancer cells and has multiple complex effects on cancers, correlate with poor cancer prognosis.
To more definitively study the role of endogenously produced PAI-1 in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAC) PANC-1 cell line biology, we used anti-PAI-1 shRNA to create stable PAI-1 deficient cells (PD-PANC-1s).
PD-PANC-1s exhibited a heterogeneous morphology.
While the majority of cells exhibited a cuboidal shape similar to the parental PANC-1 or the vector-infected control cells, numerous large cells with long filopodia and a neuronal-like appearance were observed.
Although both Vector-control cells and PD-PANC-1s expressed mRNAs that are characteristic of mesenchymal, neural and epithelial phenotypes, epithelial marker RNAs were up-regulated (e.g.
E-cadherin, 32-fold) whereas mesenchymal marker RNAs were down-regulated (e.g.
Thy1, 9-fold) in PD-PANC-1s, suggesting mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition.
Neural markers exhibited both up- and down-regulation.
Immunocytochemistry indicated that epithelial-like PD-PANC-1s expressed E-cadherin and β-catenin in significantly more cells, while neural-like cells exhibited robust expression of organized β-3-tubulin.
PAI-1 and E-cadherin were rarely co-expressed in the same cells.
Indeed, examination of PAI-1 and E-cadherin mRNAs expression in additional cell lines yielded clear inverse correlation.
Indeed, infection of Colo357 PAC cells (that exhibit high expression of E-cadherin) with PAI-1-expressing adenovirus led to a marked decrease in E-cadherin expression and to enhanced migration of cells from clusters.
Our results suggest that endogenous PAI-1 suppresses expression of E-cadherin and differentiation in PAC cells in vitro, supporting its negative impact on tumor prognosis.
J.
Cell.
Physiol.
© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22331470
The RalB Small GTPase Mediates Invadopodia Formation Through a GTPase Activating Protein-independent Function of the RalBP1/RLIP76 Effector.
Our recent studies implicated key and distinct roles for the highly related RalA and RalB small GTPases (82% sequence identity) in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) tumorigenesis, and invasive and metastatic growth, respectively.
How RalB may promote PDAC invasion and metastasis has not been determined.
In light of known Ral effector functions in regulation of actin organization and secretion, we addressed a possible role for RalB in invadopodia formation, actin-rich membrane protrusions that contribute to tissue invasion and matrix remodeling.
We determined that a majority of KRAS mutant PDAC cell lines exhibited invadopodia and that expression of activated K-Ras is both necessary and sufficient for invadopodia formation.
Invadopodia formation was not dependent on the canonical Raf-MEK-ERK effector pathway, and instead, dependent on the Ral effector pathway.
However, this process was more dependent on RalB as opposed to RalA.
Surprisingly, RalB-mediated invadopodia formation was dependent on RalBP1/RLIP76, but not Sec5 and Exo84 exocyst effector function.
Unexpectedly, the requirement for RalBP1 was independent of its best known function as a GTPase activating protein for Rho small GTPases.
Instead, disruption of the ATPase function of RalBP1 impaired invadopodia formation.
Our results identify a novel RalB-mediated biochemical and signaling mechanism for invadopodia formation.
PMID: 22331464
PALB2 interacts with KEAP1 to promote NRF2 nuclear accumulation and function.
PALB2/FANCN is mutated in breast and pancreatic cancers and Fanconi anemia (FA).
It controls the intra-nuclear localization, stability and DNA repair function of BRCA2 and links BRCA1 and BRCA2 in DNA homologous recombination repair and breast cancer suppression.
Here we show that PALB2 directly interacts with KEAP1, an oxidative stress sensor that binds and represses the master anti-oxidant transcription factor NRF2.
PALB2 shares with NRF2 a highly conserved "ETGE"-type KEAP1-binding motif and can effectively compete with NRF2 for KEAP1 binding.
PALB2 promotes NRF2 accumulation and function in the nucleus and lowers cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) level.
In addition, PALB2 also regulates the rate of NRF2 export from nucleus following induction.
Our findings identify PALB2 as a regulator of cellular redox homeostasis and provide a new link between oxidative stress and the development of cancer and FA.
PMID: 22330678
S100P-Binding Protein, S100PBP, Mediates Adhesion through Regulation of Cathepsin Z in Pancreatic Cancer Cells.
Several S100 proteins are up-regulated in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), the most significant being S100P.
We previously reported on S100PBP, a binding partner of S100P, that shows no homology to any described protein and whose functions are completely unknown.
To determine S100PBP expression across human tissues and organs, IHC was performed using both multiorgan- and in-house-constructed pancreatic TMAs.
To establish S100PBP functions, cell lines with either stably overexpressed or silenced S100PBP were generated and investigated using Affymetrix gene expression arrays and complementary functional assays.
We show that S100PBP is differentially expressed in various healthy and tumor specimens, which is both cancer- and tissue-type dependent.
In healthy pancreas, S100PBP is expressed in the nuclear/perinuclear region of both exocrine and endocrine compartments.
In early precancerous lesions, S100PBP is translocated to the cytoplasm, whereas in PDAC and metastatic lesions, its expression is significantly diminished.
The most pronounced phenotypic change after manipulation of S100PBP expression was seen in adhesion; this was significantly reduced after S100PBP up-regulation and increased after S100PBP silencing.
Up-regulation or silencing of S100PBP also led to a concomitant change in the levels of the protease cathepsin Z, the silencing of which significantly reduced PDAC cell adhesion.
We further demonstrate that the interaction of cathepsin Z with arginine-glycine-aspartic acid-binding integrins, specifically αvβ5, mediates the changes seen in adhesion of PDAC cells.
PMID: 22330234
A transcatheter arterial chemotherapy using a novel lipophilic platinum derivative (miriplatin) for patients with small and multiple hepatocellular carcinomas.
BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Miriplatin is a platinum complex developed to treat hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) through administration into the hepatic artery as a sustained-release formulation suspended in lipiodol.
A single-institute pilot study was conducted to investigate the antitumor efficacy of miriplatin infusion therapy for small and multiple HCCs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Small HCCs sized 2 cm or less, judged to be inadequate for curative treatment, were indicated for transcatheter arterial miriplatin infusion therapy.
We prospectively investigated the course of patients treated with miriplatin between March 2010 and September 2010.
Efficacy was evaluated by computed tomography at 4-8 weeks and the overall evaluation was carried out more than 3 months after treatment.
RESULTS: The study included 14 patients, of whom 13 were evaluable for efficacy.
Of the 13 patients, one (8%) showed a complete response and three (23%) showed a partial response, with an overall response rate of 31%.
Grade 3/4 hematological toxicity including thrombocytopenia was not seen.
Increases to grade 3/4 in aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase were observed for nonhematological toxicity.
Irreversible deleterious changes in hepatic function were not seen.
CONCLUSION: Miriplatin infusion therapy showed safe and moderate effects on small HCCs.
However, transarterial chemoembolization as a standard therapy cannot be replaced.
We await the results of an ongoing study of transarterial chemoembolization with miriplatin.
PMID: 22329852
The application of Methylation specific electrophoresis (MSE) to DNA methylation analysis of the 5' CpG island of mucin in cancer cells.
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Methylation of CpG sites in genomic DNA plays an important role in gene regulation and especially in gene silencing.
We have reported mechanisms of epigenetic regulation for expression of mucins, which are markers of malignancy potential and early detection of human neoplasms.
Epigenetic changes in promoter regions appear to be the first step in expression of mucins.
Thus, detection of promoter methylation status is important for early diagnosis of cancer, monitoring of tumor behavior, and evaluating the response of tumors to targeted therapy.
However, conventional analytical methods for DNA methylation require a large amount of DNA and have low sensitivity.
METHODS: Here, we report a modified version of the bisulfite-DGGE (denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis) using a nested PCR approach.
We designated this method as methylation specific electrophoresis (MSE).
The MSE method is comprised of the following steps: (a) bisulfite treatment of genomic DNA, (b) amplification of the target DNA by a nested PCR approach and (c) applying to DGGE.
To examine whether the MSE method is able to analyze DNA methylation of mucin genes in various samples, we apply it to DNA obtained from state cell lines, ethanol-fixed colonic crypts and human pancreatic juices.
Result The MSE method greatly decreases the amount of input DNA.
The lower detection limit for distinguishing different methylation status is <0.1% and the detectable minimum amount of DNA is 20 pg, which can be obtained from only a few cells.
We also show that MSE can be used for analysis of challenging samples such as paraffin sections of human isolated colonic crypts or human pancreatic juices, from which only a small amount of DNA can be extracted.
CONCLUSIONS: The MSE method can provide a qualitative information of methylated sequence profile.
The MSE method allows sensitive and specific analysis of the DNA methylation pattern of almost any block of multiple CpG sites.
The MSE method can be applied to analysis of DNA methylation status in many different clinical samples, and this may facilitate identification of new risk markers.
PMID: 22329849
Gemcitabine Alone versus combination of Gemcitabine and Cisplatin for the Treatment of Patients with Locally Advanced and/or Metastatic Pancreatic Carcinoma: A Retrospective Analysis of multicenter study (Anatolian Society of Medical Oncology).
he majority of patients with pancreatic cancer is of advanced disease.
Several randomized Phase II and III trials suggest that the combination of gemcitabine and cisplatin (GemCis) response rates were higher than Gemcitabine (Gem) alone, however the trials were not enough powered to indicate a statistically significant prolongation of survival in patients with advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
The aim of this retrospective multicenter study is to evaluated the efficiency of Gem alone versus GemCis in patients with locally advanced and/or metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma .A total of 406 patients, from fourteen centers were evaluated retrospectively.
All patients received Gem or GemCis as first-line treatment between September 2005 to March 2011.
Primary end of this study were to evaluate the toxicity, clinical response rate, progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) between the arms.
There were 156 patients (M: 98, F: 58) in Gem arm and 250 patients (M: 175, F: 75) in the combination arm.
Gemcitabin arm patients older than the combination arm ( median 63 vs 57.5, p=0.001).
In patients with the combination arm had a higher dose reduction (25.2% vs 11.3%, p=0.001) and dose delay (34% vs 16.8%, p=0.001).
Among patients with the combination and Gemcitabin arm gender, diabetes mellitus, performance status, cholestasis, grade, stage did not have a statistically difference (p>0.05).
Clinical response rate to the combination arm was higher than the Gem arm (69.0% vs 49.7%, p=0.001).
PFS was more favorable in the GemCis arm than Gem alone, but the difference did not attain statistical significance (8.9 vs 6.0, p=0.08).
OS was not significantly superior in the GemCis arm (12.0 vs 10.2, p>0.05).
Grade III-IV hematologic and nonhematologic toxicity were higher in the combination arm.
PFS was more favorable in the GemCis arm than Gem alone, but the difference did not attain statistical significance.
OS was not significantly superior in the GemCis arm.
Keywords: advanced pancreatic cancer, first-line chemotherapy, gemcitabine, cisplatin.
PMID: 22329400
Characterization of Cancer Associated Mucin Type O-Glycans Using the Exchange Sialylation Properties of Mammalian Sialyltransferase ST3Gal-II.
Our previous studies suggest that the α2,3sialylated T-antigen (NeuAcα2,3Galβ1,3GalNac-) and associated glycan structures are likely to be elevated during cancer.
An easy and reliable strategy to label mucinous glycans that contain such carbohydrates can enable the identification of novel glycoproteins that are cancer associated.
To this end, the present study demonstrates that the exchange sialylation property of mammalian ST3Gal-II can facilitate the labeling of mucin glycoproteins in cancer cells, tumor specimens, and glycoproteins in cancer sera.
Results show that (i) the radiolabeled mucin glycoproteins of each of the cancer cell lines studied (T47D, MCF7, LS180, LNCaP, SKOV(3), HL60, DU4475, and HepG(2)) is distinct either in terms of the specific glycans presented or their relative distribution.
While some cell lines like T47D had only one single sialylated O-glycan, others like LS180 and DU4475 contained a complex mixture of mucinous carbohydrates.
(ii) [(14)C]sialyl labeling of primary tumor cells identified a 25-35 kDa mucin glycoprotein unique to pancreatic tumor.
Labeled glycoproteins for other cancers had higher molecular weight.
(iii) Studies of [(14)C] sialylated human sera showed larger mucin glycopeptides and >2-fold larger mucin-type chains in human serum compared to [(14)C]sialyl labeled glycans of fetuin.
Overall, the exchange sialylation property of ST3Gal-II provides an efficient avenue to identify mucinous proteins for applications in glycoproteomics and cancer research.
PMID: 22320930
Epidemiology, risk factors, and the promotion of pancreatic cancer: Role of the stellate cell.
There are approximately 277 000 new cases of pancreatic cancer and 266 000 deaths from pancreatic cancer annually, indicating a mortality rate of 96% of the cases diagnosed.
Because of the ineffectiveness of therapies, a major emphasis needs to be placed on prevention.
This paper reviews the epidemiology and risk factors for pancreatic cancer, and uses this information to propose plausible research directions for determining the biological mechanisms mediating the effects of risk factors on the promotion of pancreatic cancer, with a focus on the pancreatic stellate cell.
PMID: 22320920
Dangerous liaisons: Pancreatic stellate cells and pancreatic cancer cells.
One of the characteristic features of the majority of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas is an abundant desmoplastic/stromal reaction.
Until recently, this stroma had received little attention from researchers studying the pathogenesis of pancreatic cancer, with most of the research focus resting on the biology of tumor cells themselves.
However, evidence is now accumulating that the stroma plays a critical role in pancreatic cancer progression.
The cells responsible for producing the stromal reaction in pancreatic cancer are activated pancreatic stellate cells (PSCs, the key effector cells in pancreatic fibrogenesis).
In vitro and in vivo studies have convincingly demonstrated a close bi-directional interaction between PSCs and pancreatic cancer cells, which facilitates local tumor growth as well as distant metastasis.
PSCs also interact closely with endothelial cells to stimulate angiogenesis and are possibly involved in the known resistance of pancreatic cancer to chemotherapy and radiation.
Most interestingly, it has recently been shown that PSCs from the primary tumor can travel to distant metastatic sites where they likely facilitate the seeding, survival, and proliferation of cancer cells.
Thus, it is now recognized that the stroma is an important alternative therapeutic target in this disease and concerted pre-clinical research is underway to develop strategies to modulate/deplete the stromal reaction to inhibit cancer progression.
The challenge is to translate these developments into clinically applicable treatments for patients.
PMID: 22320912
Bone marrow-derived proangiogenic cells in pancreatic cancer.
Tumor-derived signals systemically induce an angiogenic switch that allows cancer cells to survive and grow.
However, the vascular network in tumors is not well organized and fails to meet metabolic needs to maintain tissue homeostasis, resulting in significant hypoxia.
Among various tumors, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) typically develops in an unusually disordered microenvironment, which contributes to its highly aggressive behavior.
Since anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) (Avastin) has failed to demonstrate a survival benefit in PDAC, we need to re-visit the basic biology of this disease and understand what makes it so refractory to the anti-angiogenic approaches that are clinically effective in other neoplasms.
To address this issue, we specifically focused on the process of neovascularization where bone marrow-derived cells (BMDCs) play a role during pancreatic tumorigenesis.
We have identified subsets of BMDCs that regulate key processes during development of the neovessels through paracrine Hedgehog signaling.
Considering the importance of systemic responses occurring in tumor bearing hosts, we are currently using genetically engineered mice, which spontaneously develop PDAC, Pdx1-Cre;LSL-Kras(G12D) ;p53(lox/+) strain, to clarify critical events that can trigger aberrant angiogenesis in pancreatic cancer.
These studies allow us to provide insights into the cellular and molecular mechanisms of pancreatic tumorigenesis and have an implication for the design of therapies against this difficult disease.
PMID: 22320910
Biological and clinical relevance of stem cells in pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
Cancer stem cells (CSC) have been identified in a growing number of human malignancies.
CSC are functionally defined by their ability to self-renew and recapitulate tumors in the ectopic setting, and a growing number of studies have shown that they display other functional characteristics, such as invasion and drug resistance.
These unique functional properties implicate a role for CSC in clinical consequences, such as initial tumor formation, relapse following treatment, metastasis, and resistance, suggesting they are a major factor in directing clinical outcomes.
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is a highly-aggressive disease with a propensity for early metastasis and drug resistance.
Tumorigenic pancreatic cancer cells have been identified using the cell surface antigens CD44, CD24, and CD133, as well as the high expression of aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH).
In vitro and in vivo studies have shown that ALDH- and CD133-expressing pancreatic CSC have a greater propensity for metastasis, and ALDH-expressing CSC have been shown to be resistant to conventional chemotherapy.
In clinical samples from patients with resected pancreatic adenocarcinoma, the presence of ALDH-expressing CSC was associated with worse overall survival.
The development of CSC-targeting therapies might be important in changing the clinical outcomes of patients with this disease, and others and we have begun to identify novel compounds that block CSC function.
This review will discuss the biological and clinical relevance of CSC in pancreatic cancer, and will discuss novel therapeutic strategies to target them.
PMID: 22328735
Cruciferous vegetables and cancer risk in a network of case-control studies.
BACKGROUND: Cruciferous vegetables have been suggested to protect against various cancers, though the issue is open to discussion.
To further understand their role, we analyzed data from a network of case-control studies conducted in Italy and Switzerland.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The studies included a total of 1468 cancers of the oral cavity/pharynx, 505 of the esophagus, 230 of the stomach, 2390 of the colorectum, 185 of the liver, 326 of the pancreas, 852 of the larynx, 3034 of the breast, 367 of the endometrium, 1031 of the ovary, 1294 of the prostate, 767 of the kidney, and 11 492 controls.
All cancers were incident, histologically confirmed; controls were subjects admitted to the same network of hospitals as cases for a wide spectrum of acute nonneoplastic conditions.
RESULTS: The multivariate odds ratio (OR) for consumption of cruciferous vegetables at least once a week as compared with no/occasional consumption was significantly reduced for cancer of the oral cavity/pharynx (OR = 0.83), esophagus (OR = 0.72), colorectum (OR = 0.83), breast (OR = 0.83), and kidney (OR = 0.68).
The OR was below unity, but not significant, for stomach (OR = 0.90), liver (OR = 0.72), pancreatic (OR = 0.90), laryngeal (OR = 0.84), endometrial (OR = 0.93), ovarian (OR = 0.91), and prostate (OR = 0.87) cancer.
CONCLUSION: This large series of studies provides additional evidence of a favorable effect of cruciferous vegetables on several common cancers.
PMID: 22327868
[Gemcitabine in the chemoradiotherapy for locally advanced pancreatic cancer: a meta-analysis.]
PMID: 22327302
Dyspepsia: organic versus functional.
Dyspepsia is the medical term for difficult digestion.
It consists of various symptoms in the upper abdomen, such as fullness, discomfort, early satiation, bloating, heartburn, belching, nausea, vomiting, or pain.
The prevalence of dyspepsia in the western world is approximately 20% to 25%.
Dyspepsia can be divided into 2 main categories: "organic" and "functional dyspepsia" (FD).
Organic causes of dyspepsia are peptic ulcer, gastroesophageal reflux disease, gastric or esophageal cancer, pancreatic or biliary disorders, intolerance to food or drugs, and other infectious or systemic diseases.
Pathophysiological mechanisms underlying FD are delayed gastric emptying, impaired gastric accommodation to a meal, hypersensitivity to gastric distension, altered duodenal sensitivity to lipids or acids, altered antroduodenojenunal motility and gastric electrical rhythm, unsuppressed postprandial phasic contractility in the proximal stomach, and autonomic nervous system-central nervous system dysregulation.
Pathogenetic factors in FD are genetic predisposition, infection from Helicobacter pylori or other organisms, inflammation, and psychosocial factors.
Diagnostic evaluation of dyspepsia includes upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, abdominal ultrasonography, gastric emptying testing (scintigraphy, breath test, ultrasonography, or magnetic resonance imaging), and gastric accommodation evaluation (magnetic resonance imaging, ultrasound, single-photon emission computed tomography, and barostat).
Antroduodenal manometry can be used for the assessment of the myoelectrical activity of the stomach, whereas sensory function can be evaluated with the barostat, tensostat, and satiety test.
Management of FD includes general measures, acid-suppressive drugs, eradication of H.
pylori, prokinetic agents, fundus-relaxing drugs, antidepressants, and psychological interventions.
This review presents an update on the diagnosis of patients presenting with dyspepsia, with an emphasis on the pathophysiological and pathogenetic mechanisms of FD and the differential diagnosis with organic causes of dyspepsia.
The management of uninvestigated and FD, as well as the established and new pharmaceutical agents, is also discussed.
PMID: 22327284
Repeating regional acute pancreatitis in the head of the pancreas caused by intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms in the tail: report of a case.
Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) of the pancreas is a distinct entity characterized by papillary proliferations of mucin-producing epithelial cells with excessive mucin production and cystic dilatation of the pancreatic ducts.
The clinical presentation often involves recurrent episodes of pancreatitis associated with the temporal obstruction of the main pancreatic duct caused by the hypersecretion of mucin.
We herein describe a case in which the patient repeatedly experienced the occurrence of idiopathic acute pancreatitis in the head of the pancreas over a 9-year period, and who was ultimately was cured by distal pancreatectomy for IPMNs in the pancreatic tail.
This case illustrates the potential pitfalls in the diagnosis of IPMNs owing to a discrepancy between the site of pancreatitis and that of the IPMN.
The possible mechanisms linking acute pancreatitis with the formation of IPMNs are also reviewed.
PMID: 22326673
Old formula, new Rx: The journey of PHY906 as cancer adjuvant therapy.
PHY906, a four-herb formulation used for over 1800 years to treat gastrointestinal distress (cramps, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea), has been intensively studied as adjuvant therapy of cancer patients under chemotherapy.
Preclinical studies have shown that PHY906 enhances the therapeutic indices of a broad spectrum of anticancer agents.
These findings have been examined in clinical studies for colorectal, liver, and pancreatic cancers when PHY906 is used as an adjuvant to chemotherapy and the results were promising; i.e.
PHY906 could reduce chemotherapy-induced toxicities and/or increase chemotherapeutic efficacy.
Furthermore, PHY906 did not affect the pharmacokinetics of the chemotherapeutic agents used.
Some information has been obtained regarding the mechanism of action of PHY906 in preclinical studies.
A comprehensive platform, PhytomicsQC that integrates chemical and biological fingerprints together with a novel biostatistical methodology has been developed to assess the quality of different batches of PHY906.
Over a ten-year period, this multiplex technology has been used to show batch-to-batch consistency of PHY906 production.
Advanced clinical trials are ongoing to demonstrate the effectiveness of PHY906 as adjuvant therapy for cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy.
PMID: 22326450
Adenoma-carcinoma sequence in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.
Cholangiocarcinoma is a rare tumor but recent data report a worldwide increase in incidence and mortality.
There are several risk factors associated with cholangiocarcinoma, and chronic inflammation of billiary tree seems to be implied in the cholangiocarcinogenesis, but little is known about this process.
PRESENTATION OF CASE: We present a 56-year-old female with a bile duct adenoma incidentally discovered in the follow up of breast cancer that 18 months later progress to intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.
This is a rare presentation of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma that suggests the classic adenoma-carcinoma sequence in cholangiocarcinogenesis.
Furthermore this case gives rise to some questions about the possible common ground on intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma and breast cancer.
Cholangiocarcinogenesis is a complex multi-step mechanism and further investigations are needed to fully understand this process.
PMID: 22326395
Synthesis and biological evaluation of sulfonyl acrylonitriles as novel inhibitors to peritoneal carcinomatosis.
The vast majority of cancer patients die from metastasis, the process by which cancer cells spread to secondary tissues through body fluids.
Peritoneal carcinomatosis is a type of metastasis in which cancer cells gain access to the intra-abdominal cavity and then implant in the peritoneum, the thin tissue that lines the abdominal wall and internal organs.
Unfortunately, peritoneal carcinomatosis can occur following surgical resection of intra-abdominal malignancies.
We previously reported proapoptotic activity of (2E)-3-[[4-(1,1-dimethylethyl)phenyl]sulfonyl]-2-propenenitrile (BAY 11-7085, 1) on colon and pancreatic cancer cells during adhesion and demonstrated that this compound could significantly inhibit peritoneal carcinomatosis in mice.(1,2) In order to determine the chemical basis of the anti-metastatic properties of BAY 11-7085, a series of analogs were synthesized and evaluated for their ability to induce apoptosis in pancreatic and ovarian cancer cells during adhesion to mesothelial cells, which line the surface of the peritoneum.
The co-culture assay results were validated using a murine peritoneal carcinomatosis model.
These analogs may greatly benefit patients undergoing surgical resections of colorectal, pancreatic, and ovarian cancers depending on their tolerability.
PMID: 22325559
Identification of NME5 as a contributor to innate resistance to gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer cells.
The limited therapeutic effect of gemcitabine on pancreatic cancer is largely attributed to pre-existing or acquired resistance of the tumor cells.
This study aims to screen for candidate resistance-related gene(s) and to elucidate the underlying mechanisms.
NME5 was found to be highly expressed in an innate gemcitabine-resistant human pancreatic cancer sample and the cell line PAXC002 derived from the sample.
Downregulation of NME5 significantly reversed gemcitabine resistance in PAXC002 while NME5 overexpression induced gemcitabine resistance in pancreatic cancer cell line BxPC-3.
NME5 attenuated the induction of apoptosis and cell cycle arrest induced by gemcitabine, probably accounting for the blunted sensitivity to gemcitabine.
Furthermore, NME5 was demonstrated to play its role in a NF-κB dependent manner.
NME5 was capable of directly binding NF-κB and possibly regulated its expression level in PAXC002.
Our results also proposed NF-κB as a key executor of NME5 in regulating apoptosis and cell cycle.
All these data suggest that NME5 presents a promising target for relieving innate gemcitabine resistance in pancreatic cancer cells.
PMID: 22323115
Transient receptor potential melastatin-related 7 channel is overexpressed in human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas and regulates human pancreatic cancer cell migration.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most aggressive form of cancer with a tendency to invade surrounding healthy tissues, leading to a largely incurable disease.
Despite many advances in modern medicine, there is still a lack of early biomarkers as well as efficient therapeutical strategies.
The melastatin-related transient receptor potential 7 channel (TRPM7) is a non-selective cation channel which is involved in maintaining Ca(2+) and Mg(2+) homeostasis.
It has been recently reported to regulate cell differentiation, proliferation and migration.
However, the role of TRPM7 in PDAC progression is far to be understood.
In the present study, we show that TRPM7 is 13-fold overexpressed in cancer tissues compared to the healthy ones.
Furthermore, TRPM7 staining is stronger in tumors with high grade, suggesting a correlation between TRPM7 expression and PDAC progression.
Importantly, TRPM7 expression is inversely related to patient survival.
In BxPC-3 cell line, dialyzing the cytoplasm during the patch-clamp whole-cell recording with a 0-Mg(2+) solution activated a non-selective current with a strong outward rectification.
This cation current is inhibited by intracellular Mg(2+) and by TRPM7 silencing.
The downregulation of TRPM7 by siRNA dramatically inhibited intracellular Mg(2+) fluorescence and cell migration without affecting cell proliferation suggesting that TRPM7 contributes to Mg(2+) entry and cell migration.
Moreover, external Mg(2+) following TRPM7 silencing fully restored the cell migration.
In summary, our results indicate that TRPM7 is involved in the BxPC-3 cell migration via a Mg(2+) -dependent mechanism and may be a potential biomarker of poor prognosis of PDAC.
© 2012 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
PMID: 22322899
Inclusion Complex of Novel Curcumin Analogue CDF and β-Cyclodextrin (1:2) and Its Enhanced In Vivo Anticancer Activity Against Pancreatic Cancer.
PURPOSE: Several formulations have been proposed to improve the systemic delivery of novel cancer therapeutic compounds, including cyclodextrin derivatives.
We aimed to synthesize and characterize of CDF-β-cyclodextrin inclusion complex (1:2) (CDFCD).
METHODS: The compound was characterized by Fourier transform infrared, differential scanning calorimetry, powder X-ray diffraction studies, H1 & C13 NMR studies and scanning electron microscopic analysis.
Its activity was tested against multiple cancer cell lines, and in vivo bioavailability was checked.
RESULTS: CDF-β-cyclodextrin was found to lower IC(50) value by half when tested against multiple cancer cell lines.
It preferentially accumulated in the pancreas, where levels of CDF-β-cyclodextrin in mice were 10 times higher than in serum, following intravenous administration of an aqueous CDF-β-cyclodextrin preparation.
CONCLUSIONS: Novel curcumin analog CDF preferentially accumulates in the pancreas, leading to its potent anticancer activity against pancreatic cancer cells.
Synthesis of such CDF-β-cyclodextrin self-assembly is an effective strategy to enhance its bioavailability and tissue distribution, warranting further evaluation for CDF delivery in clinical settings for treatment of human malignancies.
PMID: 22322855
Accessory spleen mimicking a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor.
A 60-year-old man underwent computed tomography as part of colorectal cancer follow-up.
A hypervascular nodule was found within the pancreatic tail and subsequently proved to be positive on [111In] DTPA-octreotide scan.
A neuroendocrine tumor of the pancreas was supposed and a distal pancreatectomy performed.
Heterotopic splenic tissue was finally proved by pathological examination.
The present case suggests that intrapancreatic accessory spleen be considered in the differential diagnosis of pancreatic lesions positive on [111In] DTPA-octreotide scan.
PMID: 22322442
Plumbagin, a plant derived natural agent inhibits the growth of pancreatic cancer cells in in vitro and in vivo via targeting EGFR, Stat3 and NF-κB signaling pathways.
Pancreatic cancer (PC) is the most aggressive malignant disease, ranks as the fourth most leading cause of cancer related death among men and women in the United States.
We present here that plumbagin (PL), a quinoid constituent isolated from the roots of the medicinal plant Plumbago zeylanica L, inhibits the growth of PC cells both in vitro and in vivo model systems.
PL treatment induces apoptosis and inhibits cell viability of PC cells (PANC1, BxPC3, and ASPC1).
In addition, i.p administration of PL (2 mg/kg body weight, 5 days a week) in SCID mice beginning 3 days after ectopic implantation of PANC1 cells resulted in a significant (P<0.01) inhibition of both tumor weight and volume.
PL treatment inhibited 1) constitutive expression of EGFR, pStat3Tyr705, pStat3Ser727, 2) DNA binding of Stat3, and 3) physical interaction of EGFR with Stat3, in both cultured PANC1 cells and their xenograft tumors.
PL treatment also inhibited phosphorylation and DNA-binding activity of NF-κB in both cultured PC cells (PANC1, ASPC1) and in PANC1 cells xenograft tumors.
Downstream target genes (cyclin D1, MMP9, and Survivin) of Stat3 and NF-κB were similarly inhibited.
These results suggest that PL may be used as a novel therapeutic agent against human PC.
© 2012 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
PMID: 22322379
Epithelial mesenchymal transition correlates with CD24+CD44+ and CD133+ cells in pancreatic cancer.
The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been linked to induction of a stem-cell like phenotype, characterized by altered cell surface marker expression and increased tumor formation.
The aim of this study was to investigate whether EMT correlates with CD24+CD44+ and CD133+ cells in pancreatic cancer.
The morphology of untreated and gemcitabine-treated SW1990 gemcitabine-resistant cells and normal SW1990 cells were compared.
NF-κB p65 expression was knocked down using siRNA.
Vimentin and E-cadherin expression were analyzed using western blotting, and CD24+CD44+, CD133+ cells were quantified by FACS.
Additionally, immunohistochemistry of EMT-associated markers and stem cell-associated markers were performed in 41 cases of human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
In SW1990 gemcitabine-resistant cells, gemcitabine induced a mesenchymal cell phenotype, expression of EMT-related molecular markers and increased CD24+CD44+ and CD133+ cells compared to untreated SW1990 gemcitabine-resistant and SW1990 cells.
Knockdown of NF-κB p65 inhibited the ability of gemcitabine to increase the proportion of CD24+CD44+ or CD133+ cells and expression of EMT-related molecular markers.
In human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, significant correlations were observed between expression of the EMT-associated markers vimentin and E-cadherin, and stem cell-associated markers CD24, CD133 and CD44.
This study demonstrated that EMT correlated with CD24+CD44+ and CD133+ cells in pancreatic cancer.
This study also suggests that EMT may induce cancer stem-like cells in pancreatic cancer, with different degrees of EMT probability inducing different proportions of CD24+CD44+ and CD133+ cells.
PMID: 22322295
Ack1 Tyrosine Kinase Activation Correlates with Pancreatic Cancer Progression.
Pancreatic cancer is a significant cause of cancer mortality worldwide as the disease has advanced significantly in patients before symptoms are evident.
The signal transduction pathways that promote this rapid progression are not well understood.
Ack1 or TNK2, an ubiquitously expressed oncogenic non-receptor tyrosine kinase, integrates signals from ligand-activated receptor tyrosine kinases to modulate intracellular signaling cascades.
In the present study, we investigated the Ack1 activation profile in a pancreatic cancer tumor microarray, and observed that expression levels of activated Ack1 and pTyr284-Ack1 positively correlated with the severity of disease progression and inversely correlated with the survival of patients with pancreatic cancer.
To explore the mechanisms by which Ack1 promotes tumor progression, we investigated the role of AKT/PKB, an oncogene and Ack1-interacting protein.
Ack1 activates AKT directly in pancreatic and other cancer cell lines by phosphorylating AKT at Tyr176 to promote cell survival.
In addition, the Ack1 inhibitor AIM-100 not only inhibited Ack1 activation but also suppressed AKT tyrosine phosphorylation, leading to cell cycle arrest in the G1 phase.
This effect resulted in a significant decrease in the proliferation of pancreatic cancer cells and induction of apoptosis.
Collectively, our data indicate that activated Ack1 could be a prognostic marker for ascertaining early or advanced pancreatic cancer.
Thus, Ack1 inhibitors hold promise for therapeutic intervention to inhibit pancreatic tumor growth.
PMID: 22321888
[RAD001 reverses radio-resistance and exerts synergistic tumor inhibition with 5-fluorouracil].
To explore the in vitro synergistic anti-tumor efficacy of mammalian target of rampamycin (mTOR) inhibitor (RAD001) and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) for radio-resistant tumors.
Radio-resistant cells of human pancreatic cancer cell and human colon cancer cell were established.
The expression profiles of VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) and TP (thymidine phosphorylase) were compared between parental and radio-resistant tumor cells.
The tumor proliferation was analyzed after 5-FU alone or in combination with a mTOR inhibitor.
After several cycles of radiation induction (3 Gy), the radio-resistant cells of human pancreatic cancer (AsPCres) and colon cancer (HT29res) were established.
There was a higher expression of VEGF in radio-resistant tumor cells than their parental cells.
They were 1215 ± 67 pg/ml in AsPCres and 689 ± 25 pg/ml in HT29res respectively (P < 0.01).
The up-regulation of TP was observed in both AsPC-res and HT29-res.
The combined therapy of 5-FU plus a mTOR inhibitor might exert synergistic tumor inhibition.
RAD001 decreases the radiation-induced expression of VEGF in tumor.
And the post-radiation up-regulation of TP promotes the efficacy of 5-FU.
The combined therapy of RAD001 and 5-FU may inhibit synergistically the growth of radio-resistant tumors.
PMID: 22321641
Two sides of the story? Smad4 loss in pancreatic cancer versus head-and-neck cancer.
TGFβ signaling Smads (Smad2, 3, and 4) were suspected tumor suppressors soon after their discovery.
Nearly two decades of research confirmed this role and revealed other divergent and cancer-specific functions including paradoxical tumor promotion effects.
Although Smad4 is the most potent tumor suppressor, its functions are highly context-specific as exemplified by pancreatic cancer and head-and-neck cancer: in pancreatic cancer, Smad4 loss cannot initiate tumor formation but promotes metastases while in head-and-neck cancer Smad4 loss promotes cancer progression but also initiates tumor formation, likely through effects on genomic instability.
The differing consequences of impaired Smad signaling in human cancers and the molecular mechanisms that underpin these differences will have important implications for the design and application of novel targeted therapies.
PMID: 22321476
Incidental Findings in Patients Evaluated for Thoracic Aortic Pathology Using Computed Tomography Angiography.
BACKGROUND: Computed tomography angiography (CTA) is routinely used to diagnose thoracic aortic pathology and for surveillance after thoracic endovascular aortic repair.
The purpose of our study was to assess the prevalence of unsuspected disease identified on CTA examination for thoracic aortic pathology and to determine potential clinical significance of these findings.
METHODS: A retrospective review of 242 patients (136 men and 106 women; mean age, 65.7 ± 13.9 years) referred for clinical evaluation of thoracic aortic pathology during a 12-year period was performed.
CTA was acquired after obtaining full written informed consent and injecting nonionic contrast Omnipaque 350 intravenously.
Subsequently, axial images were obtained from the thoracic inlet through the pubic symphysis.
The prevalence of incidental findings was recorded.
A finding was judged potentially significant if a therapeutic intervention or radiologic follow-up was deemed advisable on the basis of the CTA findings.
RESULTS: Prevalence of incidental findings were noncalcified pulmonary lesions (subcentimeter nodule [28, 11.57%], nodule >1 cm [16, 6.61%], and pulmonary mass >3 cm [4, 1.65%]), calcified pulmonary nodules (35, 14.46%), simple liver cysts (32, 13.22%), contrast-enhancing liver lesion (7, 2.89%), renal mass (7, 2.89%), and pancreatic mass (5, 2.06%).
Subsequent diagnostic tests were recommended for 63 findings in 55 (22.72%) patients, which revealed 11 (4.5%) patients had metastatic disease-six primary lung cancer, one metastatic lesion (mets) to the lung, one renal cell carcinoma with mets in the lung, one primary pancreatic adenocarcinoma with mets in the liver, one unknown primary with mets in the liver, and one other poorly differential metastatic carcinoma with lesions in the pancreas, adrenal glands, kidneys, and small bowel with unknown primary.
CONCLUSION: CTA evaluation in patient with aortic pathology may reveal a high rate of malignant lesions.
Attention to the incidental finding of suspicious lesion on computed tomographic scans in the chest and abdomen and appropriate follow-up by the requesting surgeon is important in patients undergoing surveillance for aortic pathologies.
PMID: 22321398
Engineering fibrotic tissue in pancreatic cancer: A novel three-dimensional model to investigate nanoparticle delivery.
Pancreatic cancer contains both fibrotic tissue and tumor cells with embedded vasculature.
Therefore anti-cancer nanoparticles need to extravasate from tumor vasculature and permeate thick fibrotic tissue to target tumor cells.
To date, permeation of drugs has been investigated in vitro using monolayer models.
Since three-dimensional migration of nanoparticles cannot be analyzed in a monolayer model, we established a novel, three-dimensional, multilayered, in vitro model of tumor fibrotic tissue, using our hierarchical cell manipulation technique with K643f fibroblasts derived from a murine pancreatic tumor model.
NIH3T3 normal fibroblasts were used in comparison.
We analyzed the size-dependent effect of nanoparticles on permeation in this experimental model using fluorescent dextran molecules of different molecular weights.
The system revealed permeation decreased as number of layers of cultured cells increased, or as molecule size increased.
Furthermore, we showed changes in permeation depended on the source of the fibroblasts.
Observations of this sort cannot be made in conventional monolayer culture systems.
Thus our novel technique provides a promising in vitro means to investigate permeation of nanoparticles in fibrotic tissue, when both type and number of fibroblasts can be regulated.
PMID: 22320450
Interferon-alpha (IFN-α) modulates the chemosensitivity of CD133-expressing pancreatic cancer cells to gemcitabine.
Pancreatic cancer is a lethal disease as current chemotherapies with gemcitabine (GEM) are still insufficient.
Accumulating evidence suggests that cancer stem cells (CSCs) are responsible for chemoresistance and CD133 is one of the CSC markers in pancreatic cancer.
Interferon-alpha (IFN-α), a cytokine with pleiotropic effects, possesses direct cytotoxic and cytostatic effects on tumor cells.
The aim of this study was to investigate whether IFN-α can modulate the chemosensitivity of a human pancreatic cancer cell line, Capan-1, to GEM.
Cell cycles were evaluated for response to GEM with and without IFN-α by BrdU assay.
GEM inhibited Capan-1 cell growth in a dose-dependent manner.
GEM (IC(50) ; 100ng/mL) treatment reduced the number of both CD133(+) and CD133(-) cells in S phase, induced apoptosis of CD133(-) cells more than that of CD133(+) cells, and increased accumulation of CD133(+) cells into G0/G1 phase.
These results infer that CD133(+) cells shelter into G0/G1 phase by GEM treatment.
IFN-α modulated CD133(+) cells from G0/G1 phase to S-phase.
Consequently, apoptosis was accelerated in both CD133(+) and CD133(-) cells after IFN-α combined with GEM treatment.
Furthermore, GEM combined with IFN-α treatment showed a significant tumor suppressive effect in the in vivo study.
Importantly, CD133(+) cells showed CSC-like properties such as generation of spheres, highly invasive ability and high tumorigenesis.
These results suggest that IFN-α, as a modulator, could contribute to the treatment of CD133(+) cancer cells and be effective in combined chemotherapies with GEM for pancreatic cancer stem-like cells.
© 2012 Japanese Cancer Association.
PMID: 22320398
Coexpression of MUC16 and mesothelin is related to the invasion process in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
The invasion process is a crucial step for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC); however, the genes related to invasion remain unclear.
To identify specific genes for the invasion process, we compared microarray data for infiltrating cancer and PanIN-3, which were harvested from an individual PDAC patient by microdissection.
Furthermore, immunohistochemical, coimmunoprecipitation and invasion analyses were performed to confirm the biologic significance of molecules identified by expression profile.
In the present study, we focused on MUC16 and mesothelin among 87 genes that were significantly upregulated in infiltrating components compared to PanIN-3 in all PDAC patients, because MUC16 was the most differently expressed between two regions, and mesothelin was reported as the receptor for MUC16.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that MUC16 and mesothelin were expressed simultaneously only in infiltrating components and increased at the invasion front, and binding of MUC16 and mesothelin was found in PDAC by immunoprecipitation assay.
The downregulation of MUC16 by shRNA and the blockage of MUC16 binding to mesothelin by antibody inhibited both invasion and migration of pancreatic cancer cell line.
MUC16 high/mesothelin high expression was an independent prognostic factor for poor survival in PDAC patients.
In conclusion, we identified two specific genes, MUC16 and mesothelin, associated with the invasion process in patients with PDAC.
(Cancer Sci, doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2012.02214.x, 2012).
PMID: 22319744
Primary leiomyosarcoma of the pancreas.
Primary sarcomas of the pancreas are extremely rare, accounting for 0.1% of malignant pancreatic (non-islet) neoplasms.
Pancreatic leiomyosarcoma is a highly aggressive malignancy that spreads in a similar manner to gastric leiomyosarcoma, i.e., by adjacent organ invasion, hematogenous spread, and lymph node metastasis.
These tumors are large at the time of diagnosis and are usually found at an advanced stage.
We report a case of a 70-year-old female with intermittent right upper quadrant abdominal discomfort.
Radiological, histopathological, and immunohistochemical studies revealed the tumor to be a primary leiomyosarcoma of the pancreas.
Herein, we describe a patient with a primary leiomyosarcoma of the pancreas who presented with clinical and radiological findings indicative of a mass in the pancreatic head.
PMID: 22319600
Identification of anti-malarial compounds as novel antagonists to chemokine receptor CXCR4 in pancreatic cancer cells.
Despite recent advances in targeted therapies, patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma continue to have poor survival highlighting the urgency to identify novel therapeutic targets.
Our previous investigations have implicated chemokine receptor CXCR4 and its selective ligand CXCL12 in the pathogenesis and progression of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia and invasive pancreatic cancer; hence, CXCR4 is a promising target for suppression of pancreatic cancer growth.
Here, we combined in silico structural modeling of CXCR4 to screen for candidate anti-CXCR4 compounds with in vitro cell line assays and identified NSC56612 from the National Cancer Institute's (NCI) Open Chemical Repository Collection as an inhibitor of activated CXCR4.
Next, we identified that NSC56612 is structurally similar to the established anti-malarial drugs chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine.
We evaluated these compounds in pancreatic cancer cells in vitro and observed specific antagonism of CXCR4-mediated signaling and cell proliferation.
Recent in vivo therapeutic applications of chloroquine in pancreatic cancer mouse models have demonstrated decreased tumor growth and improved survival.
Our results thus provide a molecular target and basis for further evaluation of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine in pancreatic cancer.
Historically safe in humans, chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine appear to be promising agents to safely and effectively target CXCR4 in patients with pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22318898
Trends in digestive cancer mortality, Cuba 1987-2008.
BACKGROUND: Gastrointestinal malignancies are among the most common cancers suffered by Cubans.
The purpose of our study is to analyse the evolution of digestive cancer mortality in Cuba.
METHODS: Mortality data for this study were obtained from the National Medical Records and Health Statistic Bureau.
Trends (1987-2008) in age-standardized cancer mortality were described using joinpoint regression.
RESULTS: In the data set of digestive cancer mortality, in the period 1987-2008, colorectal/anal cancer was the most frequent cause of cancer mortality in males and females.
In men, a rise in mortality was observed for cancer of the oesophagus between 2001 and 2008, and pancreatic cancer showed a slight mortality rise for the period 1987-2008.
In women, colorectal/anal cancer increased from 1989 to 2001.
A mortality increase was observed for oesophageal cancer in the period 2005-08.
The result of the joinpoint analysis for the age group of 35-64 years was consistent with those for overall mortality.
CONCLUSION: The trend in mortality from digestive cancer in Cuba shows differences depending on sex, age and type of tumour.
The Cuban health system has seen improvements in diagnostic systems, which has contributed even better diagnoses of digestive diseases.
PMID: 22317883
Targeted cyst wall puncture and aspiration during EUS-FNA increases the diagnostic yield of premalignant and malignant pancreatic cysts.
BACKGROUND: Characterization of pancreatic cysts by using EUS-FNA includes chemical and cytologic analysis.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate whether material obtained from FNA of the cyst wall increases diagnostic yield.
DESIGN: Prospective series.
SETTING: Tertiary referral center.
PATIENTS: Consecutive patients with pancreatic cysts referred for EUS-FNA between March 2010 and March 2011.
INTERVENTION: FNA was performed with aspiration of cyst fluid for carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and cytology, followed by cyst wall puncture (CWP).
CWP is defined as puncturing the far wall of the cyst and moving the needle back and forth through the wall to sample the wall epithelium.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS: The diagnostic yield for mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasms by CEA and cytology obtained from cyst fluid compared with cytology obtained from CWP.
CEA ≥192 ng/mL was considered mucinous.
RESULTS: A total of 69 pancreatic cysts from 66 patients were included.
Adequate amounts of fluid were aspirated for CEA, amylase, and cytology in 60 cysts (81%).
Cellular material adequate for cytologic assessment from CWP was obtained in 56 cysts (81%).
Ten (30%) of 33 cysts with CEA <192 ng/mL and negative results of cyst fluid cytology had a mucinous diagnosis from CWP; 6 of 9 (67%) cysts with an insufficient amount of fluid for CEA analysis and cyst fluid cytology had a mucinous diagnosis from CWP.
Furthermore, 4 malignant cysts were independently diagnosed by CWP cytology.
The incremental diagnostic yield of CWP for mucinous or malignant cysts was therefore 29% (20 of 69 cysts, P = .0001).
An episode of pancreatitis (1.45%) occurred.
LIMITATION: Lack of surgical criterion standard.
CONCLUSIONS: CWP during EUS-FNA is a safe and effective technique for improving the diagnostic yield for premalignant and malignant pancreatic cysts.
PMID: 22316387
Multiplex Targeted Proteomic Assay for Biomarker Detection in Plasma: A Pancreatic Cancer Biomarker Case Study.
Biomarkers are most frequently proteins that are measured in the blood.
Their development largely relies on antibody creation to test the protein candidate performance in blood samples of diseased versus nondiseased patients.
The creation of such antibody assays has been a bottleneck in biomarker progress due to the cost, extensive time, and effort required to complete the task.
Targeted proteomics is an emerging technology that is playing an increasingly important role to facilitate disease biomarker development.
In this study, we applied a SRM-based targeted proteomics platform to directly detect candidate biomarker proteins in plasma to evaluate their clinical utility for pancreatic cancer detection.
The characterization of these protein candidates used a clinically well-characterized cohort that included plasma samples from patients with pancreatic cancer, chronic pancreatitis, and healthy age-matched controls.
Three of the five candidate proteins, including gelsolin, lumican, and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1, demonstrated an AUC value greater than 0.75 in distinguishing pancreatic cancer from the controls.
In addition, we provide an analysis of the reproducibility, accuracy, and robustness of the SRM-based proteomics platform.
This information addresses important technical issues that could aid in the adoption of the targeted proteomics platform for practical clinical utility.
PMID: 22316327
Primary small cell carcinoma of the pancreas: rare type of pancreatic cancer and review of the literatures.
ABSTRACT: Back ground: Primary small cell carcinoma of the pancreas (SCCP) is a rare malignancy with an extremely poor prognosis which accounts for 1 to 1.4 percent of all pancreatic malignancies.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present the case of a 62-year-old man with a half-month history of upper abdominal discomfort who was diagnosed with SCC of the pancreatic tail.
A Chest X-ray showed no evidence of primary lung tumor.
The diagnosis of a SCCP was confirmed by post-surgery pathology and immunohistology.
In our review of the published reports of SCCP, we only found a few cases reported in the literatures.
The diagnosis of SCCP needs the post-surgery pathology and immunohistology and the prognosis of SCCP is extremely poor.
There was a significant increase in median survival, from 1 to 6 months, in treated patients compared to patients treated only by symptomatic management.
Chemotherapy was the most common treatment and the combination of cisplatin/etoposide was most frequently prescribed.
CONCLUSION: The accurate diagnosis of (SCCP) is necessary for determining prognosis and deciding appropriate therapy.
PMID: 22315049
Concentrations of IGF-I and IGFBP-3 and pancreatic cancer risk in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition.
Background:Insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) and their binding proteins (BPs) regulate cell differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis, and may have a role in the aetiology of various cancers.
Information on their role in pancreatic cancer is limited and was examined here in a case-control study nested within the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition.Methods:Serum concentrations of IGF-I and IGFBP-3 were measured using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays in 422 cases and 422 controls matched on age, sex, study centre, recruitment date, and time since last meal.
Conditional logistic regression was used to compute odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) adjusted for confounding variables.Results:Neither circulating levels of IGF-I (OR=1.21, 95% CI 0.75-1.93 for top vs bottom quartile, P-trend 0.301), IGFBP-3 (OR=1.00, 95% CI 0.66-1.51, P-trend 0.79), nor the molar IGF-I/IGFBP-3 ratio, an indicator of free IGF-I level (OR=1.22, 95% CI 0.75-1.97, P-trend 0.27), were statistically significantly associated with the risk of pancreatic cancer.
In a cross-classification, however, a high concentration of IGF-I with concurrently low levels of IGFBP-3 was related to an increased risk of pancreatic cancer (OR=1.72, 95% CI 1.05-2.83; P-interaction=0.154).Conclusion:On the basis of these results, circulating levels of components of the IGF axis do not appear to be the risk factors for pancreatic cancer.
However, on the basis of the results of a subanalysis, it cannot be excluded that a relatively large amount of IGF-1 together with very low levels of IGFBP-3 might still be associated with an increase in pancreatic cancer risk.
PMID: 22314265
Noxa/Mcl-1 balance influences the effect of the proteasome inhibitor MG-132 in combination with anticancer agents in pancreatic cancer cell lines.
Pancreatic cancer progresses aggressively and owing to chemoresistance responds poorly to chemotherapy.
Thus, there is an urgent need to understand the mechanisms of cancer cell resistance to generate effective strategies to circumvent intrinsic chemoresistance in this tumour indication.
In this study, three pancreatic cancer cell lines, MIA PaCa-2, MDAPanc-3 and AsPC-1, were treated with the proteasome inhibitor MG-132 together with camptothecin, doxorubicin or paclitaxel, and cytotoxicity was measured using the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay.
The combination of MG-132 and camptothecin at a ratio of 5 : 1 gave the most promising results and enhanced cytotoxicity compared with the single compounds in MIA PaCa-2 cells.
The increase was shown to be due to enhanced caspase-3 activity resulting in apoptosis.
Moreover, this combination upregulated the levels of the proapoptotic protein Noxa and reduced the levels of the antiapoptotic protein Mcl-1, as demonstrated by western blotting.
In contrast, the combination of MG-132 with doxorubicin also induced increased cytotoxicity, but apoptosis was decreased.
The lack of an enhanced apoptosis induction could be correlated with high levels of Mcl-1 in response to the combined treatment with MG-132 and doxorubicin.
Thus, the results indicate that regulation of the antiapoptotic and proapoptotic Bcl-2 family members Noxa and Mcl-1 is predicative of the effectiveness of the combination of MG-132 with different anticancer agents on apoptosis induction in pancreatic cancer cells.
PMID: 22313544
Gene expression profiling and pathway analysis identify the integrin signaling pathway to be altered by IL-1β in human pancreatic cancer cells: Role of JNK.
The pro-inflammatory cytokine, IL-1β, is a critical component of the persistent inflammatory milieu that pancreatic cancer cells frequently encounter.
Although several studies report diverse mechanisms responsible for this association, yet a comprehensive global analysis of the effect of IL-1β in these cells is not clearly evident.
In this study, we performed whole genome transcriptome analysis of control and IL-1β treated human pancreatic MIA PaCa-2 cells, validated the most targeted pathway and evaluated the role of JNK therein.
225 Genes were up-regulated and 1215 were down-regulated and these were categorized into biological processes and cellular pathways using the PANTHER classification system.
The altered genes categorized into significant biological processes that included those of cell cycle, mitosis, transport and intracellular protein trafficking.
The integrin signaling pathway emerged as harboring the maximum number of differentially expressed genes.
Two important genes of this pathway, namely vinculin and α5-integrin were validated and both depicted significant inhibition by IL-1β that was prevented in the presence of JNK siRNA.
In a wound healing assay, IL-1β increased the migratory rate of MIA PaCa-2 and Panc-1 cells that was abrogated by JNK inhibition.
Additionally, vinculin and α-integrin siRNAs also increased the migration of these cells along the wound edge.
These results suggest that in these pancreatic cancer cells, IL-1β inhibits components of the integrin signaling pathway in a JNK dependent manner that contributes to their increased migratory potential.
Therefore, JNK might be potentially targeted to prevent the migration and invasion of pancreatic cancer cells.
PMID: 22313312
Cloning, Expression and Characterization of Mouse (Mus musculus) Nicotinamide 5'-Mononucleotide Adenylyltransferase-2.
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) is synthesized by the action of nicotinamide mononucleotide adenylyltransferase (NMNAT) from NMN and ATP.
The mouse homolog of NMNAT-2 (mmNMNAT-2) was cloned, expressed, and subsequently identified using MALDI-TOF in conjunction with the ProFound database.
Circular dichroism analyses of recombinant mmNMNAT-2 showed α helical and β sheet secondary structures, consistent with the known structure of the human isoform.
Competition experiments using mouse pancreatic tissue lysates with recombinant mmNMNAT-2 demonstrated that the activity of the expressed protein was similar to the human isoform.
Immunohistochemistry of mouse embryonic tissues with hNMNAT-2 also showed a tissue- and cellular-specific expression of this isoform.
Therefore, our studies demonstrate for the first time the clear biological evidence for the existence of a mouse isoform of hNMNAT-2.
These studies may help in future investigations aimed at understanding the regulation of this gene and its pathway, and in turn, will spur the development of novel therapies for diseases such as cancer and diabetes since mice are the most frequently used experimental system for in vivo studies.
PMID: 22312532
Treatment of pancreatic and periampullary cancers at a community hospital: successful application of tertiary care treatment standards.
Background.
The treatment of pancreatic cancer and other periampullary neoplasms is complex and challenging.
Major high-volume cancer centers can provide excellent multidisciplinary care of these patients but almost two-thirds of pancreatic cancer patients are treated at low volume centers.
There is very little published data from low volume community cancer programs in regards to the treatment of periampullary cancer.
In this study, a review of comprehensive periampullary cancer care at two low volume hospitals with comparison to national standards is presented.
Methods.
This is a retrospective review of 70 consecutive patients with periampullary neoplasms who underwent surgery over a 5-year period (2006-2010) at two community hospitals.
Results.
There were 51 successful resections of 70 explorations (73%) including 34 Whipple procedures.
Mortality rate was 2.9%.
Comparison of these patients to national standards was made in terms of operative mortality, resectability rate, administration of adjuvant therapy, clinical trial participation and overall survival.
The results in these patients were comparable to national standards.
Conclusions.
With adequate commitment of resources and experienced surgical and oncologic practitioners, community cancer centers can meet national tertiary care standards in terms of pancreatic and periampullary cancer care.
PMID: 22312494
Intraperitoneal gemcitabine chemotherapy treatment for patients with resected pancreatic cancer: rationale and report of early data.
Currently, the surgical management of pancreas cancer is recognized around the world as inadequate.
Despite a potentially curative R0 resection, long-term survival is rare.
There is a strong rationale for the use of chemotherapy in the operating room to reduce local-regional of recurrent/progressive disease.
Gemcitabine monotherapy administered by an intraperitoneal route in the operating room with hyperthermia and then for long-term treatment postoperatively has a pharmacologic basis in that the exposure of peritoneal surfaces to intraperitoneal gemcitabine is approximately 200-500 times the exposure that occurs within the plasma.
A standardized treatment with intraoperative and long-term chemotherapy that is well tolerated would greatly facilitate further improvements in pancreas cancer treatment and may lead the way to an evolution of more successful treatment strategies of this dread disease.
The aim of this paper is to present the early data on a protocol in progress in patients with resected pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22312312
Inhibition of AKT2 Enhances Sensitivity to Gemcitabine via Regulating PUMA and NF-κB Signaling Pathway in Human Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma.
Invasion, metastasis and resistance to conventional chemotherapeutic agents are obstacles to successful treatment of pancreatic cancer, and a better understanding of the molecular basis of this malignancy may lead to improved therapeutics.
In the present study, we investigated whether AKT2 silencing sensitized pancreatic cancer L3.6pl, BxPC-3, PANC-1 and MIAPaCa-2 cells to gemcitabine via regulating PUMA (p53-upregulated modulator of apoptosis) and nuclear factor (NF)-κB signaling pathway.
MTT, TUNEL, EMSA and NF-κB reporter assays were used to detect tumor cell proliferation, apoptosis and NF-κB activity.
Western blotting was used to detect different protein levels.
Xenograft of established tumors was used to evaluate primary tumor growth and apoptosis after treatment with gemcitabine alone or in combination with AKT2 siRNA.
Gemcitabine activated AKT2 and NF-κB in MIAPaCa-2 and L3.6pl cells in vitro or in vivo, and in PANC-1 cells only in vivo.
Gemcitabine only activated NF-κB in BxPC-3 cells in vitro.
The presence of PUMA was necessary for gemcitabine-induced apoptosis only in BxPC-3 cells in vitro.
AKT2 inhibition sensitized gemcitabine-induced apoptosis via PUMA upregulation in MIAPaCa-2 cells in vitro, and via NF-κB activity inhibition in L3.6pl cells in vitro.
In PANC-1 and MIAPaCa-2 cells in vivo, AKT2 inhibition sensitized gemcitabine-induced apoptosis and growth inhibition via both PUMA upregulation and NF-κB inhibition.
We suggest that AKT2 inhibition abrogates gemcitabine-induced activation of AKT2 and NF-κB, and promotes gemcitabine-induced PUMA upregulation, resulting in chemosensitization of pancreatic tumors to gemcitabine, which is probably an important strategy for the treatment of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22311829
Does preoperative therapy optimize outcomes in patients with resectable pancreatic cancer?
The objective of this study was to compare survival between all patients with radiographically resectable adenocarcinoma of the proximal pancreas who underwent preoperative chemoradiation therapy (PRE-OP CRT) or surgical exploration first (SURGERY) with "intention to resect." Pancreatic cancer patients who undergo resection after PREOP CRT live longer than patients who undergo resection without PREOP CRT, a difference that may be attributable to patient selection.
We retrospectively identified 236 patients with pancreatic head adenocarcinoma seen between 1999 and 2007 with sufficient data to be confirmed medically and radiographically resectable.
The outcomes of 144 patients who underwent PREOP CRT were compared to those of 92 patients who proceeded straight to SURGERY.
The groups were similar in age and gender.
Tumors were slightly larger in the PREOP CRT group (mean 2.5 cm vs.
2.1 cm, P < 0.01), and there were trends toward more venous abutment (54% vs.
39%, P = 0.06) and a higher Charlson comorbidity index (P = 0.1).
In the PREOP CRT group, 76 patients (53%) underwent resection, 28 (19%) had metastatic and 17 (12%) locally unresectable disease after PREOP CRT, and 23 (16%) were not explored due to performance status or loss to follow-up.
In the SURGERY group, 68 patients (74%) underwent resection.
Sixteen patients (17%) had metastatic and eight patients (9%) locally unresectable disease at exploration.
In patients who underwent resection, the PREOP CRT group had smaller pathologic tumor size and lower incidence of positive lymph nodes than the SURGERY group but no difference in positive margins or need for vascular resection.
Median overall survival (OS) in patients undergoing resection was 27 months in the PREOP CRT group and 17 months in the SURGERY group (P = 0.04).
Median OS in all patients treated with PREOP CRT or surgically explored with intention to resect was 15 and 13 months, respectively, with superimposable survival curves.
Despite a lower resection rate, the PREOP CRT group as a whole had a similar OS to the SURGERY group as a whole.
For patients who underwent resection, those in the PREOP CRT had longer survival than those in the SURGERY group, suggesting that PREOP CRT allows better patient selection for resection.
PREOP CRT should be considered an acceptable alternative for most patients with resectable pancreatic cancer.
J.
Surg.
Oncol © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22311389
Correlation of apparent diffusion coefficient measured by diffusion-weighted MRI and clinicopathologic features in pancreatic cancer patients.
BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the clinical usefulness of diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (DWI) in patients with pancreatic cancer by comparing the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) value with clinicopathologic features.
METHODS: Twenty-two consecutive patients (12 men, 10 women; mean age 64.4 years) with pancreatic cancer underwent DWI before surgery.
We retrospectively investigated the correlations between tumor ADC value and clinicopathologic features.
RESULTS: Apparent diffusion coefficient value was significantly lower for pancreatic cancer than for noncancerous tissue (P < 0.001).
Receiver operating characteristic analysis yielded an optimal ADC cutoff value of 1.21 × 10(-3) mm(2)/s to distinguish pancreatic cancer from noncancerous tissue.
There was a significant negative correlation between ADC value and tumor size (r = -0.59, P = 0.004) and between ADC value and number of metastatic lymph nodes (r = -0.56, P = 0.007).
Tumors with low ADC value had a significant tendency to show high portal venous system invasion (P = 0.02) and extrapancreatic nerve plexus invasion (P = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Apparent diffusion coefficient value appears to be a promising parameter for detecting pancreatic cancer and evaluating the degree of malignancy of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22311282
Early Mortality Risk Score: Identification of Poor Outcomes Following Upfront Surgery for Resectable Pancreatic Cancer.
BACKGROUND: Identifying pancreatic cancer patients at high risk of early mortality following pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) is important for treatment decisions in a multidisciplinary setting.
This study examines the preoperative predictors of early mortality following PD and combines these variables into an early mortality risk score (EMRS).
METHODS: Medical records of patients who underwent PD for pancreatic adenocarcinoma at the Johns Hopkins Hospital between 30 August 1993 and 28 February 2005 were reviewed.
Cox proportional hazards analysis was performed to identify predictors of early mortality, defined as death at 9 and 12 months.
EMRS was constructed from univariate associated risk factors (age >75 years, tumor size ≥3cm, poor differentiation, co-morbid diseases) with each factor assigned 1 point (range of 0-4).
EMRS was evaluated as an independent predictor of death at 9 and 12 months.
RESULTS: On univariate analysis, risk factors for death at 9 months included age ≥75 years (RR, 1.6; p = .009), comorbid disease (RR, 1.5; p = 0.020), tumor ≥3 cm (RR, 1.4; P = 0.050), and poor differentiation (RR, 2.1; P < 0.001).
EMRS was associated with early mortality among those who did (p = 0.038) and did not receive adjuvant treatment (p < 0.001).
A modified EMRS without tumor differentiation was also associated with early mortality (p < 0.001).
Results persisted when reanalyzed using death at 12 months.
CONCLUSIONS: EMRS may identify patients at risk of early mortality following PD who may be candidates for alternatively sequenced treatment protocols.
Prospective validation of this EMRS is needed.
PMID: 22311263
Aberrant elevated microRNA-146a in dendritic cells (DC) induced by human pancreatic cancer cell line BxPC-3-conditioned medium inhibits DC maturation and activation.
It has been shown that the function of dendritic cell (DC) is suppressed in pancreatic cancer patients; however, the detailed mechanism involved in it remains unclear.
Here, we used medium conditioned by a highly metastatic human pancreatic cancer cell line BxPC-3 [BxPC-3-conditioned medium (BxCM)] to culture human CD14(+) monocyte-derived DCs in vitro.
Both DC differentiation and antigen presentation function were inhibited by BxCM.
The microRNA-146a (miRNA-146a) expression is aberrantly up-regulated in BxCM-treated DCs.
In addition, inhibition of aberrant miRNA-146a expression partly rescues the BxCM-induced defects in differentiation and function of DCs, which may be through regulation of Smad4 expression.
Taken together, our findings indicate that aberrant miRNA-146a expression is one of main factors responsible for inhibition of DC maturation and antigen presentation function, and this inhibitory effect on DCs may be due to the repression of Smad4 mediated signal pathway by BxCM.
PMID: 22311120
Severe Duodenal Involvement in Familial Adenomatous Polyposis Treated by Pylorus-Preserving Pancreaticoduodenectomy.
PURPOSE: Pancreaticoduodenectomy is an alternative to pancreas-sparing duodenectomy for radical treatment of duodenal lesions.
The aims of this study were to assess the results of pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy (PPPD) for severe duodenal polyposis in familial adenomatous polyposis in terms of morbidity, long-term influence on functional results, the recurrence rate of cancer or jejunal polyps, and survival.
METHODS: All patients operated on for a PPPD between 1992 and 2009 were included.
Clinical data, endoscopic findings, and pathologic examinations were evaluated.
RESULTS: A total of 19 patients underwent PPPD for severe duodenal polyposis (17 Spigelman IV, 1 Spigelman III, and 1 invasive carcinoma).
Postoperative mortality was nil.
The postoperative morbidity rate was 42%, including 4 pancreatic fistulae (21%) and 2 delayed gastric emptying (11%).
Pathologic examination found 7 invasive carcinomas, of which only 1 was known before resection.
One third of patients operated on without a preoperative diagnosis of malignancy already had an invasive duodenal carcinoma.
After a mean follow-up of 58 months, 16 patients were alive.
Thirteen patients underwent endoscopic follow-up, and new adenomas were found in 4 (31%).
All were treated successfully during the same endoscopic procedure.
PPPD did not modify the functional result after coloproctectomy.
CONCLUSIONS: PPPD remains a safe and efficient therapeutic option for severe duodenal polyposis in familial adenomatous polyposis patients.
PMID: 22310974
Modified PNA-PCR method: A convenient and accurate method to screen plasma KRAS mutations of cancer patients.
KRAS mutations are proved to confer dramatic resistance to EGFR target therapy of cancer patients.
The aim of this study was to establish a convenient and accurate method to screen plasma KRAS mutations of cancer patients since tumor specimens were not always available in clinical practice.
A modified PNA-PCR method was established and evaluated in plasma of 19 pancreatic cancer patients.
Our results showed that the modified PNA-PCR assay was a sensitive (87.5%, 14/16) and accurate (92.9%, 13/14) method to screen plasma KRAS mutations of pancreatic cancer patients and there was a high consistency of KRAS mutation status between plasma samples and tumor specimens.
The modified protocol could not only screen plasma KRAS mutations rapidly and accurately but also had potential to quantify KRAS mutant DNA to predict treatment response of cancer patients and monitor disease progression.
It's should be indicated that this modified assay was only confirmed in the pancreatic cancer patients in this study and need to be verified in other cancer patients.
PMID: 22310917
Well-differentiated pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors: from genetics to therapy.
Well-differentiated pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PanNETs) comprise ∼1-3% of pancreatic neoplasms.
Although long considered as reasonably benign lesions, PanNETs have considerable malignant potential, with a 5-year survival of ∼65% and a 10-year survival of 45% for resected lesions.
As PanNETs have a low incidence, they have been understudied, with few advances made until the completion of their exomic sequencing in the past year.
In this Review, we summarize some of the latest insights into the genetics of PanNETs, and their probable implications in the context of prognosis and therapy.
In particular, we discuss two genes (DAXX and ATRX) that have collectively been identified as mutated in >40% of PanNETs, and the biological and prognostic implications of these novel mutations.
The identification of recurrent somatic mutations within the mTOR signaling pathway and the therapeutic implications for personalized therapy in patients with PanNETs are also discussed.
Finally, this Review outlines state-of-the-art advances in the biology of PanNETs that are of emerging translational importance.
PMID: 22309455
An Epigenetic Approach to Pancreatic Cancer Treatment: the Prospective Role of Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is quite resistant to conventional treatments, and gemcitabine, the standard chemotherapeutic agent, offers only a small benefit.
Development and progression of PDAC is a complex process involving dysregulation of multiple signal transduction pathways arising from not only genetic but also epigenetic alterations.
This makes the epigenetic approach to the treatment of PDAC of great interest.
Histone deacetylases, a family of enzymes that, by removal of acetyl groups from a variety of histone and nonhistone proteins, play an important role in the epigenetic regulation of gene expression, are frequently dysregulated in PDAC.
In particular, overexpression of class I histone deacetylases has been related to higher tumor grade, poor prognosis and development of chemoresistance.
Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs), a novel class of agents endowed with pleiotropic antitumor effects, appear promising either for their preferential toxicity towards transformed as compared to normal cells and their ability to synergistically enhance the anticancer activity of radiotherapy and many chemotherapeutic agents.
Many HDACIs have been shown to increase the antiproliferative and proapoptotic effects of gemcitabine, 5-fluorouracil and bortezomib, a new proteasome inhibitor, in vitro and in vivo PDAC xenograft models.
MGCD0103, romidepsin, panobinostat, vorinostat and valproic acid, are currently being tested in association with radiotherapy or chemotherapy (gemcitabine, fluoropyrimidines, proteasome inhibitors) in phase I-II clinical trials in patients with locally advanced or metastatic PDAC.
PMID: 22307919
Comparability of cancer identification among death registry, cancer registry and hospital discharge registry.
Registry based cancer incidence and mortality data are widely used for etiologic research, cancer control and health care monitoring and planning.
The complete coverage of all cases is the key criteria of data quality but it is difficult to assess because the alternative sources of data may be flawed.
The aim of this study was to examine, at a nationwide level, the completeness of the Swedish Cancer Registry (CR) regarding persons who died of cancer, based on the Cause of Death Registry (DR), and using the Hospital Discharge Registry (HDR) as an additional source of data.
Individuals who died of cancer from years 1999 through 2008 recorded in DR were linked to CR and HDR.
A total of 190,692 individuals were identified from DR with cancer as the underlying cause of death; the mean identification rate of concordant cancer in CR was 79.8%, depending on tumor site and age at death.
Breast, bladder and prostate cancers showed the highest rate of identification whereas bone, liver and pancreatic cancers showed the lowest rate of identification.
CR had no records on 10.6% of cancer cases recorded in DR.
Similarly, the identification rate in HDR was 84.5% for concordant cancer and with 9.6% of cases missing.
Neither source reported cancers for 3.4% of cancer cases recorded in DR.
In conclusion, some 10% of cancer deaths had no cancer records in CR or in HDR, and 3.4% were missing in both sources.
The identification rate depended on tumor site, age at death, and, to some extent, death outside hospital.
© 2012 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
PMID: 22307213
A Phase II Trial of nab-Paclitaxel as Second-line Therapy in Patients With Advanced Pancreatic Cancer.
OBJECTIVE:: nab-Paclitaxel has been shown to disrupt pancreatic cancer stroma and was effective in combination with gemcitabine in a phase I/II trial.
This study was designed to determine the efficacy of nab-paclitaxel monotherapy in previously treated pancreatic cancer patients.
METHODS:: In this phase II trial, patients with advanced pancreatic cancer who progressed on gemcitabine-based therapy, received nab-paclitaxel 100 mg/m over 30 minutes on days 1, 8, and 15 of a 28-day cycle.
The primary endpoint was 6-month overall survival (OS).
Secondary endpoints were response rate (by Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors), progression-free survival, safety, and toxicity profile.
RESULTS:: Among 19 patients treated, the median age was 61 years, 9 (47%) were male patients and 18 (95%) had stage-IV disease.
The primary endpoint of the study was reached with a 6-month OS of 58% [95% confidence interval (95% CI), 33%-76%] and an estimated median OS of 7.3 months (95% CI, 2.8-15.8 mo).
The median progression-free survival was 1.7 months (95% CI, 1.5-3.5 mo).
One patient had a confirmed partial response and 6 (32%) had stable disease as their best response.
Nonhematological toxicities were generally mild with grades 1-2 nausea, anorexia, hypocalcemia, and vomiting occurring in 63%, 47%, 37%, and 26% of patients, respectively.
Grades 3-4 neutropenia, neutropenic fever, and anemia occurred in 32%, 11%, and 11% of patients, respectively.
Only 2 of 15 available tumors stained positive for secreted protein acid rich in cysteine, and neither of these patients benefited from the therapy.
CONCLUSIONS:: nab-Paclitaxel was well tolerated, and it demonstrated preliminary evidence of activity in a subset of patients who progressed on gemcitabine-based therapy.
PMID: 22307004
The emerging role of the TGFβ tumor suppressor pathway in pancreatic cancer.
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is one of the most aggressive human cancers.
It displays many different chromosomal abnormalities and mutations.
To design new therapeutic strategies, it is important to identify the signaling pathways and gene networks within this apparent complexity that are predominantly altered.
The TGFβ signaling pathway and associated transcription network emerges as a central actor of pancreatic oncogenesis.
Its tumor suppressor function in this tissue can be affected by several alterations.
PMID: 22306768
Fluid biopsy in patients with metastatic prostate, pancreatic and breast cancers.
Hematologic spread of carcinoma results in incurable metastasis; yet, the basic characteristics and travel mechanisms of cancer cells in the bloodstream are unknown.
We have established a fluid phase biopsy approach that identifies circulating tumor cells (CTCs) without using surface protein-based enrichment and presents them in sufficiently high definition (HD) to satisfy diagnostic pathology image quality requirements.
This 'HD-CTC' assay finds >5 HD-CTCs mL(-1) of blood in 80% of patients with metastatic prostate cancer (n = 20), in 70% of patients with metastatic breast cancer (n = 30), in 50% of patients with metastatic pancreatic cancer (n = 18), and in 0% of normal controls (n = 15).
Additionally, it finds HD-CTC clusters ranging from 2 HD-CTCs to greater than 30 HD-CTCs in the majority of these cancer patients.
This initial validation of an enrichment-free assay demonstrates our ability to identify significant numbers of HD-CTCs in a majority of patients with prostate, breast and pancreatic cancers.
PMID: 22306705
Characterization of circulating tumor cell aggregates identified in patients with epithelial tumors.
Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) have been implicated as a population of cells that may seed metastasis and venous thromboembolism (VTE), two major causes of mortality in cancer patients.
Thus far, existing CTC detection technologies have been unable to reproducibly detect CTC aggregates in order to address what contribution CTC aggregates may make to metastasis or VTE.
We report here an enrichment-free immunofluorescence detection method that can reproducibly detect and enumerate homotypic CTC aggregates in patient samples.
We identified CTC aggregates in 43% of 86 patient samples.
The fraction of CTC aggregation was investigated in blood draws from 24 breast, 14 non-small cell lung, 18 pancreatic, 15 prostate stage IV cancer patients and 15 normal blood donors.
Both single CTCs and CTC aggregates were measured to determine whether differences exist in the physical characteristics of these two populations.
Cells contained in CTC aggregates had less area and length, on average, than single CTCs.
Nuclear to cytoplasmic ratios between single CTCs and CTC aggregates were similar.
This detection method may assist future studies in determining which population of cells is more physically likely to contribute to metastasis and VTE.
PMID: 22306681
A fluid biopsy as investigating technology for the fluid phase of solid tumors.
Reliable measurement of internal bodily substances and structures is one of the cornerstones of modern medicine.
Progress in cancer medicine, like that in many medical fields, must encompass and take advantage of progress in the physical sciences.
Historically, the development and refinement of physical sciences-based detection of biological entities precedes periods of great advancements in therapies.
To treat broken limbs and arthritis, we are indebted to Conrad Roentgen's discovery of x-rays by which we can evaluate the bones; to apply gamma knife therapy for cancer, we are indebted to Marie Curie's discoveries about radioactivity by which we can eradicate tumors; to manage the complications of diabetes, we are indebted to Tom Clemens, Ames Pharmaceuticals and Dick Bernstein's refinement of direct blood glucose measurement technology by which we can count, hour-to-hour, the waxing and waning of blood sugar levels; to understand anything at all on the cellular level, we are indebted to Antonie van Leeuwenhoek's microscope, by which we can see our cells.
The application of physical sciences perspectives to biological and medical problems has a long and productive history.
As of late, however, the increasing compartmentalization of science and exponential increases of knowledge in both arenas has resulted in a rift between the two.
The NCI has initiated a research network establishing multiple centers of investigation, the Physical Sciences in Oncology Centers (http://physics.cancer.gov), which seek to mend the rift.
Each headed by a pair of investigators, one in the physical sciences and one in the biological sciences, the centers seek to bring the advances and breakthroughs of the physical sciences world to bear on the question of cancer.
This issue of physical biology contains a series of articles exploring the utility and applicability of a new method for measuring cancer as it spreads, developed at the Scripps Physical Oncology Center.
Although some progress has been made in fighting cancer, the victories are limited.
Current medical and surgical strategies are very good at controlling local disease in cancer patients.
We can successfully eradicate primary tumors in the sites where they arise and we can effectively control local recurrences in the nearby tissues.
However, distant spread of cancer via the bloodstream (figure 1), known as hematogenous metastasis, has always been the fatal loophole.
Like an evil humor, this process of hematogenous metastasis is mysterious to us.
We do not understand its timing or its variability in terms of establishing new tumors at distant sites.
It is invisible while it is happening, just as infectious transmission of Yersinia pestis is invisible.
And like the resultant boils of bubonic plague in the pre-antibiotic era, by the time we see the ominous swellings, it is far too late.
[Formula: see text]Figure 1.
Hematogenous metastasis from a primary lung tumor.
The inset shows the spread of cancer cells via the bloodstream.
Consequently, despite furious effort to treat and cure cancer, we are frustrated at our poor ability to detect and predict the deadly phenomenon of hematogenous spread, and we are disheartened by the apparent impenetrability of the process.
Persistent helplessness in the face of this randomness tempts us toward fatalistic acceptance of cancer deaths as a natural consequence of improved longevity, just as death from childbed fever was once accepted as a frequent natural consequence of delivering a child.
Finally, however, we are in the process of refining methods to reliably detect, measure and characterize this internal biological process.
The cells that are spreading cancer are in the bloodstream and must therefore be found and studied in samples from the bloodstream.
Such circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are the focus of the evolving field of CTC biology and have proved a wily target.
Early intimations of their nature came with the application of the Cellsearch® methodology, which has shown predictive utility in several cancer types-the blurry outlines of things to come began to coalesce.
The field of CTC research is in its adolescence; enumeration and characterization research effort is methodologically varied, vigorously individuated and rich in innovation.
The high definition CTC (HD-CTC) assay described herein and applied to several currently relevant research questions about cancer spread represents a new measure of an internal biologic process that will hopefully lead to great advancements in cancer medicine.
First, the paper entitled 'Fluid biopsy in patients with metastatic prostate, pancreatic and breast cancers' by Marrinucci et al, represents the initial technical and clinical validation of an enrichment-free assay and demonstrates our ability to identify significant numbers of HD-CTCs in a majority of patients with prostate, breast and pancreatic cancers.
It demonstrates very high rates of detection (>50%) in breast, prostate and pancreatic cancer patients with no CTCs found in normal control subjects.
The assay detects significantly higher numbers of CTCs than the FDA-approved Cellsearch® assay and shows the presence of clusters of CTCs in many patients.
The nature of the clusters is further evaluated in 'Characterization of circulating tumor cell aggregates identified in patients with epithelial tumors' by Cho et al, wherein CTC aggregates are identified in 43% of 86 patient samples.
The fraction of CTC aggregation was investigated in blood draws from 24 breast, 14 non-small cell lung (NSCLC), 18 pancreatic, 15 prostate stage IV cancer patients and 15 normal blood donors (NBD).
Cells contained in CTC aggregates had less area and length, on average, than single CTCs.
The nuclear to cytoplasmic (N/C) ratio between single CTCs and CTC aggregates was similar.
To assist with translating into patients the substantial cell biology work done using cell line cells instead of human tumor tissue, the paper entitled 'Cytometric comparisons between circulating tumor cells from prostate cancer patients and the prostate tumor derived LNCaP cell line' by Lazar et al elucidates differences between the two sample types.
In this study, immunocytochemistry is used to compare the protein expression levels of total cytokeratin (CK) and androgen receptor (AR) in CTCs from patients with prostate cancer versus those of cell line cells and to determine what translational insights might be gained through the use of cell line data.
This paper demonstrates that LNCaP cells are phenotypically different from CTCs, both in terms of cytomorphic features and relative expression levels of proteins.
The ability to perform comparisons between cell lines and actual CTCs from cancer patients furthers our ability to translate experimental cell line data into understanding cancer in the human body and, thus, into predicting and influencing clinical outcomes.
In the paper entitled 'High definition imaging of circulating tumor cells and associated cellular events in non-small cell lung cancer patients: a longitudinal analysis' by Nieva et al, the kinetics of CTCs over time is explored.
Twenty eight patients with non-small cell lung cancer and hematogenously seeded metastasis were analyzed with multiple blood draws.
We detected CTCs in 68% of analyzed samples and found a propensity for increased CTC detection as the disease progressed in individual patients.
CTCs were present at a median concentration of 1.6 CTCs per milliliter of analyzed blood in the patient population.
Higher numbers of detected CTCs were associated with an unfavorable prognosis.
The paper entitled 'Fluid biopsy for circulating tumor cell identification in patients with early and late stage non-small cell lung cancer: a glimpse into lung cancer biology' by Wendel et al, describes similar numbers of CTCs in the bloodstream of patients with widely differing extent of disease at the time they were first diagnosed.
Whether the tumors were found when they were small and confined to the lung, or large and widespread in the body, the median count of CTCs did not differ in this set of lung cancer patients.
HD-CTCs were analyzed in blood samples from 78 chemotherapy-naïve NSCLC patients.
73% of the total population had a positive HD-CTC count (>0 CTC in 1 mL of blood) with a median of 4.4 HD-CTCs/mL (range 0-515.6) and a mean of 44.7 (±95.2) HD-CTCs/mL.
No significant difference in the medians of HD-CTC counts was detected between stage IV (n = 31, range 0-178.2), stage III (n = 34, range 0-515.6) and stages I/II (n = 13, range 0-442.3).
Furthermore, HD-CTCs exhibited uniformity in terms of molecular and physical characteristics, such as fluorescent cytokeratin intensity, nuclear size, frequency of apoptosis and aggregate formation across the spectrum of staging.
Thus, this series of papers describes a new technology based on physical sciences and its first applications to several basic mysteries of cancer and its spread.
As we extend the reach of this new physical sciences perspective to cancer, the invisible evil biological humors that often kill when cancer arises are coming within our sights.
We aim to take aim.
Acknowledgments We are indebted to our patients for their long-term commitment to making a difference in cancer care through their participation in research.
We are grateful to the clinical staff and to the collaborators and colleagues that have worked with us over the years.
We greatly appreciate the generous donations by the Borden Family and the many individual donations in memory of Sandy Thielicke who has infused in our group the motivation, drive and focus in our fight against cancer.
The Scripps Physics Oncology Center (http://4db.us) is principally supported under grant number U54CA143906 from the National Cancer Institute.
The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Cancer Institute or the National Institutes of Health.
PMID: 22306538
Histological subclassification of the pancreatic intraductal neoplasms.
PMID: 22306263
CUX1 transcription factors: From biochemical activities and cell-based assays to mouse models and human diseases.
ChIP-chip and expression analyses indicated that CUX1 transcription factors regulate a large number of genes and microRNAs involved in multiple cellular processes.
Indeed, in proliferating cells CUX1 was shown to regulate several genes involved in DNA replication, progression into S phase and later, the spindle assembly checkpoint that controls progression through mitosis.
siRNA-mediated knockdown established that CUX1 is required for cell motility.
Moreover, higher expression of short CUX1 isoforms, as observed in many cancers, was shown to stimulate cell migration and invasion.
In parallel, elevated expression particularly in higher grade tumors of breast and pancreatic cancers implicated CUX1 in tumor initiation and progression.
Indeed, transgenic mouse models demonstrated a causal role of CUX1 in cancers originating from various cell types.
These studies revealed that higher CUX1 expression or activity not only stimulates cell proliferation and motility, but also promotes genetic instability.
CUX1 has also been implicated in the etiology of polycystic kidney diseases, both from a transgenic approach and the analysis of CUX1 activity in multiple mouse models of this disease.
Studies in neurobiology have uncovered a potential implication of CUX1 in cognitive disorders, neurodegeneration and obesity.
CUX1 was shown to be expressed specifically in pyramidal neurons of the neocortex upper layers where it regulates dendrite branching, spine development, and synapse formation.
In addition, modulation of CUX1 expression in neurons of the hypothalamus has been associated with changes in leptin receptor trafficking in the vicinity of the primary cilium resulting in altered leptin signaling and ultimately, eating behavior.
Overall, studies in various fields have allowed the development of several cell-based assays to monitor CUX1 function and have extended the range of organs in which CUX1 plays an important role in development and tissue homeostasis.
PMID: 22306154
Quantitative molecular profiling of biomarkers for pancreatic cancer with functionalized quantum dots.
Applications in nanomedicine, such as diagnostics and targeted therapeutics, rely on the detection and targeting of membrane biomarkers.
In this article we demonstrate absolute quantitative profiling, spatial mapping, and multiplexing of cancer biomarkers using functionalized quantum dots (QDs).
We demonstrate highly selective targeting molecular markers for pancreatic cancer with extremely low levels of nonspecific binding.
We confirm that we have saturated all biomarkers on the cell surface, and, in conjunction with control experiments, extract absolute quantitative values for the biomarker density in terms of the number of molecules per square micron on the cell surface.
We show that we can obtain quantitative spatial information of biomarker distribution on a single cell, important because tumors' cell populations are inherently heterogeneous.
We validate our quantitative measurements (number of molecules per square micron) using flow cytometry and demonstrate multiplexed quantitative profiling using color-coded QDs.
PMID: 22305864
Vascular Surgery Collaboration During Pancreaticoduodenectomy With Vascular Reconstruction.
BACKGROUND: Once thought to have unresectable disease, pancreatic cancer patients with portal venous involvement are now reported to have comparable survival after pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) with vascular reconstruction (VR) as compared with patients without vascular involvement.
We hypothesize that a multidisciplinary approach involving a vascular surgeon will minimize morbidity and improve patency of VRs.
METHODS: We identified 204 patients who underwent PD for pancreatic adenocarcinoma from 1997 to 2008.
Patients who underwent PD with VR (N = 42) were compared with those who underwent standard PD (N = 162).
VRs were performed by a vascular surgeon and involved primary repair (N = 8), vein patch (N = 25), or interposition grafting (N = 9) with femoral or other venous conduit.
RESULTS: Patients undergoing PD with VR had larger tumors (3.0 cm vs.
2.5 cm, P < 0.01) but did not have different rates of tumor-free margins (73% vs.
72%, P = 0.84) or lymph nodes metastases (50% vs.
38%, P = 0.14).
The VR group had higher median blood loss (875 mL vs.
550 mL, P = 0<0.01), but no differences in mortality, complication rates, length of stay, or readmission rates were found in a median follow-up of 29 months.
Overall survival rates were similar.
Predictors of mortality on multivariate analysis included increasing histological grade (P = 0.01), positive lymph nodes (P = 0.01), and increasing tumor size (P = 0.01), but not VR (P = 0.28).
When evaluated by computed tomography scans within 6 months postoperatively, 97% of reconstructions remained patent.
CONCLUSIONS: The need for VR is not a contraindication to potentially curative resection in patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
Assistance of a vascular surgeon during VR may allow moderate-volume centers to achieve outcomes comparable with high-volume centers.
PMID: 22305626
Transperineal template-guided prostate biopsy for patients with persistently elevated PSA and multiple prior negative biopsies.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the use of transperineal template-guided prostate biopsy for patients with persistently elevated PSA despite multiple negative prior biopsies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A retrospective review was performed of patients with at least two prior prostate biopsies who underwent transperineal template-guided biopsy.
Electronic medical records were reviewed to obtain relevant clinical, laboratory, and pathologic data.
RESULTS: A total of 34 patients underwent transperineal template-guided biopsy.
Patients had a mean of 3.7 ± 1.6 (range 2-8) prior biopsies, including prior negative transurethral resection (TUR) biopsy in 6 (17.6%) patients.
Prostate cancer was detected in 17 (50%) of the 34 patients.
Of these, 14 (82.4%) patients had cancer in the anterior prostate, 9 (52.9%) patients had cancer in the apical prostate, and 16 (94.1%) patients had cancer in either the anterior or apical prostate.
Gleason score was 3+3 in 9 (52.9%) patients and 3+4 or greater in 7 (47.1%) patients.
The mean number of positive cores was 4.5 ± 3.0 (range 1-11).
Of the 17 patients with a diagnosis of cancer, 7 underwent radical prostatectomy, 7 underwent radiation therapy, 1 elected active surveillance, and 1 was deciding between surgery and radiation therapy; 1 patient received palliative chemotherapy for synchronous metastatic pancreatic carcinoma.
Patients in whom cancer was detected had significantly smaller prostate volume, higher PSA, higher PSA density, and greater PSA velocity.
CONCLUSIONS: Transperineal template-guided prostate biopsy is an effective technique for detecting cancer in patients with persistently elevated PSA despite multiple negative biopsies.
It improves sampling of the anterior and apical prostate, and should be included as part of the diagnostic algorithm to reduce extensive repeat biopsy.
PMID: 22304734
Computational and Biological Evaluation of Quinazolinone Prodrug for Targeting Pancreatic Cancer.
Our concept of Enzyme-Mediated Cancer Imaging and Therapy aims to use radiolabeled compounds to target hydrolases over-expressed on the extracellular surface of solid tumors.
A data-mining approach identified extracellular sulfatase 1 (SULF1) as an enzyme expressed on the surface of pancreatic cancer cells.
We designed, synthesized, and characterized 2-(2'-sulfooxyphenyl)-6-iodo-4-(3H)-quinazolinone (IQ(2-S) ) as well as its radioiodinated form ((125) IQ(2-S) ) as a prodrug with potential for hydrolysis by SULF1.
IQ(2-S) was successfully docked in silico into three enzymes - homolog of SULF1, alkaline phosphatase, and prostatic acid phosphatase.
The incubation of (125) IQ(2-S) and (125) IQ(2-P) with the three enzymes in solution confirms the docking results and enzyme selectivity for the analogs.
The hydrolysis of both radioactive compounds produces the water-insoluble, fluorescent product 2-(2'-hydroxyphenyl)-6-[(125) I]iodo-4-(3H)-quinazolinone ((125) IQ(2-OH) ).
The in vitro incubation of (127) IQ(2-S) and (127) IQ(2-P) with pancreatic, ovarian and prostate cancer cells expressing studied hydrolases also results in their hydrolysis and the precipitation of (127) IQ(2-OH) fluorescent crystals on the cell surface.
To our knowledge, these findings are the first to report the targeting of a radioactive substrate to SULF1 and that this prodrug may be potentially useful in the imaging ((123) I/(124) I/(131) I) and radiotherapy ((131) I) of pancreatic cancer.
© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.
PMID: 22303557
Bacteria found in saliva linked to pancreatic cancer, study shows.
PMID: 22302762
Dynamic telecytopathology for on-site preliminary diagnosis of endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration of pancreatic masses.
We evaluated dynamic telecytopathology for on-site-evaluation of endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) samples of the pancreas.
Realtime images of stained cytology smears were assessed by a cytopathologist while communicating with the on-site operator by telephone.
A total of 55 consecutive cases was assessed; preliminary diagnoses of benign, atypical/suspicious and positive for malignancy were 69%, 7% and 24%.
We also reviewed 55 consecutive cases of EUS-guided FNA of pancreas which had had conventional microscopic on-site evaluation prior to the introduction of telecytopathology.
Preliminary diagnoses of benign, atypical/suspicious and positive for malignancy were 60%, 9% and 31%.
The overall concordance between the preliminary and final diagnosis was 84% for telecytopathology and 87% for conventional microscopy.
Neuroendocrine neoplasms and well-differentiated adenocarcinoma were diagnostically challenging for both telecytopathology and conventional microscopy.
Telecytopathology was similar in accuracy of preliminary diagnosis to conventional microscopy during EUS-FNA of pancreas.
PMID: 22302349
A phase II trial of Erlotinib in combination with gemcitabine and cisplatin in advanced pancreatic cancer.
Background Gemcitabine has been recognized as a standard chemotherapy in advanced pancreas cancer (APC).
We conducted a phase II study of a triple combination regimen (GPT) consisting of gemcitabine (G), cisplatin (P) and erlotinib (T) in patients with APC.
Patients and methods Chemotherapy-naïve patients with locally advanced or metastatic, histologically confirmed adenocarcinoma of the pancreas were treated with erlotinib 100 mg daily, 1,000 mg/m(2) of gemcitabine and 25 mg/m(2) of cisplatin administered on days 1 and 8, respectively, every 3 weeks.
The primary end point was objective response.
Secondary end points included progression-free survival, overall survival and toxicity.
The study was designed according to the optimal two-stage design.
Results Twenty-two patients were enrolled between June 2009 and August 2010.
No complete response was achieved and partial response was observed in 5 patients (26%), Stable disease in 7 (37%), and progressive disease in 7 (37%).
The median time to progression was 4.0 months (95% CI: 2.9-5.1 months), and the median overall survival 6.8 months (95% CI: 3.7-9.9 months).
The response rate in stage I reached the target (≥3/22, p0 = 10%) established for movement to stage II but this study was determined to close earlier than planned because of unexpected treatment-related deaths (3 patients).
Conclusion The triple regimen of GPT is effective for APC.
Treatment-related mortalities factored early closure of this GPT protocol.
Considering effect and toxicity, this triple regimen seems to offer few benefits to the patients compared with gemcitabine-based doublets.
(ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00922896).
PMID: 22301921
Resveratrol Inhibits Proliferation and Induces Apoptosis through the Hedgehog Signaling Pathway in Pancreatic Cancer Cell.
Purpose: To investigate the effect and possible mechanisms of resveratrol on pancreatic cancer cells in vitro.
Methods: After being treated with resveratrol, cell viability, cell cycle phase distribution and apoptosis rate of pancreatic cancer cells were measured by CCK-8 assay and flow cytometer, respectively.
The effects of resveratrol on the Hedgehog pathway were studied by real-time RT-PCR and Western blotting.
By interfering Gli1 expression in PANC-1 cells and overexpressing Gli1 in BxPC-3 cells, we detected the expressions of Gli1-targeted genes, such as Ptc1, CCND1 and BCL-2, compared with resveratrol experimental group.
We further used the luciferase reporter assay to explore the correlation between resveratrol and Gli1.
Results: Resveratrol inhibited the growth of pancreatic cancer cells in a dose- and time-dependent manner.
Compared with control group, the cells in the G0/G1 phase and the apoptosis rate were significantly increased.
Low concentration of resveratrol decreased the expression of the Hedgehog pathway members including Gli1, Ptc1 and Smo.
The expression of downstream target genes of the Hedgehog pathway such as Gli1, Ptc1, CCND1 and BCL-2 were significantly decreased after 12.5 μM resveratrol treatment, which demonstrated a similar change of gene expression when Gli1 was knocked down by the RNAi technique in PANC-1 cells.
Resveratrol also downregulated the expression of Gli1, Ptc1, CCND1 and BCL-2 in Gli1-overexpressed BxPC-3 cells.
Results of the luciferase assay showed that resveratrol did not act on the Gli1 promoter directly.
Conclusion: Resveratrol can inhibit pancreatic cancer cell survival and its mechanisms might be partly via the Hedgehog signaling pathway.
and IAP.
PMID: 22301828
The Associations of Advanced Glycation End Products and Its Soluble Receptor with Pancreatic Cancer Risk: A Case-Control Study within the Prospective EPIC Cohort.
BACKGROUND: Advanced glycation end products (AGE) and their receptors (RAGE) have been implicated in cancer development through their proinflammatory capabilities.
However, prospective data on their association with cancer of specific sites, including pancreatic cancer, are limited.METHODS: Prediagnostic blood levels of the AGE product Nε-(carboxymethyl)lysine (CML) and the endogenous secreted receptor for AGE (esRAGE) were measured using ELISA in 454 patients with exocrine pancreatic cancer and individually matched controls within the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC).
Pancreatic cancer risk was estimated by calculating ORs with corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CI).RESULTS: Elevated CML levels tended to be associated with a reduction in pancreatic cancer risk [OR = 0.57 (95% CI, 0.32-1.01) comparing highest with lowest quintile), whereas no association was observed for esRAGE (OR = 0.98; 95% CI, 0.62-1.54).
Adjustments for body mass index and smoking attenuated the inverse associations of CML with pancreatic cancer risk (OR = 0.78; 95% CI, 0.41-1.49).
There was an inverse association between esRAGE and risk of pancreatic cancer for cases that were diagnosed within the first 2 years of follow-up [OR = 0.46 (95% CI, 0.22-0.96) for a doubling in concentration], whereas there was no association among those with a longer follow-up (OR = 1.11; 95% CI, 0.88-1.39; P(interaction) = 0.002).Conclusions and Impact: Our results do not provide evidence for an association of higher CML or lower esRAGE levels with risk of pancreatic cancer.
The role of AGE/RAGE in pancreatic cancer would benefit from further investigations.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev; ©2012 AACR.
PMID: 22301608
The carcinoembryonic antigen level in pancreatic juice and mural nodule size are predictors of malignancy for branch duct type intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas.
: Identification of predictors of malignancy for branch duct type intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN).
: Main duct type IPMN has been recommended for resection.
However, the indications for resection of the branch duct type IPMN have been controversial.
: We retrospectively analyzed the clinicopathological factors of 134 patients undergoing resection for branch duct type IPMN, excluding main duct type IPMN, to identify predictors of the malignant behavior of this neoplasm.
The cutoff values of tumor size, main pancreatic duct (MPD) size, mural nodule size, and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level in the pancreatic juice obtained during preoperative endoscopic retrograde pancreatography (ERP) were analyzed using receiver-operator characteristic curves.
: We found 7 significant predictors for malignancy in the branch duct type IPMN in a univariate analysis; jaundice, tumor occupying the pancreatic head, MPD size >5 mm, mural nodule size >5 mm, serum carbohydrate antigen (CA)19-9 level, positive cytology in the pancreatic juice, and CEA level in the pancreatic juice >30 ng/mL.
In a multivariate analysis, a mural nodule size >5 mm and a CEA level in the pancreatic juice >30 ng/mL were independent factors associated with malignancy.
The positive predictive value of a mural nodule size >5 mm and a CEA level in the pancreatic juice >30 ng/mL was 100%, and the negative predictive value was 96.3%.
: We identified 2 useful predictive factors for malignancy in branch duct type IPMN; a mural nodule size >5 mm and a CEA level in the pancreatic juice obtained by preoperative ERP >30 ng/mL.
PMID: 22301497
Perineural and intraneural invasion in posttherapy pancreaticoduodenectomy specimens predicts poor prognosis in patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
Perineural invasion (PNI) is one of the established prognostic factors in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC).
However, the prognostic significance of PNI in patients with PDAC who received neoadjuvant therapy and pancreaticoduodenectomy is not clear.
In this study, we performed a detailed examination of neural invasion in pancreaticoduodenectomy specimens from 212 patients with PDAC who received neoadjuvant chemoradiation (treated group) and in 60 untreated patients at our institution between January 1999 and December 2007.
The frequency of PNI was higher in the untreated group (80%, 48/60) than in the treated group (58%, 123/212).
For the 123 treated cases that were positive for PNI, extratumoral PNI, intratumoral PNI, intrapancreatic PNI only, extrapancreatic PNI, and intraneural invasion were identified in 86 (69.9%), 37 (30.1%), 11 (8.9%), 112 (91.1%), and 35 cases (28.5%), respectively.
The presence of PNI correlated with tumor size, margin status, lymph node metastasis, pathologic tumor, and American Joint Committee on Cancer stages in the treated group.
Tumor involvement of nerves >0.8 mm correlated with higher frequency of positive margin compared with tumors with PNI involving nerves ≤0.8 mm but not with other clinicopathologic parameters and survival.
In the treated group, the presence of PNI or intraneural invasion correlated significantly with shorter disease-free survival and overall survival compared with no PNI or PNI only, respectively.
PNI was an independent prognostic factor for both disease-free survival and overall survival in multivariate analysis.
Our results showed that PNI plays an important role in the progression of PDAC and in predicting prognosis in this group of patients.
PMID: 22301496
Tumor Invasion of Muscular Vessels Predicts Poor Prognosis in Patients With Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma Who Have Received Neoadjuvant Therapy and Pancreaticoduodenectomy.
Lymphovascular invasion (LVI) is a prognostic factor in many types of human malignancies, including pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC).
However, the prognostic significance of LVI in patients with PDAC who have received neoadjuvant therapy and pancreaticoduodenectomy is unclear.
In this study, we analyzed LVI in 212 patients who had received neoadjuvant chemoradiation and subsequent pancreaticoduodenectomy at our institution between January 1999 and December 2007.
LVI was present in 61.8% (131/212) of the patients.
Of the 131 patients who were positive for LVI, 67 (31.6%) had tumor invasion into lymphovascular spaces without muscle layer (nonmuscular lymphovascular spaces), and 64 (30.2%) had tumor invasion into muscular vessels.
Tumor invasion into muscular vessels correlated with higher frequencies of positive resection margin, lymph node metastasis, and locoregional/distant recurrence.
Patients with tumor invasion into muscular vessels had significantly shorter disease-free survival and overall survival than did patients who had no LVI or who had tumor invasion of nonmuscular lymphovascular spaces (P<0.01).
Tumor invasion into muscular vessels is an independent prognostic factor in patients with PDAC who have received neoadjuvant therapies.
Our results showed that tumor invasion into muscular vessels plays an important role in the progression of PDAC and in predicting prognosis in this group of patients.
PMID: 22301400
Association of increased DNA methyltransferase expression with carcinogenesis and poor prognosis in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
Introduction Epigenetic modifications play an important role in multistage carcinogenesis.
The role of the three functional DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) in pancreatic carcinogenesis has not been fully understood.
The main goal of this study was to examine DNMT expression in different stages of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), and evaluate their prognostic significance in PDAC.
Materials and methods A large number of premalignant and malignant pancreatic lesions were obtained by manual microdissection.
Quantitative real-time RT-PCR was used to detect DNMTs mRNA expression.
Nonparametric test, logrank test and Cox regression analysis were used to evaluate the clinical significance of DNMT expression.
Results The mRNA expression of the three DNMTs increased with the development of pancreatic cancer from normal duct to pancreatic intraductal neoplasia and further to PDAC, and were statistically correlated with each other.
Expression of the three DNMTs was statistically correlated with TNM staging and history of chronic pancreatitis.
DNMT3A and DNMT3B, but not DNMT1 expression, was statistically correlated with tumour size.
Patients with higher levels of DNMT1, DNMT3A and/or DNMT3B expression had an overall lower survival than those with lower levels of expression.
Univariate analysis showed that high expression levels of DNMTs, alcohol consumption, tumour differentiation and TNM staging were statistically significant risk factors.
Multivariate analysis showed that high level of DNMT3B expression and tumour differentiation were statistically significant independent poor prognostic factors.
Conclusions These results suggested that pancreatic carcinogenesis involves an increased mRNA expression of three DNMTs, and they may become valuable diagnostic and prognostic markers as well as potential therapeutic targets for pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22301281
Genetic variants in carcinogen-metabolizing enzymes, cigarette smoking and pancreatic cancer risk.
Individual susceptibility to the toxic effects of cigarette smoke may be modified by inherited variability in carcinogen metabolism.
The purpose of the present study was to investigate pancreatic cancer risk associated with cigarette smoking and 33 variants within carcinogen metabolism genes and examine whether these variants modify the association between smoking and pancreatic cancer.
A population-based study was conducted with 455 pancreatic cancer cases and 893 controls.
Epidemiological and smoking data were collected from questionnaires and variants were genotyped by mass spectrometry.
Age- and sex-adjusted odds ratio (ASOR) and multivariate-adjusted odds ratio (MVOR) estimates were obtained using multivariate logistic regression, and interactions between each variant and smoking were investigated.
Current smoker status [MVOR = 2.29, 95% confidence interval (95% CI): 1.62, 3.22], 10-27 pack-years (MVOR = 1.57, 95% CI: 1.13, 2.18), >27 pack-years (MVOR = 1.77, 95% CI: 1.27, 2.46) and longer durations of smoking (19-32 years: MVOR = 1.46, 95% CI: 1.05, 2.05; >32 years: MVOR = 1.78, 95% CI: 1.30, 2.45) were associated with increased pancreatic cancer risk.
CYP1B1-4390-GG (ASOR = 0.36, 95% CI: 0.15, 0.86) and Uridine 5'-diphospho glucuronosyltransferase 1 family, polypeptide A7-622-CT (ASOR = 0.77, 95% CI: 0.60, 0.99) were associated with reduced risk.
N-acetyltransferase 1-640-GT/GG (ASOR = 1.75, 95% CI: 1.00, 3.05), GSTM1 (rs737497)-GG (ASOR = 1.41, 95% CI: 1.02, 1.95), GSTM1 gene deletion (ASOR = 4.89, 95% CI: 3.52, 6.79) and glutathione S-transferase theta-1 gene deletion (ASOR = 4.41, 95% CI: 2.67, 7.29) were associated with increased risk.
Significant interactions were observed between pack-years and EPHX1-415 (P = 0.04) and smoking status and N-acetyltransferase 2-857 (P = 0.03).
Variants of carcinogen metabolism genes are independently associated with pancreatic cancer risk and may modify the risk posed by smoking.
PMID: 22300608
A phase I/II study of gemcitabine-concurrent proton radiotherapy for locally advanced pancreatic cancer without distant metastasis.
PURPOSE: We conducted the study to assess the feasibility and efficacy of gemcitabine-concurrent proton radiotherapy (GPT) for locally advanced pancreatic cancer (LAPC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Of all 50 patients who participated in the study, 5 patients with gastrointestinal (GI)-adjacent LAPC were enrolled in P-1 (50Gy equivalent [GyE] in 25 fractions) and 5 patients with non-GI-adjacent LAPC in P-2 (70.2GyE in 26 fractions), and 40 patients with LAPC regardless of GI-adjacency in P-3 (67.5GyE in 25 fractions using the field-within-a-field technique).
In every protocol, gemcitabine (800mg/m(2)/week for 3weeks) was administered concurrently.
Every patient received adjuvant chemotherapy including gemcitabine after GPT within the tolerable limit.
RESULTS: The median follow-up period was 12.5months.
The scheduled GPT was feasible for all except 6 patients (12%) due to acute hematologic or GI toxicities.
Grade 3 or greater late gastric ulcer and hemorrhage were seen in 5 patients (10%) in P-2 and P-3.
The one-year freedom from local-progression, progression-free, and overall survival rates were 81.7%, 64.3%, and 76.8%, respectively.
CONCLUSION: GPT was feasible and showed high efficacy.
Although the number of patients and the follow-up periods are insufficient, the clinical results seem very encouraging.
PMID: 22300387
A3 Adenosine Receptor: A Plausible Therapeutic Target for Cardio-Protection in Diabetes.
Diabetes mellitus categorized as type I and II, is a disease of pancreatic insulin, affecting blood glucose level in the body.
Recent evidence suggests that cardiac diseases such as hypertension, coronary artery disease, congestive heart failure, and diabetic cardiomyopathy are associated with diabetes and hyperglycemia.
The adenosine receptors (AR) have been reported to play an important role in the regulation of these diseases.
Four adenosine receptors have been cloned and characterized from several different mammalian species.
The receptors are named adenosine A1, A2A, A2B, and A3.
The A2A and A2B receptors preferably interact with members of the Gs family of G proteins and the A1 and A3 receptors with Gi/o proteins.
The ubiquitous levels of adenosine are found in each cell in normal conditions but in disease conditions its level has been shown to increase and activate G-protein mediated signaling pathway leading to artery constriction in cardiovascular diseases and diabetes.
Various studies have demonstrated that A3AR is a potent cardioprotectant during myocardial ischemeia/ischemic reperfusion.
Role of A3AR receptor as a possible cardioprotectant in diabetes is under investigation and studies have verified the involvement of cyclooxygenases (COXs) and NADPH oxidase pathways.
This review summarizes the possible role of A3AR in cardiovascular disease and discusses advancement in the development of therapeutic agents targeting cardioprotection with discussion on recent patents on A3 agonists that are being utilized in the clinical setting.
We anticipate that detailed pharmacological studies of adenosine A3 receptors could help in understanding the link between cardiovascular disease and diabetes and this can be utilized to develop newer therapies that selectively target A3 receptor to overcome cardiac challenges.
PMID: 22299600
Role of Rapamycin-Induced Autophagy in Pancreatic Islets.
PMID: 22299208
P53 expression in invasive pancreatic adenocarcinoma and precursor lesions.
Patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma are known to have a high mortality rate.
The 5-year survival rate still remains low even now compared to that of the 1960's despite new advances in management including surgery, chemotherapy, pathological classification and molecular diagnostic technologies.
Precursors to invasive pancreatic adenocarcinoma have been identified in the last ten years that include mucinous cystic neoplasm, intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm and pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia.
p53 protein accumulation in the nuclei is a common molecular event in most human neoplasms.
Our objective is to investigate p53 expression in pancreatic adenocarcinoma and precursor lesions and their significance.
The selected study material encompassed 31 invasive ductal adenocarcinoma, 15 mucinous cystic neoplasm and papillary mucinous neoplasm, and 27 cases of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia including grade 1, 2 and 3.
Immunoscore was given for each case based on intensity of staining and percentage of cells positive and compared between precursor lesions and invasive adenocarcinoma.
A score of 50 and above was considered significant.
The results showed that p53 expression increased progressively and significantly with the grade of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia and adenocarcinoma (p-value < 0.001).
These findings support the concept of multistep carcinogenesis in pancreatic adenocarcinoma and suggest that p53 inactivation occurs in the progression of precursors to pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
PMID: 22299055
Immunohistochemical profile for unknown primary adenocarcinoma.
Development of tailored treatment based on immunohistochemical profiles (IPs) of tumors for cancers of unknown primary is needed.
We developed an algorithm based on primary known adenocarcinoma for testing sensitivity and specificity.
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue samples from 71 patients of unfavorable subsets of unknown primary adenocarcinoma were obtained.
We examined 15 molecular markers using the algorithm incorporating these IPs and classified the tumours into 9 subsets based on the primary tumour site.
The sensitivity and specificity of this algorithm were 80.3% and 97.6%, respectively.
Apparent primary sites were lung in 17 patients, digestive organs in 13, gynecological organs in 9, prostate in 7, liver or kidney in 6, breast in 4, urothelial organ in 2, biliary tract and pancreatic profile in none, and unclassified in 13.
The response rate to chemotherapy was highest for the gynecological IPs.
Patients with gynecological or lung cancer IPs had longer median progression-free survival than those with others: 11.2 months for gynecological IPs (p<0.001) and 6.8 months for lung IPs (p = 0.05).
Lung, digestive, prostate, and gynecological profiles were associated with significantly longer median survival time than the other profiles.
Multivariate analysis confirmed that the IPs were independent prognostic factors for survival.
The IPs identified in this study can be used to further stratify patient prognosis for unfavorable subsets of unknown primary adenocarcinoma.
PMID: 22298869
Solid pseudopapillary tumors of the pancreas: contrast-enhanced sonographic features.
Objectives- The aims of this study were to determine the features of solid pseudopapillary tumors of the pancreas on contrast-enhanced sonography and correlate them with pathologic findings.
Methods- Five patients with solid pseudopapillary tumors of the pancreas underwent conventional sonographic, color Doppler flow imaging, and contrast-enhanced sonographic examinations.
Time-intensity curves were used to calculate the contrast enhancement times, wash-out times, and enhancement patterns of the lesions.
Three of the 5 patients also underwent contrast-enhanced computed tomography.
All cases were confirmed by surgery and pathologic examination.
Results- The study included 3 women and 2 men.
Tumor diameters ranged from 4.4 to 13.0 cm.
Sonography revealed round well-defined encapsulated tumors.
Two appeared as mixed cystic-solid and 3 as solid masses on conventional sonography.
One mass had a macrocalcification.
Some areas of blood flow were seen in 3 of the masses on color Doppler flow imaging.
On contrast-enhanced sonography, the peripheral rims of the tumors showed isoenhancement during the early arterial phase, and the interiors of the masses showed heterogeneous enhancement consisting of regions of isoenhancement, hypoenhancement, and nonenhancement.
Progressive wash-out of the contrast agent during venous phases revealed hypoenhancement compared with normal adjacent pancreatic parenchyma.
Pathologic findings showed that each tumor was completely encapsulated and had varying degrees of internal hemorrhage and necrosis.
Conclusions- Solid pseudopapillary tumors of the pancreas have characteristic findings on contrast-enhanced sonography, including peripheral rim isoenhancement and internal heterogeneous enhancement with nonenhanced portions; these features may help differentiate solid pseudopapillary tumors from other pancreatic neoplasms.
PMID: 22298601
Gabapentin enacarbil for treatment of restless legs syndrome in adults.
To review the pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, clinical efficacy, adverse effects, drug interactions, precautions, dosing recommendations, and patient counseling for gabapentin enacarbil for the treatment of restless legs syndrome (RLS) in adults.
A literature search was conducted using the terms gabapentin enacarbil, XP13512/GSK1838262, and restless legs syndrome.
MEDLINE, Books@Ovid, Journals@Ovid Full Text, BIOSIS Previews, and EMED databases were the primary search sites (2004-October 2011).
All English-based articles and abstracts obtained from the literature searches were reviewed.
Additional information was obtained from references cited in the articles.
All gabapentin enacarbil information related to RLS was considered.
Study selection included human trials evaluating safety and efficacy of gabapentin enacarbil for the treatment of RLS.
Gabapentin enacarbil is a prodrug of gabapentin that is Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved for the treatment of moderate-to-severe primary RLS in adults.
In placebo-controlled trials, gabapentin enacarbil demonstrated efficacy in reducing the symptoms of RLS.
Most clinical trials assessed gabapentin enacarbil at dosages greater than the FDA-approved 600-mg dosage.
For the approved dose of 600 mg, the most commonly reported adverse effects are somnolence and dizziness.
Clinical trials have evaluated gabapentin enacarbil for safety and efficacy in treating moderate-to-severe RLS symptoms for up to 64 weeks.
It offers a pharmacokinetic advantage over gabapentin by having improved absorption and a longer duration of action, but clinically significant differences are yet to be determined.
Potential disadvantages of gabapentin enacarbil include cost, concerns of suicide risk and pancreatic cancer, and a lack of data for the FDA-approved 600-mg dosage.
Overall, gabapentin enacarbil is a viable therapeutic option for adults with moderate-to-severe RLS for whom more conventional therapies have failed.
PMID: 22298506
Fine needle aspiration of intrapancreatic accessory spleen: Cytomorphologic features and differential diagnosis.
BACKGROUND: Intrapancreatic accessory spleen (IPAS) is a rare benign lesion of the pancreas that frequently clinically and radiographically mimics a solid neoplasm.
Very rarely, epidermoid cysts may form in IPAS and be mistaken for a cystic neoplasm of the pancreas on radiographic imaging.
IPAS and epidermoid cyst involving intrapancreatic cyst (ECIPAS) are benign, and, if recognized, do not require surgical intervention.
There are few reports of the cytopathologic features of IPAS diagnosed by fine needle aspiration (FNA).
METHODS: Here we report a series of 6 cases of endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)-guided FNA of IPAS, 3 of which had histological confirmation, including 1 case of histologically confirmed ECIPAS.
RESULTS: Cytomorphologic features of IPAS include a polymorphous population of hematopoietic cells, including lymphocytes, eosinophils, histiocytes, plasma cells, and red blood cells, admixed with numerous small blood vessels representing splenic sinusoids.
CD8 immunostaining of cell block or core biopsy material highlights splenic endothelial cells and confirms the diagnosis.
FNA of ECIPAS reveals predominantly macrophages and proteinaceous debris.
CONCLUSIONS: Diagnostic pitfalls include pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor.
If IPAS is recognized as a diagnostic consideration on EUS-FNA, unnecessary surgical resection may be avoided.
Cancer (Cancer Cytopathol) 2012.
© 2012 American Cancer Society.
PMID: 22298098
Advanced Endosonographic Diagnostic Tools for Discrimination of Focal Chronic Pancreatitis and Pancreatic Carcinoma - Elastography, Contrast Enhanced High Mechanical Index (CEHMI) and Low Mechanical Index (CELMI) Endosonography in Direct Comparison.
New tools have recently emerged that further improve the diagnostic performance of high-end endosonography.
Whilst elastography has been available for a while, contrast-enhancing techniques are still very young with little experience existing in this field.
The latest development is contrast enhanced low mechanical index endosonography (CELMI-EUS) which became commercially available at the beginning of 2010.
This technique requires contrast-specific software whereas the pre-existing technique of contrast-enhanced high mechanical index endosonography (CEHMI-EUS) does not.
The aim of this study was to compare these techniques in discriminating between focal chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic carcinoma.
Included in the study were 58 patients with a pancreatic lesion (19 pancreatic cancer and 39 chronic pancreatitis) with a mean age of 60 ± 15 years.
All patients were examined by one investigator (MH).
All methods were performed within one examination and the result of each technique was noted before using the next.
The gold standard was pathology following surgery, endoscopic fine-needle puncture, or one-year follow-up when chronic pancreatitis was suspected.
The consecutive results of specificity and sensitivity were 73.7 % and 61.5 % for B-mode endosonography; 94.7 % and 33.4 % for elastography; 84.2 % and 76.9 % for CELMI-EUS; and 89.5 % and 92.3 % for CEHMI-EUS. A combination of 3 of those methods could not improve on the result of CEHMI-EUS alone.
This study shows that, despite the availability of new technologies, CEHMI-EUS is still the most reliable method for the differentiation of focal chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic carcinoma.
However, understanding the advantages of the different methods might help to find the optimal indications for the use of the new techniques.
PMID: 22297233
Effects of the Synthetic Coprisin Analog Peptide, CopA3 in Pathogenic Microorganisms and Mammalian Cancer Cells.
A synthetic coprisin analog peptide, 9-mer dimer CopA3 (CopA3) was designed based on a defensin-like peptide, Coprisin, isolated from the bacteria-immunized dung beetle Copris tripartitus.
Here, CopA3 was investigated for its antimicrobial activity and cancer cell growth inhibition.
CopA3 showed antimicrobial activities against various pathogenic bacteria and yeast fungus with MIC values in 2~32 microM ranges, and inhibited the cell viabilities of pancreatic and hepatocellular cancer cells, except MIAPaca2, Hep3B, and HepG2 cells, in a dose-dependent manner.
The average IC50 values of CopA3 against pancreatic and hepatocellular cancer cells were 61.7 microM and 67.8 microM, respectively.
The results indicate that CopA3 has potential in the treatments of pancreatic and hepatocellular cancers as well as microorganism infection disease.
PMID: 22296619
Development of Hypoxia Enhanced (111)In-Labeled Bombesin Conjugates: Design, Synthesis, and In Vitro Evaluation in PC-3 Human Prostate Cancer.
The gastrin-releasing peptide receptor (BB2r) has shown great promise for tumor targeting due to the increase of the receptor expression in a variety of human cancers including prostate, breast, small-cell lung, and pancreatic cancer.
From clinical investigations, prostate cancer has been shown to be among the most hypoxic of the cancers investigated.
Many solid tumors contain regions of hypoxia due to poor organization and efficiency of the vasculature.
However, hypoxia is typically not present in normal tissue.
Nitroimidazoles, a thoroughly investigated class of hypoxia selective drugs, have been shown to be highly retained in hypoxic tissues.
The purpose of this study is to determine if the incorporation of hypoxia trapping moieties into the structural paradigm of BB2r-targeted peptides will increase the retention time of the agents in prostate cancer tumors.
The present work involves the design, syntheses, purification, and in vitro investigation of hypoxia enhanced (111)In-BB2r-targeted radioconjugates.
A total of four BB2r-targeted conjugates (1-4) were synthesized and coupled with increasing numbers of 2-nitroimidazoles, a hypoxia trapping moiety.
Conjugates were radiolabeled with (111)In and purified by HPLC prior to in vitro studies.
Receptor saturation assays under both normoxic and hypoxic conditions showed that the BB2r receptor expression on the PC-3 human prostate cancer cell line was not significantly affected by oxygen levels.
Competitive binding assays revealed that incorporation of 2-nitroimidazoles had a detrimental effect to BB2r binding when adequate spacer groups, between the hypoxia trapping agent and the pharmacophore, were not employed.
All of the 2-nitroimidazole containing BB2r-targeted agents exhibited significantly higher longitudinal retention in PC-3 cells under hypoxic conditions compared to the analogous normoxic studies.
Protein association analysis revealed a 3-fold increase in binding of a 2-nitroimidazole containing BB2r-targeted agent under hypoxic relative to normoxic conditions.
The positive nature of these results indicate that further exploration into the potential of hypoxia selective trapping agents for BB2r-targeted agents, as well as other targeted compounds, is warranted.
PMID: 22295108
A Comparative Study of Gene-Expression Data of Basal Cell Carcinoma and Melanoma Reveals New Insights about the Two Cancers.
A comparative analysis of genome-scale transcriptomic data of two types of skin cancers, melanoma and basal cell carcinoma in comparison with other cancer types, was conducted with the aim of identifying key regulatory factors that either cause or contribute to the aggressiveness of melanoma, while basal cell carcinoma generally remains a mild disease.
Multiple cancer-related pathways such as cell proliferation, apoptosis, angiogenesis, cell invasion and metastasis, are considered, but our focus is on energy metabolism, cell invasion and metastasis pathways.
Our findings include the following.
(a) Both types of skin cancers use both glycolysis and increased oxidative phosphorylation (electron transfer chain) for their energy supply.
(b) Advanced melanoma shows substantial up-regulation of key genes involved in fatty acid metabolism (β-oxidation) and oxidative phosphorylation, with aerobic metabolism being far more efficient than anaerobic glycolysis, providing a source of the energetics necessary to support the rapid growth of this cancer.
(c) While advanced melanoma is similar to pancreatic cancer in terms of the activity level of genes involved in promoting cell invasion and metastasis, the main metastatic form of basal cell carcinoma is substantially reduced in this activity, partially explaining why this cancer type has been considered as far less aggressive.
Our method of using comparative analyses of transcriptomic data of multiple cancer types focused on specific pathways provides a novel and highly effective approach to cancer studies in general.
PMID: 22294831
Efficacy of intraductal ultrasonography in the diagnosis of non-opaque choledocholith.
To evaluate the efficacy of intraductal ultrasonography (IDUS) in the diagnosis of non-opaque, common bile duct stones.
A total of 183 patients (102 males, mean age 73 years; 81 females, mean age 70 years) with suspected common bile duct stones diagnosed through abdominal computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and abdominal Type-B ultrasound were included in the study.
The diagnosis was confirmed through endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) followed by IDUS.
A total of 183 patients with suspected common bile duct (CBD) stones were included in the study as follows: 36 patients with high-density CBD stones, 68 patients with sand-like stones, 44 patients with low-density stones, 21 patients with ampullary cancer, and 14 patients with pancreatic cancer.
Conventional imaging revealed 124 cases of choledochectasia, and only 36 cases of suspected CBD stones; ERCP revealed 145 cases of CBD stones with three missed diagnoses.
IDUS revealed 148 cases of CBD stones, 21 cases of ampullary tumors, and 14 cases of pancreatic cancer.
IDUS was more effective in the diagnosis of bile duct stones than ERCP, upper abdominal CT or upper abdominal MRI.
PMID: 22294829
Microencapsulated tumor assay: Evaluation of the nude mouse model of pancreatic cancer.
To establish a more stable and accurate nude mouse model of pancreatic cancer using cancer cell microencapsulation.
The assay is based on microencapsulation technology, wherein human tumor cells are encapsulated in small microcapsules (approximately 420 μm in diameter) constructed of semipermeable membranes.
We implemented two kinds of subcutaneous implantation models in nude mice using the injection of single tumor cells and encapsulated pancreatic tumor cells.
The size of subcutaneously implanted tumors was observed on a weekly basis using two methods, and growth curves were generated from these data.
The growth and metastasis of orthotopically injected single tumor cells and encapsulated pancreatic tumor cells were evaluated at four and eight weeks postimplantation by positron emission tomography-computed tomography scan and necropsy.
The pancreatic tumor samples obtained from each method were then sent for pathological examination.
We evaluated differences in the rates of tumor incidence and the presence of metastasis and variations in tumor volume and tumor weight in the cancer microcapsules vs single-cell suspensions.
Sequential in vitro observations of the microcapsules showed that the cancer cells in microcapsules proliferated well and formed spheroids at days 4 to 6.
Further in vitro culture resulted in bursting of the membrane of the microcapsules and cells deviated outward and continued to grow in flasks.
The optimum injection time was found to be 5 d after tumor encapsulation.
In the subcutaneous implantation model, there were no significant differences in terms of tumor volume between the encapsulated pancreatic tumor cells and cells alone and rate of tumor incidence.
There was a significant difference in the rate of successful implantation between the cancer cell microencapsulation group and the single tumor-cell suspension group (100% vs 71.43%, respectively, P = 0.0489) in the orthotropic implantation model.
The former method displayed an obvious advantage in tumor mass (4th wk: 0.0461 ± 0.0399 vs 0.0313 ± 0.021, t = -0.81, P = 0.4379; 8th wk: 0.1284 ± 0.0284 vs 0.0943 ± 0.0571, t = -2.28, respectively, P = 0.0457) compared with the latter in the orthotopic implantation model.
Encapsulation of pancreatic tumor cells is a reliable method for establishing a pancreatic tumor animal model.
PMID: 22294553
Hedgehog-EGFR cooperation response genes determine the oncogenic phenotype of basal cell carcinoma and tumour-initiating pancreatic cancer cells.
Inhibition of Hedgehog (HH)/GLI signalling in cancer is a promising therapeutic approach.
Interactions between HH/GLI and other oncogenic pathways affect the strength and tumourigenicity of HH/GLI.
Cooperation of HH/GLI with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signalling promotes transformation and cancer cell proliferation in vitro.
However, the in vivo relevance of HH-EGFR signal integration and the critical downstream mediators are largely undefined.
In this report we show that genetic and pharmacologic inhibition of EGFR signalling reduces tumour growth in mouse models of HH/GLI driven basal cell carcinoma (BCC).
We describe HH-EGFR cooperation response genes including SOX2, SOX9, JUN, CXCR4 and FGF19 that are synergistically activated by HH-EGFR signal integration and required for in vivo growth of BCC cells and tumour-initiating pancreatic cancer cells.
The data validate EGFR signalling as drug target in HH/GLI driven cancers and shed light on the molecular processes controlled by HH-EGFR signal cooperation, providing new therapeutic strategies based on combined targeting of HH-EGFR signalling and selected downstream target genes.
PMID: 22294193
In response to the article of Dr. Nadia Peparini, "Extended lymphadenectomy does not improve prognosis in pancreatic carcinoma: is that really so?"
PMID: 22293948
Effects on apoptosis and cell cycle arrest contribute to the antitumor responses of interleukin-27 mediated by retrovirus in human pancreatic carcinoma cells.
Interleukin (IL)-27, composed of p28 and Epstein-Barr virus-induced gene 3 (EBI3) subunits, has diverse functions in regulating immune systems.
Human melanoma cells have been shown to express both IL-27 receptor subunits, and growth inhibition by IL-27 was detected.
We investigated whether forced expression of the p28-linked EBI3 gene in human pancreatic carcinoma cells (AsPC1) by retroviral vector would produce IL-27-mediated antitumor effects and the related mechanisms.
The data demonstrated that AsPC1 cells expressed both IL-27 receptor subunits, and tumor growth of AsPC1/IL-27 in mice was retarded compared with vector DNA-transduced tumors and survival of the mice was prolonged.
Expression of cytokines such as interferon-γ, tumor necrosis factor-α and IL-1β in tumor specimens increased, while the secretion of IFN-γ and TNF-α from spleen cells of mice bearing IL-27-transfected tumors increased.
Moreover, cell cycle arrest was induced in AsPC1/IL-27 inoculated mice with upregulated p21 expression and downregulated survivin expression.
The appearance of apoptotic cells increased in tumor specimens of mice bearing IL-27-transfected tumors compared with the mice bearing DNA-transfected tumors by confirming the expression of apoptosis-related proteins and activated apoptotic pathways through detection of cleaved PARP.
These results suggest that transfection of the IL-27 gene into human pancreatic carcinoma cells could produce antitumor effects in vivo and induction of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis could be the mechanism of IL-27 action in tumor regression.
PMID: 22293850
Reduced levels of p15INK4b, p16INK4a, p21cip1 and p27kip1 in pancreatic carcinoma.
Pancreatic carcinoma is one of the leading causes of cancer mortality worldwide, although the molecular mechanisms of this disease are poorly understood.
The aim of this study was to examine the expression of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CDKIs) and the epigenetic modifications in the promoters of these genes.
We also evaluated the correlation between the methylation status of CDKI genes and smoking habit in clinical pancreatic carcinoma specimens.
Western blotting and real-time PCR were performed to assess CDKI expression.
Methylation-specific PCR was carried out to examine the methylation status of the promoters of CDKI genes.
In this study, we revealed that reduced levels of the CDKI proteins, p15INK4b, p16INK4a, p21cip1 and p27kip1, are a prominent feature of pancreatic carcinoma patients.
The DNA hypermethylation of the promoter was observed in 40% (2 of 5) of the p15INK4b genes, 60% (3 of 5) of the p16INK4a genes and 60% of the p21cip1 genes, which markedly correlated with their decreased mRNA expression.
No hypermethylation was detected in the p27kip1 gene promoter in 5 pancreatic carcinoma patients with markedly decreased expression of p27kip1 mRNA, suggesting an alternative mechanism of p27kip in these patients.
In this study, patients with a smoking habit displayed methylation of 2 CDKI genes in their pancreatic carcinoma specimens.
We concluded that epigenetic modification via hypermethylation represents a critical mechanism for the inactivation of CDKI genes in pancreatic carcinoma.
PMID: 22293752
DNA methylation profiling identifies epigenetic dysregulation in pancreatic islets from type 2 diabetic patients.
In addition to genetic predisposition, environmental and lifestyle factors contribute to the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes (T2D).
Epigenetic changes may provide the link for translating environmental exposures into pathological mechanisms.
In this study, we performed the first comprehensive DNA methylation profiling in pancreatic islets from T2D and non-diabetic donors.
We uncovered 276 CpG loci affiliated to promoters of 254 genes displaying significant differential DNA methylation in diabetic islets.
These methylation changes were not present in blood cells from T2D individuals nor were they experimentally induced in non-diabetic islets by exposure to high glucose.
For a subgroup of the differentially methylated genes, concordant transcriptional changes were present.
Functional annotation of the aberrantly methylated genes and RNAi experiments highlighted pathways implicated in β-cell survival and function; some are implicated in cellular dysfunction while others facilitate adaptation to stressors.
Together, our findings offer new insights into the intricate mechanisms of T2D pathogenesis, underscore the important involvement of epigenetic dysregulation in diabetic islets and may advance our understanding of T2D aetiology.
PMID: 22293498
High incidence of peritoneal implants in recurrence of intra-abdominal cancer revealed by 18F-FDG PET/CT in patients with increased tumor markers and negative findings on conventional imaging.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this prospective study was to investigate the role of F-fluorodeoxyglucose (F-FDG) PET/CT in the diagnosis of recurrent intra-abdominal cancer in patients with increased tumor markers and negative findings on conventional imaging studies.
METHODS: Seventy-three patients (30 men; age 61.1±11.5 years) with intra-abdominal cancer (colorectal, n=32; ovarian, n=18; gastric, n=7; pancreatic, n=7; cervical, n=4; endometrial, n=3; duodenal, n=1; and small bowel, n=1) and increasing levels of tumor markers during follow-up and negative CT, MRI or both underwent 125 F-FDG PET/CT examinations.
The final diagnosis was confirmed by histopathological findings in 22 patients, clinical follow-up (median of 12 months) in 13 patients,and repeated imaging with F-FDG PET/CT examinations in 38 patients.
RESULTS: Of 73 cancer patients, F-FDG PET/CT identified recurrent disease in 52 patients and ruled out in 21 patients.
F-FDG PET/CT scan was true positive (TP) in 49 patients, false positive in three patients, false negative in four patients, and true negative in 17 patients.
In our study, the F-FDG-PET/CT scan had a sensitivity of 92.4%, a specificity of 85%, and an accuracy of 91%.
Fourteen of 49 TP studies (28.5%) showed peritoneal implants only.
Moreover, peritoneal implants were detected in additional nine of 49 TP studies (18.3%) presented with multiple lesions.
Thus, half of the true-positive examination revealed peritoneal implants that CT or MRI had not depicted.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study indicate a high incidence of peritoneal implants revealed by F-FDG PET/CT in the diagnosis of recurrent intra-abdominal cancer in patients with increasing tumor markers and negative findings on conventional imaging studies.
PMID: 22292614
Chemically Modified Peptides Targeting the PDZ Domain of GIPC as a Therapeutic Approach for Cancer.
GIPC (GAIP-interacting protein, C terminus) represents a new target class for the discovery of chemotherapeutics.
While many of the current generation of anticancer agents function by directly binding to intracellular kinases or cell surface receptors, the disruption of cytosolic protein-protein interactions mediated by non-enzymatic domains is an underdeveloped avenue for inhibiting cancer growth.
One such example is the PDZ domain of GIPC.
Previously we developed a molecular probe, the cell-permeable octapeptide CR1023 (N-myristoyl-PSQSSSEA), which diminished proliferation of pancreatic cancer cells.
We have expanded upon that discovery using a chemical modification approach and here report a series of cell-permeable, side chain-modified lipopeptides that target the GIPC PDZ domain in vitro and in vivo.
These peptides exhibit significant activity against pancreatic and breast cancers, both in cellular and animal models.
CR1166 (N-myristoyl-PSQSK(εN-4-bromobenzoyl)SK(εN-4-bromobenzoyl)A), bearing two halogenated aromatic units on alternate side chains, was found to be the most active compound, with pronounced down-regulation of EGFR/1GF-1R expression.
We hypothesize that these organic acid-modified residues extend the productive reach of the peptide beyond the canonical binding pocket, which defines the limit of accessibility for the native proteinogenic sequences that the PDZ domain has evolved to recognize.
Cell permeability is achieved with N-terminal lipidation using myristate, rather than a larger CPP (cell-penetrating peptide) sequence.
This, in conjunction with optimization of targeting through side chain modification, has yielded an approach that will allow the discovery and development of next-generation cellular probes for GIPC PDZ as well as for other PDZ domains.
PMID: 22292226
Choledochal cyst in pediatric patients: a 10 years single institution experience.
Choledochal cysts (CCs) are rare congenital dilatations of the biliar tree.
The incidence is 1:150,000.
A correct diagnosis and surgical treatment are important because of the long term risks of infection and neoplasia.
We report our experience with CCs in children.
Patients with CC disease, who were seen at the Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires between 1999 and 2009, were identified retrospectively from our prospectively acquired hepato-pancreatico-biliary database.
Prenatal, clinical, surgical and pathological records were analysed.
We included 12 children (10 girls and 2 boys), all of them affected by a cystic dilatation type I of Todani classification.
Between the 4 patients with antenatal diagnosis only one presented symptoms before surgery, expressed in acolic feces.
Between the 8 patients with postnatal diagnosis, the most common clinical presentation was abdominal pain, occurring in all patients.
Ultrasound was used for the diagnosis of all patients.
Mean age at surgery was 74 months.
All patients had intraoperative cholangiograms to definitively confirm the diagnosis.
Five patients underwent open surgery and 7 laparoscopic approach.
From patients with a laparoscopic approach, 1 had to be converted to open surgery due to intraoperative complications and 2 underwent an initial surgery for a cholecystectomy and a CC cyst excision.
The complications observed were: anastomotic biliary fistula 1, residual lithiasis in the pancreatic portion of the duct 1 and anastomotic stenosis 1.
The last 2 cases required reoperation.
Once CCs are diagnosed, careful treatment decisions need to be taken because both intra hepatic and extra hepatic CCs, if untreated, have an increased risk of cancer.
After a careful study of the cyst's characteristics, we recommend a laparoscopic approach when possible, as the best choice, after 3 months of life to increase the success of the treatment according to the size of the anatomic structure.
We recommend early treatment, before 3 months of life, only in case of severe symptoms.
PMID: 22292058
COUP-TFII Controls Mouse Pancreatic β-Cell Mass through GLP-1-β-Catenin Signaling Pathways.
The control of the functional pancreatic β-cell mass serves the key homeostatic function of releasing the right amount of insulin to keep blood sugar in the normal range.
It is not fully understood though how β-cell mass is determined.
Conditional chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor II (COUP-TFII)-deficient mice were generated and crossed with mice expressing Cre under the control of pancreatic duodenal homeobox 1 (pdx1) gene promoter.
Ablation of COUP-TFII in pancreas resulted in glucose intolerance.
Beta-cell number was reduced at 1 day and 3 weeks postnatal.
Together with a reduced number of insulin-containing cells in the ductal epithelium and normal β-cell proliferation and apoptosis, this suggests decreased β-cell differentiation in the neonatal period.
By testing islets isolated from these mice and cultured β-cells with loss and gain of COUP-TFII function, we found that COUP-TFII induces the expression of the β-catenin gene and its target genes such as cyclin D1 and axin 2.
Moreover, induction of these genes by glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) via β-catenin was impaired in absence of COUP-TFII.
The expression of two other target genes of GLP-1 signaling, GLP-1R and PDX-1 was significantly lower in mutant islets compared to control islets, possibly contributing to reduced β-cell mass.
Finally, we demonstrated that COUP-TFII expression was activated by the Wnt signaling-associated transcription factor TCF7L2 (T-cell factor 7-like 2) in human islets and rat β-cells providing a feedback loop.
Our findings show that COUP-TFII is a novel component of the GLP-1 signaling cascade that increases β-cell number during the neonatal period.
COUP-TFII is required for GLP-1 activation of the β-catenin-dependent pathway and its expression is under the control of TCF7L2.
PMID: 22291919
Arousal of cancer-associated stroma: overexpression of palladin activates fibroblasts to promote tumor invasion.
Cancer-associated fibroblasts, comprised of activated fibroblasts or myofibroblasts, are found in the stroma surrounding solid tumors.
These myofibroblasts promote invasion and metastasis of cancer cells.
Mechanisms regulating the activation of the fibroblasts and the initiation of invasive tumorigenesis are of great interest.
Upregulation of the cytoskeletal protein, palladin, has been detected in the stromal myofibroblasts surrounding many solid cancers and in expression screens for genes involved in invasion.
Using a pancreatic cancer model, we investigated the functional consequence of overexpression of exogenous palladin in normal fibroblasts in vitro and its effect on the early stages of tumor invasion.
Palladin expression in stromal fibroblasts occurs very early in tumorigenesis.
In vivo, concordant expression of palladin and the myofibroblast marker, alpha smooth muscle actin (α-SMA), occurs early at the dysplastic stages in peri-tumoral stroma and progressively increases in pancreatic tumorigenesis.
In vitro introduction of exogenous 90 kD palladin into normal human dermal fibroblasts (HDFs) induces activation of stromal fibroblasts into myofibroblasts as marked by induction of α-SMA and vimentin, and through the physical change of cell morphology.
Moreover, palladin expression in the fibroblasts enhances cellular migration, invasion through the extracellular matrix, and creation of tunnels through which cancer cells can follow.
The fibroblast invasion and creation of tunnels results from the development of invadopodia-like cellular protrusions which express invadopodia proteins and proteolytic enzymes.
Palladin expression in fibroblasts is triggered by the co-culture of normal fibroblasts with k-ras-expressing epithelial cells.
Overall, palladin expression can impart myofibroblast properties, in turn promoting the invasive potential of these peri-tumoral cells with invadopodia-driven degradation of extracellular matrix.
Palladin expression in fibroblasts can be triggered by k-ras expression in adjacent epithelial cells.
This data supports a model whereby palladin-activated fibroblasts facilitate stromal-dependent metastasis and outgrowth of tumorigenic epithelium.
PMID: 22291707
Autophagy in pancreatic cancer.
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a devastating disease with an extremely poor life expectancy and no effective treatment.
Autophagy is a process of degradation of cytoplasmic component capable of recycling cellular components or eliminate specific targets.
The presence of autophagy in PDAC has been demonstrated.
However, the implicated cellular pathways are not fully understood and, more importantly, the role of autophagy in PDAC is matter of intensive debate.
This review summarizes recently published data in an attempt to clarify the importance of autophagy in this disease and try to reconcile apparently contradictory results.
PMID: 22290402
Use of Antidiabetic Agents and the Risk of Pancreatic Cancer: A Case-Control Analysis.
OBJECTIVES:The objective of this study was to explore the association between use of metformin or other antidiabetic drugs, diabetes, and the risk of pancreatic cancer.METHODS:We conducted a case-control study using the UK-based General Practice Research Database (GPRD).
Cases had a first-time diagnosis of pancreatic cancer, and six controls per case were matched on age, sex, calendar time, general practice, and number of years of active history in the GPRD before the index date.
Results were further adjusted in multivariate logistic regression analyses for potential confounders such as body mass index, smoking, alcohol consumption, and diabetes duration.RESULTS:In all, 2,763 case patients with a recorded diagnosis of pancreatic cancer were identified.
Mean age±s.d.
was 69.5±11.0 years.
Long-term use (≥30 prescriptions) of metformin was not associated with a materially altered risk of pancreatic cancer (adjusted odds ratio (adj.
OR): 0.87, 95% confidence interval (CI): 0.59-1.29), but there was a suggestion of effect modification by gender, as long-term use of metformin was linked to a decreased risk in women (adj.
OR: 0.43, 95% CI: 0.23-0.80).
Both use of sulfonylureas (≥30 prescriptions, adj.
OR: 1.90, 95% CI: 1.32-2.74) and of insulin (≥40 prescriptions, adj.
OR: 2.29, 95% CI: 1.34-3.92) were associated with an increased risk of pancreatic cancer.CONCLUSIONS:Use of metformin was associated with a decreased risk of pancreatic cancer in women only, whereas use of sulfonylureas and of insulin was associated with an increased risk of pancreatic cancer.Am J Gastroenterol advance online publication, 31 January 2012; doi:10.1038/ajg.2011.483.
PMID: 22289952
[Obesity and pancreatic diseases].
Obesity is defined as BMI (calculated as weight in kg divided by height in m2) more than 30, and overweight is defined as BMI of 25-29.9.
Obesity has been considered as a risk factor for pancreatic diseases, including pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer.
Severe acute pancreatitis is significantly more frequent in obese patients.
Furthermore, obese patients develop systemic and local complications of acute pancreatitis more frequently.
The underlying mechanisms are increased inflammation and necrosis from increased amount of intra- and peri-pancreatic fat.
In addition, obesity is a poor prognostic factor in acute pancreatitis, and overweight before disease onset appears to be a risk factor for chronic pancreatitis.
Overweight and/or obesity are associated with greater risk of pancreatic cancer and younger age of onset.
Physical activity appears to decrease the risk of pancreatic cancer, especially among those who are overweight.
Long-standing diabetes increases the risk of pancreatic cancer.
The pathogenic mechanism is that obesity and physical inactivity increase insulin resistance.
In a state of hypersinulinemia, increased circulating level of insulin-like growth factor-1 induces cellular proliferation of pancreatic cancer.
Obesity is associated with negative prognostic factor and increased mortality in pancreatic cancer.
However, there are controversies regarding the effects of obesity on long-term post-operative results in the patient with pancreatic cancer.
(Korean J Gastroenterol 2012;59: 5-39).
PMID: 22289513
Avian SERPINB11 gene: a marker for ovarian endometrioid cancer in chickens.
As serine and cysteine proteinase inhibitors, serpins, such as SERPINB5, cause ovarian, colorectal and pancreatic adenocarcinomas.
We identified SERPINB11 as a novel estrogen-induced gene in chickens during oviduct development.
The chicken is a unique animal model for research on human ovarian cancer, because it spontaneously develops epithelial cell-derived ovarian cancer as in women.
Therefore, this study investigated the expression pattern, CpG methylation status, and miRNA regulation of the SERPINB11 gene in normal and cancerous ovaries from chickens.
Our results indicate that SERPINB11 is most abundant in the glandular epithelium of endometrioid adenocarcinoma of cancerous, but not normal, ovaries of hens.
In addition, bisulfite sequencing revealed that about 30% of -110 CpG sites are methylated in ovarian cancer cells, whereas -110 CpG sites are demethylated in normal ovarian cells.
Next, we determined whether miR-1582 influences SERPINB11 expression via its 3'UTR and found that it does not directly target the 3'UTR of SERPINB11 mRNA.
Therefore, it is unlikely that post-transcriptional regulation influences SERPINB11 expression in the chicken ovary.
On the other hand, in human ovarian cancer cells such as OVCAR-3, SKOV-3 and PA-1 cells, immunoreactive SERPINB11 protein was predominant in the cytoplasm and had a similar expression pattern to that in chicken ovarian cancer cells.
Collectively, these results suggest that SERPINB11 is a biomarker for chicken ovarian endometrioid carcinoma that could be used for diagnosis and monitoring effects of therapies for the disease in women.
PMID: 22288880
Laparoscopic Distal Pancreatectomy: Feasibility Study of Radiofrequency-Assisted Transection in a Porcine Model.
Abstract Background and Aim: Despite technological improvements in pancreatic surgery, the incidence and morbidity of pancreatic leak after resection of distal pancreas are persistently high in most series.
Laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy (LDP) is today the gold standard procedure for benign and certain malignant neoplasms of the pancreatic body and tail in specialized centers.
This study evaluated safety and feasibility of a radiofrequency (RF)-assisted transection device in a porcine model of LDP.
Materials and Methods: LDP was performed on 10 pigs (median weight, 39.6 kg) using a new device based on an internally cooled RF-assisted electrode (Coolinside(®), Apeiron Medical, Valencia, Spain).
The animals were subjected to daily observation and then sacrificed and necropsied at 4 weeks postoperatively.
Primary end points were the development of postoperative pancreatic fistula using the Pancreatic Anastomotic Leak Study Group definition and/or the presence of abdominal amylase-rich fluid collections or abscesses during necropsy and pathological study and/or dye extravasation from the pancreatic remnant duct.
Secondary end points were intra- or postoperative complications, surgery, and transection duration.
Results: No clinically relevant postoperative pancreatic fistulas were observed.
In one case a grade A postoperative fistula was diagnosed due to amylase drain concentration of more than 6200 IU/mL on postoperative day 4.
Median peritoneal liquid amylase concentration on postoperative day 4 was 2399.0 IU/L (range, 819.2-7122.0 IU/L), similar to the median plasma amylase level of 1520.8 IU/L (range, 1015.3-4056.6 IU/L).
Median surgery time was 93.5 minutes (range, 46.0-140.0 minutes), and median transection time was 4.5 minutes (range, 2.0-26.0 minutes).
There was one postoperative wound infection.
There were no postoperative deaths or major complications.
During the histopathological study, the surgical margin of the remaining pancreas showed a common pattern with a central area of necrosis surrounded by granulomatous infiltrate and fibrosis.
Ductal obliteration was observed.
No purulent inflammatory infiltrate or abscesses were present.
Conclusion: Experimental findings suggest that performing pancreatic transection with Coolinside in a animal model of LDP is feasible and safe.
PMID: 22288086
Hepatic resection vs minimally invasive radiofrequency ablation for the treatment of colorectal liver metastases: a Markov analysis.
Current literature evaluating radiofrequency ablation (RFA) for treatment of colorectal liver metastases describes high-risk surgical candidates or patients with unresectable disease.
This creates bias when comparing RFA and hepatic resection.
A Markov analysis would define theoretical outcomes necessary for RFA to demonstrate equivalence to resection.
A multistate Markov decision analytic model was constructed.
Second-order Monte Carlo analysis was used to simulate a randomized controlled trial.
Sensitivity analyses were performed to determine the projected outcomes necessary for RFA to achieve equivalence with resection.
Tertiary care teaching hospital.
A systematic review of published literature was performed, identifying studies involving patients with colorectal liver metastases treated with RFA or resection.
Data were also included from a prospective database of patients undergoing laparoscopic RFA at our institution.
Percutaneous or laparoscopic RFA and hepatic resection.
Quality-adjusted life expectancy and quality of life-adjusted survival.
The base-case analysis (60-year-old man) demonstrated a mean ± SD quality-adjusted life expectancy of 5.67 ± 0.71 years and a 5-year survival of 38.2% following resection.
Based on current literature, the mean ± SD quality-adjusted life expectancy for RFA was 3.61 ± 0.49 years, with a 5-year survival of 27.2%.
Sensitivity analyses demonstrated that RFA becomes the preferred strategy if the median disease-free survival reaches 1.42 years.
When limited to patients from our institution with resectable lesions, the quality-adjusted life expectancy for RFA improved to a mean ± SD of 5.72 ± 0.50 years.
Classical Markov analysis demonstrates that based on current literature, resection is superior to RFA in the treatment of colorectal liver metastases.
When input is limited to laparoscopic RFA in patients with resectable lesions, projected 5-year survival is superior to that of hepatic resection.
PMID: 22288063
Epithelial inclusion cyst arising within an intra-pancreatic splenunculus.
An accessory spleen (splenunculus) may occur in up to 10% of the general population.
However, an epithelial inclusion cyst originating within an intra-pancreatic splenunculus is an extremely rare finding, with only twenty-two previous cases described in medical literature.
PRESENTATION OF CASE: A 51-year-old male presented to our institution for investigation of altered bowel habit.
Endoscopic ultrasound examination and CT scanning demonstrated an 18 mm cystic, well-demarcated lesion in the tail of the pancreas, resembling malignancy.
Following laparoscopic spleen-preserving distal pancreatectomy, histological analysis confirmed epithelial inclusion cyst arising within an intra-pancreatic splenunculus.
The pre-operative radiological identification of such cystic pancreatic lesions is challenging.
Surgical resection is usually performed for clinical suspicion of pancreatic malignancy.
Epithelial inclusion cyst originating within an intra-pancreatic accessory spleen is an extremely rare finding, which can mimic malignancy.
Nevertheless, it should be carefully considered in the differential diagnosis of cystic lesions of the tail of the pancreas.
PMID: 22288050
Double Hamoudi: A case report.
INTRODUCTION: Solid pseudopapillary neoplasms are rare pancreatic neoplasms with low malignant potential and favorable prognosis that are typically seen in young women.
PRESENTATION OF CASE: We report a case of two large solid pseudopapillary neoplasms in a 23-year old woman who was treated successfully with a total pancreatectomy.
CONCLUSION: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of two discrete solid pseudopapillary neoplasms in the same patient.
PMID: 22287840
Cell-delivered magnetic nanoparticles caused hyperthermia-mediated increased survival in a murine pancreatic cancer model.
Using magnetic nanoparticles to absorb alternating magnetic field energy as a method of generating localized hyperthermia has been shown to be a potential cancer treatment.
This report demonstrates a system that uses tumor homing cells to actively carry iron/iron oxide nanoparticles into tumor tissue for alternating magnetic field treatment.
Paramagnetic iron/ iron oxide nanoparticles were synthesized and loaded into RAW264.7 cells (mouse monocyte/ macrophage-like cells), which have been shown to be tumor homing cells.
A murine model of disseminated peritoneal pancreatic cancer was then generated by intraperitoneal injection of Pan02 cells.
After tumor development, monocyte/macrophage-like cells loaded with iron/ iron oxide nanoparticles were injected intraperitoneally and allowed to migrate into the tumor.
Three days after injection, mice were exposed to an alternating magnetic field for 20 minutes to cause the cell-delivered nanoparticles to generate heat.
This treatment regimen was repeated three times.
A survival study demonstrated that this system can significantly increase survival in a murine pancreatic cancer model, with an average post-tumor insertion life expectancy increase of 31%.
This system has the potential to become a useful method for specifically and actively delivering nanoparticles for local hyperthermia treatment of cancer.
PMID: 22287729
Oncogenic MST1R Activity in Pancreatic and Gastric Cancer Represents a Valid Target of HSP90 Inhibitors.
Aim: To evaluate the effects of HSP90 blockade by EC154 on the oncogenic receptor tyrosine kinase macrophage-stimulating 1 receptor (MST1R) in gastric and pancreatic cancer.
Impact of EC154 on signaling pathways was investigated by western blotting.
Cancer cell migration was evaluated in Boyden chambers.
Transcriptional regulation of MST1R was examined by using promoter-luciferase reporter constructs.
Effects on MST1R expression, and tumor growth were investigated in in vivo tumor models.
MST1R was expressed by cancer cells without evidence of MST1R mutations.
EC154 led to an effective inhibition of cancer cell growth, down-regulated MST1R, diminished its promoter activity, and disrupted oncogenic macrophage-stimulating protein 1 (MSP1) signaling.
Moreover, pro-migratory activities of cancer cells were dramatically inhibited.
In vivo, treatment with EC154 significantly reduced tumor growth, while MST1R expression was down-regulated.
Wild-type MST1R is an HSP90 client protein that can be targeted in gastrointestinal cancer using HSP90 inhibitors.
PMID: 22287597
Targeting cathepsins: a new glimmer of hope for pancreatic cancer therapy?
PMID: 22287227
Atorvastatin delays progression of pancreatic lesions to carcinoma by regulating PI3/AKT signaling in p48(Cre/+) .LSL-Kras(G12D/+) mice.
Pancreatic cancer is the one of most common causes of cancer deaths and has the worst prognosis.
Clinical observational studies suggest that statins may reduce the risk of pancreatic cancer.
The chemopreventive efficacy of the statin atorvastatin (Lipitor®) and the role of the phosphatidyl-inositol 3-kinase(PI3/AKT) signaling pathway were evaluated for the progression of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasms (PanINs) to pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) in conditional p48(Cre/+) -LSL-Kras(G12D/+) transgenic mice.
Six-week old male p48(Cre/+) -LSL-Kras(G12D/+) (20/group) mice were fed AIN-76A diets containing 0, 200, and 400 ppm atorvastatin for 35 weeks.
At termination, pancreata were evaluated histopathologically for PanINs and PDAC, and for various PI3/AKT signaling markers, and inflammatory cytokines, by immunohistochemistry/ immunohistoflourscence, ELISA, Western blotting and/or Reverse Transcription-PCR methods.
Control diet-fed mice showed 85% incidence of PDAC; whereas, mice fed with atorvastatin showed PDAC incidence of 65 and 35% respectively (p<0.0001).
Similarly, significant suppression of PanIN-3 (22.6%) was observed in mice fed 400 ppm atorvastatin.
Importantly, pancreata from atorvastatin-treated mice were 68% free from ductal lesions.
Furthermore, pancreas of mice administered with atorvastatin had significantly reduced expressions levels of PCNA, p2X7, p-ERK, RhoA, cyclin D1, survivin, Akt, pAKT, β-catenin, cyclin E, cdK2, and caveolin-1.
Also, atorvastatin-treated mice had shown dose-dependent suppression of inflammatory cytokines and a significant increase in tunnel-positive cells, p21 and PARP expression levels in pancreas.
Atorvastatin significantly delays the progression of PanIN-1 and -2 lesions to PanIN-3 and PDAC by modulating PI3/AKT signal molecules in a preclinical model, suggesting potential clinical benefits of statins for high risk pancreatic cancer patients.
© 2012 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
PMID: 22286958
D-Dimer as a Potential Prognostic Marker.
Malignant tumors are often accompanied by increased risk for procoagulant activity, thrombosis and embolism.
As a marker indicating such disturbancies is D-dimer, a product of fibrinolysis.
In this retrospective study almost 300 patients with malignant tumors were evaluated.
During LMWH treatment (as thromboprophylaxis) the highest frequency of VTE with worst prognosis occurred in pancreatic cancer (partly due to the late discovery) followed by ovarian, colonic and breast cancers.
Also, increased D-dimer level correlated with progression (stages) and high mortality rate.
Furthermore, D-dimer showed very similar or better prognostic activity than the clinically widely used classic tumor markers and suggested to use it as an additional value.
PMID: 22286382
Trefoil Factor Family Peptides in Normal and Diseased Human Pancreas.
OBJECTIVES: Trefoil factor family (TFF) peptides promote wound healing in the gut.
Recent evidence has suggested that TFF3 may be a pancreatic mitogen, an unusual role for TFF peptides.
We sought to clarify human pancreatic TFF and mucin expression and performed in vitro experiments to see how pancreatic cell lines respond to TFF3 in particular.
METHODS: Samples of normal and diseased pancreas (chronic pancreatitis, pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia, neuroendocrine tumors, and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma [PDAC]) were studied by immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization.
Pancreatic cell lines were challenged with TFF2 and TFF3 in wound and migration assays.
RESULTS: In normal islets, colocalization of insulin or glucagon with TFF3 was common.
All TFF messenger RNAs were seen in ductal epithelium.
Adenocarcinomas expressed all TFF messenger RNAs.
Normal ducts were mucin free; MUC5AC was strongest in pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia and chronic pancreatitis but was reduced in PDAC.
TFF2 induced Panc-1 migration and accelerated wound closure in Capan-2 and COLO-357.
Double immunohistochemistry for insulin or TFF3 and Ki67 colabeled only very rare islet cells.
TFF3-positive PDAC ducts showed some Ki67 colocalization.
CONCLUSIONS: No correlation between TFF3 or insulin and Ki67 was seen without ductal hyperplasia.
TFF2 may assist pancreatic tumor cell movement, but TFF3 may not be a pancreatic mitogen.
PMID: 22286380
External Validation of 2 Prognostic Indices for Patients With Advanced Pancreatic Cancer Treated With First-line Therapy.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study was to perform an external validation of 2 Asian prognostic indices for patients with advanced pancreatic cancer.
METHODS: A score was calculated in patients treated with frontline therapy derived from the factors Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status, localization of primary tumor, and C-reactive protein level according to Sawaki and from the factors Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status, pretreatment carcinoembryonic antigen, and presence/absence of distant metastasis following Ishii.
For analysis, the Kaplan-Meier method and the log-rank test were used.
An analysis of the Brier score was performed to determine how the prediction error was reduced by the introduction of prognostic factors.
RESULTS: For the Sawaki and Ishii score, 112 and 105 complete cases were available, respectively.
Based on the 3 prognostic categories according to the Sawaki score, median overall survival was 12.3, 9.9, and 5.9 months, respectively (not statistically significant).
By adapting the Ishii score to our population, 93% of the patients were allocated to the subgroup with "good" and only 7% to the subgroup with "intermediate" prognosis.
Corresponding median OS was 10.5 and 3.8 months, respectively (P = 0.0035).
CONCLUSIONS: Both Asian indices may not be suitable for defining different prognostic subgroups for a white population with advanced pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22286244
[Physiologic and molecular mechanisms linking physical activity to cancer risk and progression].
Physical activity is associated with a reduced risk of colon, breast, endometrial, lung, and pancreatic cancer.
Evidence for mediating molecular mechanisms from experimental studies substantially strengthens the causal inference for this relationship.
Randomized controlled trials indicate that exercise affects metabolic profiles, including hormone levels (estrogen, insulin signaling), inflammation (e.g., C-reactive protein), and adipokine concentrations (e.g., leptin).
The size of the effect depends frequently on concurrent changes in body composition.
There is also initial evidence for effects on immune function, oxidative stress, and possibly DNA repair capacity.
Finally, outdoor physical activity can directly increase 25(OH)-vitamin D levels, providing another potential mechanism for linking physical activity to cancer risk.
Randomized controlled studies with biomarker measurements are essential to increase evidence for causality and to identify the most effective intervention strategies and pharmacologic targets.
PMID: 22286027
Claudin-4 as therapeutic target in cancer.
BACKGROUND: Intercellular junctional complexes such as adherens junctions and tight junctions are critical regulators of cellular polarity, paracellular permeability and metabolic and structural integrity of cellular networks.
Abundant expression analysis data have yielded insights into the complex pattern of differentially expressed cell-adhesion proteins in epithelial cancers and provide a useful platform for functional, preclinical and clinical evaluation of novel targets.
SCOPE OF REVIEW: This review will focus on the role of claudin-4, an integral constituent of tight junctions, in the pathophysiology of epithelial malignancies with particular focus pancreatic cancer, and its potential applicability for prognostic, diagnostic and therapeutic approaches.
MAJOR CONCLUSIONS: Claudin-4 expression is widely dysregulated in epithelial malignancies and in a number of premalignant precursor lesions.
Although the functional implications are only starting to unravel, claudin-4 seems to play an important role in tumour cell invasion and metastasis, and its dual role as receptor of Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin (CPE) opens exciting avenues for molecular targeted approaches.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: Claudin-4 constitutes a promising molecular marker for prognosis, diagnosis and therapy of epithelial malignancies.
PMID: 22285669
High-dose Helical Tomotherapy with Concurrent Full-dose Chemotherapy for Locally Advanced Pancreatic Cancer.
PURPOSE: To improve poor therapeutic outcome of current practice of chemoradiotherapy (CRT), high-dose helical tomotherapy (HT) with concurrent full-dose chemotherapy has been performed on patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer (LAPC), and the results were analyzed.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: We retrospectively reviewed 39 patients with LAPC treated with radiotherapy using HT (median, 58.4 Gy; range, 50.8-59.9 Gy) and concomitant chemotherapy between 2006 and 2009.
Radiotherapy was directed to the primary tumor with a 0.5-cm margin without prophylactic nodal coverage.
Twenty-nine patients (79%) received full-dose (1000 mg/m(2)) gemcitabine-based chemotherapy during HT.
After completion of CRT, maintenance chemotherapy was administered to 37 patients (95%).
RESULTS: The median follow-up was 15.5 months (range, 3.4-43.9) for the entire cohort, and 22.5 months (range, 12.0-43.9) for the surviving patients.
The 1- and 2-year local progression-free survival rates were 82.1% and 77.3%, respectively.
Eight patients (21%) were converted to resectable status, including 1 with a pathological complete response.
The median overall survival and progression-free survival were 21.2 and 14.0 months, respectively.
Acute toxicities were acceptable with no gastrointestinal (GI) toxicity higher than Grade 3.
Severe late GI toxicity (≥Grade 3) occurred in 10 patients (26%); 1 treatment-related death from GI bleeding was observed.
CONCLUSION: High-dose helical tomotherapy with concurrent full-dose chemotherapy resulted in improved local control and long-term survival in patients with LAPC.
Future studies are needed to widen the therapeutic window by minimizing late GI toxicity.
PMID: 22284762
Laparoscopic resection of exocrine carcinoma in central and distal pancreas results in a high rate of radical resections and long postoperative survival.
BACKGROUND: The role of laparoscopic resection in patients with pancreatic cancer remains to be clarified, because previous reports have not clearly defined oncologic outcomes.
The objective of the present study was to investigate this question with the rate of R0 resection and long-term survival as endpoints.
METHODS: This retrospective observational study included prospectively collected data from 40 patients operated laparoscopically with curative intent for exocrine pancreatic malignancies identified among 250 consecutive patients undergoing laparoscopic pancreatic operations since 1997.
All 40 patients had histologically verified exocrine pancreatic carcinoma.
RESULTS: Ten patients (25%) with typical ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas were deemed nonresectable by laparoscopic staging.
Laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy was performed in 29 patients; 8 resections were combined with resections of adjacent organs and 1 removal of a malignant intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm what appeared to be ectopic pancreatic tissue.
In 1 patient, the resection was completed by hand-assisted technique, and 1 procedure was converted to open resection.
Postoperative morbidity was 23% (n = 7).
The median hospital stay was 5 days (range, 1-30).
The rate of R0 resections was 93%.
Postoperative 3-year survivals rates were 36% for the entire cohort (n = 30) and 30% in typical ductal adenocarcinoma (n = 21).
CONCLUSION: Laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy for exocrine pancreatic carcinoma is comparable with outcomes after open surgery and supports the concept that laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy is a safe, oncologic procedure.
PMID: 22284684
Analysis of Local Control in Patients Receiving IMRT for Resected Pancreatic Cancers.
PURPOSE: Intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) is increasingly incorporated into therapy for pancreatic cancer.
A concern regarding this technique is the potential for geographic miss and decreased local control.
We analyzed patterns of first failure among patients treated with IMRT for resected pancreatic cancer.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Seventy-one patients who underwent resection and adjuvant chemoradiation for pancreas cancer are included in this report.
IMRT was used for all to a median dose of 50.4 Gy.
Concurrent chemotherapy was 5-FU-based in 72% of patients and gemcitabine-based in 28%.
RESULTS: At median follow-up of 24 months, 49/71 patients (69%) had failed.
The predominant failure pattern was distant metastases in 35/71 patients (49%).
The most common site of metastases was the liver.
Fourteen patients (19%) developed locoregional failure in the tumor bed alone in 5 patients, regional nodes in 4 patients, and concurrently with metastases in 5 patients.
Median overall survival (OS) was 25 months.
On univariate analysis, nodal status, margin status, postoperative CA 19-9 level, and weight loss during treatment were predictive for OS.
On multivariate analysis, higher postoperative CA19-9 levels predicted for worse OS on a continuous basis (p < 0.01).
A trend to worse OS was seen among patients with more weight loss during therapy (p = 0.06).
Patients with positive nodes and positive margins also had significantly worse OS (HR for death 2.8, 95% CI 1.1-7.5; HR for death 2.6, 95% CI 1.1-6.2, respectively).
Grade 3-4 nausea and vomiting was seen in 8% of patients.
Late complication of small bowel obstruction occurred in 4 (6%) patients.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first comprehensive report of patterns of failure among patients treated with adjuvant IMRT for pancreas cancer.
IMRT was not associated with an increase in local recurrences in our cohort.
These data support the use of IMRT in the recently activated EORTC/US Intergroup/RTOG 0848 adjuvant pancreas trial.
PMID: 22284089
Clinical impact of K-ras mutation analysis in EUS-guided FNA specimens from pancreatic masses.
BACKGROUND: EUS-guided FNA (EUS-FNA) is considered optimal for differentially diagnosing pancreatic masses.
However, the sensitivity of EUS-FNA ranges from 65% to 95%, respectively, which requires improvement.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate clinical impact of K-ras mutation analysis in EUS-FNA specimens from pancreatic masses.
DESIGN: Prospective registration, single-center study.
SETTING: Tertiary referral center.
PATIENTS: This study involved 394 consecutive patients with pancreatic masses (307 pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas [PDACs], 47 pancreatic inflammatory lesions, and 40 other types of tumors) who underwent EUS-FNA and analysis of K-ras mutations.
INTERVENTION: EUS-FNA, Cycleave polymerase chain reaction.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS: Improvement of the diagnostic accuracy by K-ras mutation analysis; absence of K-ras mutations in non-PDAC masses.
RESULTS: K-ras mutations were detected in 266 of 307 PDAC aspirates (87%) and in 3 of 87 non-PDAC masses (3%).
K-ras mutations were detected in 18 of 39 patients (46%) who remained cytohistopathologically undiagnosed.
The sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive values, and accuracy of cytohistopathological and K-ras mutation analyses alone were 87%, 100%, 100%, 54%, and 89%, respectively, and, when combined, were 93%, 100%, 100%, 68%, and 94%, respectively.
Adding K-ras mutation analysis to standard cytohistopathological assessment increased the sensitivity and accuracy of EUS-FNA by 6% (P < .001) and 5% (P < .001), respectively.
LIMITATIONS: Single-center study.
CONCLUSIONS: K-ras mutation analysis may be helpful in patients with suspected PDAC yet inconclusive EUS-FNA findings.
K-ras mutations were extremely rare in pancreatic inflammation and other pancreatic tumors.
PMID: 22283686
Bone marrow-derived cells contribute to cerulein-induced pancreatic fibrosis in the mouse.
Bone marrow (BM) cells may transdifferentiate into circulating fibrocytes and myofibroblasts in organ fibrosis.
In this study, we investigated the contribution and functional roles of BM-derived cells in murine cerulein-induced pancreatic fibrosis.
C57/BL6 female mice wild-type (WT) or Col 1α1(r/r) male BM transplant, received supraphysiological doses of cerulein to induce pancreatic fibrosis.
The CD45(+) Col 1(+) fibrocytes isolated from peripheral blood (PB) and pancreatic tissue were examined by in situ hybridization for Y chromosome detection.
The number of BM-derived myofibroblasts, the degree of Sirius red staining and the levels of Col 1α1 mRNA were quantified.
The Y chromosome was detected in the nuclei of PB CD45(+) Col 1(+) fibrocytes, confirming that circulating fibrocytes can be derived from BM.
Co-expression of α-smooth muscle actin illustrated that fibrocytes can differentiate into myofibroblasts.
The number of BM-derived myofibroblasts, degree of collagen deposition and pro-collagen I mRNA expression were higher in the mice that received Col 1α1(r/r) BM, (cells that produce mutated, collagenase-resistant collagen) compared to WT BM, indicating that the genotype of BM cells can alter the degree of pancreatic fibrosis.
Our data indicate that CD45(+) Col 1(+) fibrocytes in the PB can be BM-derived, functionally contributing to cerulein-induced pancreatic fibrosis in mice by differentiating into myofibroblasts.
PMID: 22283657
The Use of Specific Monoclonal Antibodies to Target Immunogenic Tumor Membrane Proteins in Patients with Recurrent Pancreatic and Colon Cancer.
human pancreatic cancer were then immunized with NPC-1 monoclonal antibody targeting mutated MUC5ac.
FDA studies including tissue cross reactivity, biodistribution, and cytokine release assays indicated safety and efficacy of the monoclonals we have developed.
Submission of the IND allowed for initiation of the Phase I trial using mAb NPC-1 targeting pancreatic cancer when that antigen was found to be expressed.
PMID: 22281437
Autophagy and cancer cell metabolism.
Autophagy is a catabolic process involving lysosomal turnover of proteins and organelles for maintenance of cellular homeostasis and mitigation of metabolic stress.
Autophagy defects are linked to diseases, such as liver failure, neurodegeneration, inflammatory bowel disease, aging and cancer.
The role of autophagy in tumorigenesis is complex and likely context-dependent.
Human breast, ovarian and prostate cancers have allelic deletions of the essential autophagy regulator BECN1 and Becn1(+/-) and other autophagy-deficient transgenic mice are tumor-prone, whereas tumors with constitutive Ras activation, including human pancreatic cancers, upregulate basal autophagy and are commonly addicted to this pathway for survival and growth; furthermore, autophagy suppression by Fip200 deletion compromises PyMT-induced mammary tumorigenesis.
The double-edged sword function of autophagy in cancer has been attributed to both cell- and non-cell-autonomous mechanisms, as autophagy defects promote cancer progression in association with oxidative and ER stress, DNA damage accumulation, genomic instability and persistence of inflammation, while functional autophagy enables cancer cell survival under stress and likely contributes to treatment resistance.
In this review, we will focus on the intimate link between autophagy and cancer cell metabolism, a topic of growing interest in recent years, which has been recognized as highly clinically relevant and has become the focus of intense investigation in translational cancer research.
Many tumor-associated conditions, including intermittent oxygen and nutrient deprivation, oxidative stress, fast growth and cell death suppression, modulate, in parallel and in interconnected ways, both cellular metabolism and autophagy to enable cancer cells to rapidly adapt to environmental stressors, maintain uncontrolled proliferation and evade the toxic effects of radiation and/or chemotherapy.
Elucidating the interplay between autophagy and tumor cell metabolism will provide unique opportunities to identify new therapeutic targets and develop synthetically lethal treatment strategies that preferentially target cancer cells, while sparing normal tissues.
PMID: 22281375
"PancPro" as a tool for selecting families eligible for pancreatic cancer screening: An Italian study of incident cases.
BACKGROUND: PancPRO is a computer program that estimates the risk of pancreatic cancer for asymptomatic individuals based on a genetic model of susceptibility and the familial incidence of cancer.
AIM: To evaluate the distribution of the familial risk in a series of incident cases of pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The lifetime risk of pancreatic cancer was calculated by PancPro for a hypothetical 40-year-old son of 570 consecutive probands with pancreatic cancer.
RESULTS: The 570 risk values were included between 1% and 13%.
The distribution was bimodal, with the antimode located at risk=7.5%.
Considering a 10-fold risk over the general population as a threshold for including a subject in a surveillance program, 19 families (3.3%) would be selected, totalling 92 first-degree relatives with age >40 years.
CONCLUSIONS: PancPro is a valid instrument to rank families based on risk of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22280800
Role of parathyroid hormone-related protein in the pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrogenic response associated with acute pancreatitis.
Pancreatitis is a common and potentially lethal necro-inflammatory disease with both acute and chronic manifestations.
Current evidence suggests that the accumulated damage incurred during repeated bouts of acute pancreatitis (AP) can lead to chronic disease, which is associated with an increased risk of pancreatic cancer.
While parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) exerts multiple effects in normal physiology and disease states, its function in pancreatitis has not been previously addressed.
Here we show that PTHrP levels are transiently elevated in a mouse model of cerulein-induced AP.
Treatment with alcohol, a risk factor for both AP and chronic pancreatitis (CP), also increases PTHrP levels.
These effects of cerulein and ethanol are evident in isolated primary acinar and stellate cells, as well as in the immortalized acinar and stellate cell lines AR42J and irPSCc3, respectively.
Ethanol sensitizes acinar and stellate cells to the PTHrP-modulating effects of cerulein.
Treatment of acinar cells with PTHrP (1-36) increases expression of the inflammatory mediators interleukin-6 (IL-6) and intracellular adhesion protein (ICAM-1), suggesting a potential autocrine loop.
PTHrP also increases apoptosis in AR42J cells.
Stellate cells mediate the fibrogenic response associated with pancreatitis; PTHrP (1-36) increases procollagen I and fibronectin mRNA levels in both primary and immortalized stellate cells.
The effects of cerulein and ethanol on levels of IL-6 and procollagen I are suppressed by the PTH1R antagonist, PTHrP (7-34).
Together these studies identify PTHrP as a potential mediator of the inflammatory and fibrogenic responses associated with alcoholic pancreatitis.
PMID: 22278702
Intraductal Papillary Mucinous Neoplasms of the Pancreas: Making a Disposition Using the Natural History.
The process of Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN) follows the adenoma-to-carcinoma sequence.
If it progresses to malignancy about 5 years is required.
Even though the process is slow IPMN provides the clinician with the opportunity to avoid malignancy if the patient is at risk.
The natural history as observed through Kaplan Meier event curves for occurrence of malignancy show the process to malignancy is much faster (50% within 2 years) if pancreatitis-like symptoms are present or if the main pancreatic duct (MPD) is involved.
Almost all decisions to resect (95% in our experience) are based on the presence of symptoms or the MPD location.
Cyst size is used infrequently.
Every patient with an IPMN should always have a planned follow-up and the frequency depends on the perceived risk of malignancy-immediate imaging if becomes symptomatic to every 2 to 3 years if asymptomatic side branch lesions.
The natural history provides modern guidelines for making decisions in patients with a newly discovered IPMN.
PMID: 22278619
A one-stage operation for abdominal aortic aneurysm and intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas: report of a case.
Pancreatic surgery concomitant with abdominal aortic repair is rarely chosen due to concerns about prosthetic infection following pancreatic leakage and the poor prognosis of pancreatic neoplasms.
We herein report a successfully treated case of infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm and intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas treated by a one-stage operation.
A 75-year-old male with a history of cerebral infarction and chronic subdural hematoma was referred to our department with a pulsatile abdominal mass.
A 70-mm infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm with severe proximal neck angulation and a 28-mm multilocular cystic tumor with mural nodules in the pancreas body were detected.
Abdominal aortic repair with a prosthetic graft and distal pancreatectomy were performed simultaneously.
The postoperative course was mostly uneventful, and he was discharged to a rehabilitation facility.
PMID: 22277791
Gamma-Glutamyltransferase and Cancer Incidence: The Ohsaki Cohort Study.
Background: Although experimental studies have shown that gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT) has a role in tumor progression, epidemiologic evidence for a relationship between GGT and cancer incidence is limited.
The present study investigated the association between GGT and cancer incidence and assessed the role of alcohol consumption in this association.Methods: We examined a cohort of 15 031 Japanese adults aged 40 to 79 years who attended a health checkup in 1995 and were free of cancer at that time.
GGT was measured using the Szasz method.
The participants were then followed from 1 January 1996 until 31 December 2005, and cancer incidence was recorded by using the Miyagi Regional Cancer Registry.
Hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were computed for each quartile of GGT and compared.
The lowest quartile (GGT <13.0 IU/ml) was used as the reference category.Results: We documented 1505 cancers.
Among participants in the highest quartile (GGT ≥31.0 IU/ml), the multivariate HR for any cancer was 1.28 (95% CI, 1.08-1.53; P for trend, <0.001), the HR for colorectal cancer was significantly greater than unity, and the HRs for esophageal, pancreatic, and breast cancers were greater than unity but not significantly so.
This positive trend was observed only in current drinkers.Conclusions: Our findings suggest that there is a positive relationship between GGT and cancer incidence only for alcohol-related cancers in current drinkers and that the positive association of GGT with cancer incidence largely reflects alcohol consumption.
PMID: 22277584
A single nucleotide polymorphism of the cholecystokinin-B receptor predicts risk for pancreatic cancer.
There currently are no tests available for early diagnosis or for the identification of patients at risk for development of pancreatic cancer.
We report the discovery of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the cholecystokinin B receptor (CCKBR) gene predicts survival and risk of pancreatic cancer.
Growth of human pancreatic cancer is stimulated by gastrin through the CCKBR and an alternatively spliced isoform of the CCKBR gene called CCKCR.
One hundred and ten surgically resected benign and malignant pancreatic tissues as well as normal pancreas were prospectively evaluated for CCKBR genotype and protein expression.
Analysis demonstrated the expression of the spliced isoform, CCKCR, was associated with a (SNP) (C > A) at position 32 of the intron 4 (IVS 4) of the CCKBR gene.
Since the SNP is within an intron, it has not previously been identified in the GWAS studies.
Only patients with the A/A or A/C genotypes, exhibited immunoreactivity to a selective CCKCR antibody.
Survival among pancreatic cancer patients with the A-SNP was significantly shorter (p = 0.0001, hazard ratio = 3.63) compared with individuals with C/C genotype.
Other variables such as surgical margins, lymph node status, histologic grade or adjuvant chemotherapy were not associated with survival.
Furthermore, having one or two of the A-alleles was found to increase the risk of pancreatic adenocarcinoma by 174% (p = 0.0192) compared with the C/C wild type.
Cancer cells transfected to overexpress the CCKCR demonstrated increased proliferation over controls.
Genetic screening for this SNP may aid in early detection of pancreatic cancer in high risk subjects.
PMID: 22277035
[Neuroendocrine tumours of the upper gastrointestinal tract, characteristics and comparison of localization diagnostics].
In daily clinical practice it's important to think of neuroendocrine tumors, since their prevalence for the past 5 years exceeded even the common occurrences of stomach, esophageal and pancreatic cancers.
Patients diagnosed early and accurately with NET, have a greater chance for complete cure.
The diagnostic tools over the past century were significantly inefficient in diagnosing NET i.e.
(40% of tumors were not localized after USG, CT, MRI, AG investigations).
Until the past 2 decades that major turnover in diagnostic methods has been achieved.
In particular, the introduction of the somatostatine receptor scintigrafy (SRS) and endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) have increased sensitivity of localization diagnostics up to 90%.
Our work is to test the success of the localization diagnostics in 22 patients with surgically and histologically confirmed NET ofthe pancreas and duodenum.
These patients fulfilled jointly SRS, CT and/or MRI, but also classic USG and EUS.
From our comparison, clearly endoscopic USG is the most efficient tool with 90% sensitivity.
PMID: 22276603
HMGA1 and HMGA2 protein expression correlates with advanced tumour grade and lymph node metastasis in pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma follows a multistep model of progression through precursor lesions called pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN).
The high mobility group A1 (HMGA1) and high mobility group A2 (HMGA2) proteins are architectural transcription factors that have been implicated in the pathogenesis and progression of malignant tumours, including pancreatic cancer.
The aim of this study was to explore the role of HMGA1 and HMGA2 in pancreatic carcinogenesis.
HMGA1 and HMGA2 expression was examined in 210 ductal pancreatic adenocarcinomas from resection specimens, combined on a tissue microarray also including 40 examples of PanIN and 40 normal controls.
The results were correlated with the clinicopathological parameters of the tumours and the outcome of the patients.
The percentage of tumour cells showing HMGA1 and HMGA2 nuclear immunoreactivity correlated positively with increasing malignancy grade and lymph node metastasis.
Moreover, HMGA1 and HMGA2 expression was significantly higher in invasive carcinomas than in PanINs.
No, or very low, expression was found in normal pancreatic tissue.
Our results suggest that HMGA1 and HMGA2 are implicated in pancreatic carcinogenesis and may play a role in tumour progression towards a more malignant phenotype.
PMID: 22276460
[The evaluation of mortality in abdominal surgery of patients aged over 75. A retrospective study on a series of 111 cases].
Abdominal surgery of patients aged over 75 is a real challenge, regarding the risk-benefit ratio, especially in emergency cases.
The aim of the study was to assess the mortality in elderly patients admitted for abdominal surgical conditions.
A retrospective study was carried out on a series of 111 patients aged over 75 that died during hospitalization for abdominal diseases in the 3rd Surgical Unit during the period 2007-2010.
Data from the medical files, operating books and pathology reports were collected and analyzed.
Of the 61 cases admitted for benign conditions, 11 deceased prior to surgery due to high ASA risk.
50 patients underwent surgery, mainly on emergency basis (42 cases).
Most of the patients in this group suffered from intestinal infarction (22), followed by abdominal sepsis (16), intestinal obstruction (12) and digestive bleeding (10).
Resection followed by anastomosis was performed in 17 cases; of these, anastomotic fistula with sepsis developed in 7 cases (41%).
Malignant abdominal diseases were diagnosed in 50 patients, most frequently colorectal cancer (25) followed by gastric cancer (14), pancreatic cancer (5), billiary duct carcinoma (3), malignant ampuloma (2) and hepatoma (1).
In this group, 46 patients were operated on, mainly in emergency (35).
Of the 32 cases where resection was performed, anastomostic fistula with sepsis developed in 21 (65,6 %).
the main cause of death was abdominal sepsis due to anastomotic fistula following resections, for both benign and malignant condition.
PMID: 22275514
Imexon Induces an Oxidative Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress Response in Pancreatic Cancer Cells.
Oxidative protein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) requires strict regulation of redox homeostasis.
Disruption of the lumenal redox balance induces an integrated ER stress response that is associated with reduced protein translation, increased chaperone activity, and ultimately cell death.
Imexon is a small-molecule chemotherapeutic agent that has been shown to bind glutathione (GSH) and induce oxidative stress in tumor cells; however, the mechanism of cytotoxicity is not well understood.
In this report, we investigate the effects of imexon on the integrated ER stress response in pancreatic carcinoma cells.
Acute exposure to imexon induces an ER stress response characterized by accumulation of the oxidized form of the oxidoreductase Ero1α, phosphorylation of eIF2α, and inhibition of protein synthesis.
An RNA interference chemosensitization screen identified the eukaryotic translation initiation factor eIF2B5 as a target that enhanced imexon-induced growth inhibition of MiaPaCa-2 pancreatic cancer cells, but did not significantly augment the effects of imexon on protein synthesis.
Concurrent reduction of intracellular thiols with N-acetyl cysteine reversed imexon activity, however cotreatment with superoxide scavengers had no effect, suggesting thiol binding may be a primary component of the oxidative effects of imexon.
Moreover, the data suggest that disruption of the redox balance in the ER is a potential therapeutic target.
Mol Cancer Res; 1-9.
©2012 AACR.
PMID: 22275185
The RON-Receptor regulates pancreatic cancer cell migration through phosphorylation-dependent breakdown of the hemidesmosome.
The RON receptor tyrosine kinase is overexpressed and stimulates invasive growth in pancreatic cancer cells, yet the mechanisms that underlie RON-mediated phenotypes remain poorly characterized.
To better understand RON function in pancreatic cancer cells, we sought to identify novel RON interactants using multidimensional protein identification analysis.
These studies revealed plectin, a large protein of the spectrin superfamily, to be a novel RON interactant.
Plectin is a multifunctional protein that complexes with integrin-β4 (ITGB4) to form hemidesmosomes, serves as a scaffolding platform crucial to the function of numerous protein signaling pathways, and was recently described as an overexpressed protein in pancreatic cancer (1-2) .
In this study we demonstrate that upon exposure to its ligand, macrophage stimulating protein, RON binds to plectin and ITGB4, which results in disruption of the plectin-ITGB4 interaction and enhanced cell migration, a phenotype that can be recapitulated by shRNA mediated suppression of plectin expression.
We demonstrate that disruption of plectin-ITGB4 is dependent on RON and PI3 kinase, but not MEK, activity.
Thus, in pancreatic cancer cells, plectin and ITGB4 form hemidesmosomes which serve to anchor cells to the ECM and restrain migration.
The current study defines a novel interaction between RON and plectin, provides new insight into RON mediated migration and further supports efforts to target RON kinase activity in pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22273718
Possibility of immunotherapy for biliary tract cancer: how do we prove efficacy? Introduction to a current ongoing phase I and randomized phase II study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of adding Wilms tumor 1 peptide vaccine to gemcitabine and cisplatin for the treatment of advanced biliary tract cancer (WT-BT trial).
BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: In biliary tract cancer, few clinical studies evaluating immunotherapy have been reported.
A phase I and randomized phase II study with Wilms tumor 1 (WT1) peptide vaccine plus gemcitabine and cisplatin (GC) for chemo-naïve patients with unresectable or recurrent biliary tract cancer was started, because the overexpression of WT1 is seen in the majority of patients with this disease, encouraging the potential of WT1-based immunotherapy.
This trial was registered at the UMIN Clinical Trials Registry as UMIN 000004886.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The aim of this trial is to evaluate the efficacy and safety of the regimen and to determine whether the regimen should be compared with the current standard regimen, GC, in a subsequent phase III trial for patients with unresectable or recurrent biliary tract cancer.
Six patients in the phase I study and a total of 100 patients in the phase II study will be accrued over a 2-year period.
The patients in the phase II study will be randomized at a 2:1 ratio to receive GC either with or without WT1 peptide vaccine.
The primary endpoint of the phase II study is the 1-year overall survival rate.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first randomized trial to evaluate the use of immunotherapy in patients with advanced biliary tract cancer.
PMID: 22273698
IL-6 Stimulates STAT3 and Pim-1 Kinase in Pancreatic Cancer Cell Lines.
OBJECTIVES: We investigated the signaling pathways activated in response to interleukin 6 (IL-6) in pancreatic cell lines, with a focus on signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) and proto-oncogene serine/threonine-protein (Pim-1) kinase.
METHODS: Interleukin 6 receptor (IL-6R) expression and IL-6-induced cell signaling was measured by Western blotting in human pancreatic cell lines.
Cucurbitacin I was used as a pharmacological tool to investigate the role of STAT3 in Pim-1 activation.
Stably overexpressing Pim-1 kinase cell lines were characterized for their response to IL-6 in vitro and for their growth rate as flank tumors in scid mice.
RESULTS: Interleukin 6 receptor was expressed across multiple cancer cell lines.
In Panc-1 cells, IL-6 treatment increased expression of phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 and Pim-1 kinase.
Cucurbitacin I treatment alone increased pErk1/2 expression in wild-type and Pim-1-overexpressing cell lines and resulted in exaggerated Pim-1 kinase protein levels in control and IL-6-stimulated cells, suggesting that up-regulation of Pim-1 may be partially STAT3 independent.
Pim-1 overexpression did not significantly affect growth rate in vitro or in vivo in Panc-1 or MiaPaCa2 cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: Interleukin 6 activates STAT3 and stimulates Pim-1 kinase in pancreatic cell line models.
The regulation and consequence of Pim-1 expression seems to be highly context dependent.
PMID: 22272725
The Impact of the Activated Stroma on Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma Biology and Therapy Resistance.
Around 95% of patients diagnosed with pancreatic cancer will die of their disease within 5 years, three quarters within a year.
The major hurdle in improving prognosis is the lack of a therapeutic time window.
Early cancerous lesions are far beneath our threshold of detection.
Therefore, at the time of diagnosis even early (T1) tumors can be metastatic and resistant to conventional treatments.
Several therapies targeting epithelial tumor cells-all showing impressive results in vitro and in animal experiments-have failed to show relevant effects in clinical trials.
This discrepancy between experimental data and clinical reality results mostly from the inefficiency of our current experimental setups in recreating the tumor microenvironment.
Forming more than 80% of the tumor mass, the fibrotic stroma of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is not a passive scaffold for the malignant cells but an active player in carcinogenesis.
This component is mostly missing in the xeno-/allograft- mouse models.
Although tumors are bigger if stellate cells are co-implanted, due to the disproportionate cancer/stromal cell ratio and -possibly- too rapid tumor growth, the stromal reaction is much smaller than in human pancreatic cancer.
One the other hand, desmoplasia is present only in some of the genetically engineered mouse models.
Clinically, stromal activity of the pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma has as great an impact on patient prognosis as the lymph node status of the tumor.
The exact molecular mechanisms behind this observation remain obscure.
However, one possible fundamental biologic explanation could be that selective pressure applied by the stroma leads to the evolution of cancer cells.
Consequently, somatic evolution of invasive cancer could be viewed as a sequence of phenotypical adaptations to this barrier, highlighting the importance of the fibrotic tumor microenvironment in the behavior of pancreatic cancer.
In this review, the interaction of the epithelial tumor cells with the stroma in humans and in various animal models is scrutinized, and novel therapeutic options for uncoupling cancer-stroma interactions are discussed.
PMID: 22272632
Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) in portal blood in patients with pancreatic tumor--a single institution series.
Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) may play a significant role in the development of pancreatic cancer.
One of COX-2 main metabolites is prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), which is involved both in inflammation and carcinogenesis.
As PGE2 is inactivated in the lungs and the liver we assumed that the best medium to assess the level of PGE2 is not peripheral but portal blood.
Fifty-seven patients with pathologically verified diagnosis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC group, n = 38) and chronic pancreatitis (CP group, n = 19) were enrolled in this study.
Sample of blood from central line was collected before surgery.
Intraoperatively portal vein was identified and sampled.
PGE2 levels were determined using ELISA test.
All the patients were followed-up for 1-35 months.
PGE2 portal blood levels in patients with PDAC were higher than in patients with CP (190.55 ± 149.86 versus 120.23 ± 132.60; p = .04).
PGE2 concentration at a cut-off value of 94.46 pg/ml had a sensitivity of 91.67%, specificity of 50%, AUC = 0.631 (95% CI, 0.489-0.758).
The PGE2 portal blood levels in PDAC patients are higher than in those with CP.
The PGE2 portal concentration cannot be a single marker in diagnosing PDAC due to low specificity.
PMID: 22272248
Phase I evaluation of intravenous ascorbic acid in combination with gemcitabine and erlotinib in patients with metastatic pancreatic cancer.
Preclinical data support further investigation of ascorbic acid in pancreatic cancer.
There are currently insufficient safety data in human subjects, particularly when ascorbic acid is combined with chemotherapy.
14 subjects with metastatic stage IV pancreatic cancer were recruited to receive an eight week cycle of intravenous ascorbic acid (three infusions per week), using a dose escalation design, along with standard treatment of gemcitabine and erlotinib.
Of 14 recruited subjects enrolled, nine completed the study (three in each dosage tier).
There were fifteen non-serious adverse events and eight serious adverse events, all likely related to progression of disease or treatment with gemcitabine or erlotinib.
Applying RECIST 1.0 criteria, seven of the nine subjects had stable disease while the other two had progressive disease.
These initial safety data do not reveal increased toxicity with the addition of ascorbic acid to gemcitabine and erlotinib in pancreatic cancer patients.
This, combined with the observed response to treatment, suggests the need for a phase II study of longer duration.
Clinicaltrials.gov NCT00954525.
PMID: 22271799
Role of the ductal transcription factors HNF6 and Sox9 in pancreatic acinar-to-ductal metaplasia.
ObjectiveGrowing evidence suggests that a phenotypic switch converting pancreatic acinar cells to duct-like cells can lead to pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia and eventually to invasive pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
Histologically, the onset of this switch is characterised by the co-expression of acinar and ductal markers in acini, a lesion called acinar-to-ductal metaplasia (ADM).
The transcriptional regulators required to initiate ADM are unknown, but need to be identified to characterise the regulatory networks that drive ADM.
In this study, the role of the ductal transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear factor 6 (HNF6, also known as Onecut1) and SRY-related HMG box factor 9 (Sox9) in ADM was investigated.DesignExpression of HNF6 and Sox9 was measured by immunostaining in normal and diseased human pancreas.
The function of the factors was tested in cultured cells and in mouse models of ADM by a combination of gain and loss of function experiments.ResultsExpression of HNF6 and Sox9 was ectopically induced in acinar cells in human ADM as well as in mouse models of ADM.
HNF6 and, to a lesser extent, Sox9 were required for repression of acinar genes, for modulation of ADM-associated changes in cell polarity and for activation of ductal genes in metaplastic acinar cells.ConclusionsHNF6 and Sox9 are new biomarkers of ADM and constitute candidate targets for preventive treatment in cases when ADM may lead to cancer.
This work also shows that ectopic activation of transcription factors may underlie metaplastic processes occurring in other organs.
PMID: 22271412
Suppression of the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Inhibits Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition in Human Pancreatic Cancer PANC-1 Cells.
BACKGROUND: Aberrant expression of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) has been detected in pancreatic cancer; however, the mechanisms of EGFR in inducing pancreatic cancer development have not been adequately elucidated.
The objective of this study was to determine the role of EGFR in mediating epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in pancreatic cancer cells.
METHODS: Pancreatic cancer cell line PANC-1 was transfected with small interfering RNA of EGFR by use of a lentiviral expression vector to establish an EGFR-knockdown cell line (si-PANC-1).
PANC-1 cells transfected with lentiviral vector expressing negative control sequence were used as negative control (NC-PANC-1).
Scratch assay and transwell study were used to analyze cell migration and invasion.
Real-time PCR and Western blotting were used to detect the expression of EMT markers E-cadherin, N-cadherin, vimentin, and fibronectin and transcription factors snail, slug, twist1, and sip1 in PANC-1, NC-PANC-1, and si-PANC-1 cells.
Immunofluorescent staining with these antibodies and confocal microscopy were used to observe their cellular location and morphologic changes.
RESULTS: After RNA interference of EGFR, the migration and invasion ability of si-PANC-1 cells decreased significantly.
The expression of epithelial phenotype marker E-cadherin increased and the expression of mesenchymal phenotype markers N-cadherin, vimentin, and fibronectin decreased, indicating reversion of EMT.
We also observed intracellular translocation of E-cadherin.
Expression of transcription factors snail and slug in si-PANC-1 cells decreased significantly.
CONCLUSION: Suppression of EGFR expression can significantly inhibit EMT of pancreatic cancer PANC-1 cells.
The mechanism may be related with the down-regulation of the expression of transcription factors snail and slug.
PMID: 22271055
[Surgical therapy of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas].
Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN) of the pancreas constitute an increasingly recognized entity of cystic pancreatic tumors which are characterized by mucin production and epithelial growth within the pancreatic ducts and show a wide spectrum of morphologic variants.
They may arise in the main pancreatic duct, its major side branches or in both (mixed type).
Furthermore, IPMNs are considered as precursor lesions to pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
However, it is not clear what the time course of such potential neoplastic transformation might be and whether all lesions progress to malignant tumors.
As currently no diagnostic test can reliably differentiate between benign and malignant tumors the majority of newly diagnosed IPMNs should be surgically resected.
According to current treatment guidelines (Sendai criteria), only asymptomatic side branch IPMNs of less than 3 cm in diameter without suspicious radiologic features, such as nodules, thickness of the cystic wall or size progression, should be treated conservatively without the need for surgical resection.
Recently, this approach has become controversial due to a relevant number of reported Sendai negative IPMNs which revealed malignant transformation on final histological examination.
The focus of this review is on the surgical treatment of IPMNs with regard to the current state of knowledge.
PMID: 22271054
[Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasia: which findings support observation?].
On abdominal CT scans asymptomatic cystic lesions of the pancreas are accidentally detected in 1-2% of patients.
Congenital cysts and pancreatic pseudocysts account for two thirds of these lesions.
Pancreatic pseudocysts are a frequent complication of acute and chronic pancreatitis.
Among resected cystic neoplasms serous cystic adenoma accounts for 30%, mucinous cystic neoplasms for 45% and intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms for 25%.
The diagnosis of a cystic pancreatic lesion is usually made by diagnostic imaging.
Symptomatic lesions require definitive therapeutic treatment after appropriate diagnostic work-up.
In the diagnosis of asymptomatic cystic lesions several factors are important, among them whether the cyst is connected to the pancreatic duct (as in IPMN and pseudocysts), the size of lesion (for treatment indications) and whether nodules form in the wall of the cyst (a sign of potential malignancy).
EUS-guided fine needle aspiration of the cyst fluid adds to the discrimination between benign, premalignant and malignant cystic lesions.
Measuring lipase activity, CEA, viscosity and mucin as well as cytology can help in differentiating cystic lesions.
An algorithm is discussed for the differential diagnosis and for selection of the appropriate treatment for pancreatic cystic lesions, most of which never require surgery.
PMID: 22271032
Photodynamic therapy of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm.
Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) of the main pancreatic duct is usually treated by surgical excision of the affected pancreas.
Nonoperative ablative therapies have not been described.
We treated IPMN of the pancreatic duct with photodynamic therapy (PDT) in a patient who was a poor operative candidate.
Porfimer sodium was administered intravenously, and laser light was delivered by a diffusing catheter placed in the pancreatic duct during endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP).
Imaging and biopsy findings of IPMN resolved after PDT, and symptoms also resolved.
Metastatic cancer was diagnosed 2 years after PDT had been initiated.
Pancreatic PDT was well tolerated in this case, and may be a therapeutic option for selected patients with IPMN of the main pancreatic duct.
PMID: 22270965
Escin augments the efficacy of gemcitabine through down-regulation of nuclear factor-κB and nuclear factor-κB-regulated gene products in pancreatic cancer both in vitro and in vivo.
PURPOSE: Pancreatic cancer is an aggressive malignancy, which generally develops resistance to chemotherapy.
Agents that are safe and can sensitize cancer to chemotherapy are urgently needed.
Escin, a natural mixture of triterpene saponins isolated from Aesculus wilsonii Rehd, has been demonstrated to possess anti-cancer activity both in vitro and in vivo.
The anti-cancer activity of escin could be, in part, due to the inactivation of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB).
In contrast, chemotherapy including gemcitabine could activate NF-κB and lead to chemoresistance.
Here, for the first time, we investigated whether escin, via the inactivation of NF-κB, would potentiate the antitumor activity of gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer.
METHODS: Cell viability and proliferation, apoptosis, NF-κB activity and the expression of NF-κB-linked genes were all examined in vitro.
The antitumor effect of escin with or without gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer was also assessed using BxPC-3 xenografts subcutaneously established in BALB/c nude mice.
RESULTS: Escin not only potentiated the proliferation-inhibiting and apoptosis-inducing effect of gemcitabine in both BxPC-3 and PANC-1 cell lines in vitro, but also dramatically enhanced its suppressive effect on tumor growth in nude mice.
The mechanism is at least partially due to the inhibition of NF-κB activity and consequent inhibition of c-Myc, COX-2, Cyclin D1, Survivin, Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL, and the activation of caspase-3.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that escin, via inactivation of NF-κB, could potentiate the efficacy of gemcitabine in combating pancreatic cancer, which could be a novel and potentially important therapeutic approach for the treatment for pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22270149
Multimarker gene analysis of circulating tumor cells in pancreatic cancer patients: a feasibility study.
Objective: The aim of this study was to develop an immunomagnetic/real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay and assess its clinical value for the molecular detection of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in peripheral blood of pancreatic cancer patients.
Methods: The presence of CTCs was evaluated in 34 pancreatic cancer patients before systemic therapy and in 40 healthy controls, through immunomagnetic enrichment, using the antibodies BM7 and VU1D9 [targeting mucin 1 and epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM), respectively], followed by real-time RT-PCR analysis of the genes KRT19, MUC1, EPCAM, CEACAM5 and BIRC5.
Results: The developed assay showed high specificity, as none of the healthy controls were found to be positive for the multimarker gene panel.
CTCs were detected in 47.1% of the pancreatic cancer patients before the beginning of systemic treatment.
Shorter median progression-free survival (PFS) was observed for patients who had at least one detectable tumor-associated transcript, compared with patients who were CTC negative.
Median PFS time was 66.0 days [95% confidence interval (CI) 44.8-87.2] for patients with baseline CTC positivity and 138.0 days (95% CI 124.1-151.9) for CTC-negative patients (p = 0.01, log-rank test).
Conclusion: Our results suggest that in addition to the current prognostic methods, CTC analysis represents a potential complementary tool for prediction of outcome in pancreatic cancer patients.
PMID: 22269414
Percutaneous computed tomography guided cryoablation of the celiac plexus as an alternative treatment for intractable pain caused by pancreatic cancer.
Computed Tomography (CT)-guided percutaneous cryoablation was performed in a 43-year-old patient with intractable epigastric abdominal pain caused by advanced adenocarcinoma of the pancreas and extensive celiac trunk involvement.
Initial treatment with celiac plexus nerve neurolysis using local ethanol injection was unsuccessful.
A 17-gauge 17-cm cryoablation probe (Galil Medical Inc.
Plymouth Meeting, PA) was placed into the expected location of the celiac plexus through a left paraspinal approach under CT guidance and two cycles of freeze-thaw were performed.
Patient's pain decreased from 10 of 10 (subjective pain scoring using a visual analog scale; VAS; 0-10) to 3.
No post-procedure complication was observed.
His pain has remained stable after 6 months of follow up.
Percutaneous cryoablation appears to be an effective alternative to neurolytic celiac plexus block for palliative treatment of celiac plexus involvement.
Further study with larger number of patients is needed to evaluate the safety and efficacy.
PMID: 22266985
Mucin production determines sensitivity to bortezomib and gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer cells.
The prognosis of pancreatic cancer remains disappointing due to a high intrinsic resistance against chemotherapeutic agents.
Standard gemcitabine therapies have improved overall survival only marginally and recently, inhibition of the proteasome by the boronic acid derivative bortezomib has been introduced as a novel therapeutic strategy for solid and hematological malignancies including pancreatic cancer.
The mucus-producing pancreatic cancer cell line Capan-1 was cultured under standard conditions and treated with different concentrations of gemcitabine or bortezomib.
Mucus production was suppressed by siRNA-mediated silencing of apomucin genes.
Cell proliferation was determined by 3H-thymidine incorporation and apoptosis was quantified after propidium iodide staining by flow cytometry.
Apoptotic cell death was confirmed by TUNEL staining, determination of mitochondrial transmembrane potential and assessment of caspase 3/7 activity.
NFκB-activity was determined by EMSA.
The unfolded protein response (UPR) was further investigated by PCR, Western blotting and caspase 12 activity assays.
Silencing of MUC4 significantly reduced expression of mucins for up to 5 days after transfection.
While native cells showed an increased sensitivity to bortezomib treatment, silenced cells were more sensitive to gemcitabine treatment.
Bortezomib induces mitochondrial damage in native cells and also activates the UPR by splicing of Xbp-1 and induction of CHOP, which is significantly reduced by silencing of MUC4.
Our data suggest that mucinous pancreatic cancers are more sensitive towards proteasome inhibition by bortezomib and that alternative pathways of apoptosis are involved in cell death induction, while tumor cells with a low secretory activity show a better response to gemcitabine.
PMID: 22266848
MUC1 regulates PDGFA expression during pancreatic cancer progression.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) has one of the worst prognoses of all cancers.
Mucin 1 (MUC1), a transmembrane mucin glycoprotein, is a key modulator of several signaling pathways that affect oncogenesis, motility and metastasis.
Its expression is known to be associated with poor prognosis in patients.
However, the precise mechanism remains elusive.
We report a novel association of MUC1 with platelet-derived growth factor-A (PDGFA).
PDGFA is one of the many drivers of tumor growth, angiogenesis and metastasis in PDA.
Using mouse PDA models as well as human samples, we show clear evidence that MUC1 regulates the expression and secretion of PDGFA.
This, in turn, influences proliferation and invasion of pancreatic cancer cells leading to higher tumor burden in vivo.
In addition, we reveal that MUC1 overexpressing cells are heavily dependent on PDGFA both for proliferation and invasion, whereas MUC1-null cells are not.
Moreover, PDGFA and MUC1 are critical for translocation of β catenin to the nucleus for oncogenesis to ensue.
Finally, we elucidate the underlying mechanism by which MUC1 regulates PDGFA expression and secretion in pancreatic cancer cells.
We show that MUC1 associates with Hif1-α, a known transcription factor involved in controlling PDGFA expression.
Furthermore, MUC1 facilitates Hif1-α translocation to the nucleus.
In summary, we have demonstrated that MUC1-induced invasion and proliferation occurs via increased exogenous production of PDGFA.
Thus, impeding MUC1 regulation of PDGFA signaling may be therapeutically beneficial for patients with PDA.Oncogene advance online publication, 23 January 2012; doi:10.1038/onc.2011.651.
PMID: 22266188
Secreted 70kDa lumican stimulates growth and inhibits invasion of human pancreatic cancer.
Lumican expression in the stromal tissues of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) correlates with tumor invasion, and tends to correlate with poor prognosis.
We used gene transfection techniques to examine the biological roles of lumican secreted from PDAC cells.
Lumican-transfected PANC-1 cells secreted a 70-kDa lumican protein and had an active ERK pathway.
Transfection stimulated PANC-1 cell growth, increased cell adhesion to laminin, inhibited cell invasion, and decreased active matrix metalloproteinase-9.
Down-regulation of lumican using siRNA resulted in opposite cell behavior.
Thus, the 70-kDa lumican secreted by PDAC cells plays important roles in cell growth and invasion.
PMID: 22266185
Targeting heat shock factor 1 with a triazole nucleoside analog to elicit potent anticancer activity on drug-resistant pancreatic cancer.
Issued from a lead optimization process, we have identified a novel triazole nucleoside analog which elicits potent anticancer activity on drug-resistant pancreatic cancer.
Most importantly, this compound targets heat shock response pathways by down-regulation of heat shock transcription factor 1 and consequential down-regulation of multiple heat shock proteins HSP27, HSP70 and HSP90.
Down-regulation of these proteins caused the shut-down of several oncogenic pathways and caspase-dependent apoptosis resulting in a potent anticancer effect in vitro and in vivo.
These results demonstrate the potential rewards gained in searching for anticancer candidates with multimodal actions on heat shock response pathways via HSF1 down-regulation.
PMID: 22265421
Computational modeling of pancreatic cancer reveals kinetics of metastasis suggesting optimum treatment strategies.
Pancreatic cancer is a leading cause of cancer-related death, largely due to metastatic dissemination.
We investigated pancreatic cancer progression by utilizing a mathematical framework of metastasis formation together with comprehensive data of 228 patients, 101 of whom had autopsies.
We found that pancreatic cancer growth is initially exponential.
After estimating the rates of pancreatic cancer growth and dissemination, we determined that patients likely harbor metastases at diagnosis and predicted the number and size distribution of metastases as well as patient survival.
These findings were validated in an independent database.
Finally, we analyzed the effects of different treatment modalities, finding that therapies that efficiently reduce the growth rate of cells earlier in the course of treatment appear to be superior to upfront tumor resection.
These predictions can be validated in the clinic.
Our interdisciplinary approach provides insights into the dynamics of pancreatic cancer metastasis and identifies optimum therapeutic interventions.
PMID: 22265420
EMT and dissemination precede pancreatic tumor formation.
Metastasis is the leading cause of cancer-associated death but has been difficult to study because it involves a series of rare, stochastic events.
To capture these events, we developed a sensitive method to tag and track pancreatic epithelial cells in a mouse model of pancreatic cancer.
Tagged cells invaded and entered the bloodstream unexpectedly early, before frank malignancy could be detected by rigorous histologic analysis; this behavior was widely associated with epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT).
Circulating pancreatic cells maintained a mesenchymal phenotype, exhibited stem cell properties, and seeded the liver.
EMT and invasiveness were most abundant at inflammatory foci, and induction of pancreatitis increased the number of circulating pancreatic cells.
Conversely, treatment with the immunosuppressive agent dexamethasone abolished dissemination.
These results provide insight into the earliest events of cellular invasion in situ and suggest that inflammation enhances cancer progression in part by facilitating EMT and entry into the circulation.
PMID: 22265397
Understanding metastasis in pancreatic cancer: a call for new clinical approaches.
Although metastasis is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in patients with pancreatic cancer, the requisite events are currently unknown.
In this issue of Cell, Haeno et al.
and Rhim et al.
propose that metastasis occurs much earlier than previously anticipated, with clear implications for improving patient care.
PMID: 22265327
Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the biliary and pancreatic ducts-A shape shifting outlook into an increasingly recognized disease.
PMID: 22264964
Surgical technique and results of total mesopancreas excision (TMpE) in pancreatic tumors.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Retro pancreatic invasion is a major concern in pancreatic head carcinoma.
Posterior clearance has been recognized as an independent risk factor for disease recurrence and hence patient survival.
The aim of this study was to report a standardized method that ensures posterior clearance with Total Mesopancreas Excision (TMpE).
METHODS: Our procedure consisted in a posterior approach with cranio-caudal dissection at the origin of the superior mesenteric artery and the celiac trunk all along their right semi-circumference.
This allowed a complete clearance of retro pancreatic tissues with safe control of pancreaticoduodenal arteries at their origin.
RESULTS: Fifty-two consecutive pancreatic resections with TMpE were performed.
Sixteen cases were associated to vascular resection.
Pathology revealed an adenocarcinoma of the pancreatic duct, distal bile duct, periampullary and neuroendocrine carcinoma.
Mesopancreas was invaded by cancer in 12 cases, of these, 3 had invaded margins and 7 had a margin less than 1 mm.
Mesopancreas was the only site of tumour infiltration.
Applying the International Union Against Cancer criteria, an R0 resection was thus achieved in 42 patients.
CONCLUSION: Our procedure is feasible and safe in experienced hand.
It is a description of a standardized method for TMpE that clearly shows an advantage in improving posterior clearance and R0 resection.
PMID: 22264850
A preclinical and clinical review of aflibercept for the management of cancer.
Aflibercept, also known as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-Trap, is a recombinant, decoy receptor fusion protein, rationally designed to block angiogenesis by targeting not only all forms of VEGF-A, but also VEGF-B and placental growth factor.
It inhibits VEGF-induced angiogenesis in preclinical models.
In tumor models, aflibercept is associated with the reduction of tumor vasculature and size, and the inhibition of ascites formation.
Clinical studies are investigating the use of aflibercept alone and in combination with other antineoplastic therapies for the treatment of various cancers.
Phase I and II studies have provided proof of principle, and support the continuing clinical investigation of aflibercept.
Results from the phase III study, VITAL, of aflibercept in the second-line setting in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer [NCT00532155] demonstrated efficacy in progression-free survival and overall objective response rate, but overall survival was not significantly improved.
A full report awaits publication.
The Phase III VANILLA trial in metastatic pancreatic cancer [NCT00574275] showed no improvement in overall survival.
Most recently, the phase III VELOUR study [NCT00561470] of aflibercept plus FOLFIRI compared with placebo plus FOLFIRI in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer following failure of an oxaliplatin regimen showed significant improvements in overall survival, progression-free survival, and response rate and the complete results have been submitted to a peer-reviewed journal.
This review summarizes preclinical and clinical data for aflibercept and discusses future directions and clinical trials for this agent.
PMID: 22264792
KrasG12D-induced IKK2/β/NF-κB activation by IL-1α and p62 feedforward loops is required for development of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
Constitutive Kras and NF-κB activation is identified as signature alterations in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC).
However, how NF-κB is activated in PDAC is not yet understood.
Here, we report that pancreas-targeted IKK2/β inactivation inhibited NF-κB activation and PDAC development in Kras(G12D) and Kras(G12D);Ink4a/Arf(F/F) mice, demonstrating a mechanistic link between IKK2/β and Kras(G12D) in PDAC inception.
Our findings reveal that Kras(G12D)-activated AP-1 induces IL-1α, which, in turn, activates NF-κB and its target genes IL-1α and p62, to initiate IL-1α/p62 feedforward loops for inducing and sustaining NF-κB activity.
Furthermore, IL-1α overexpression correlates with Kras mutation, NF-κB activity, and poor survival in PDAC patients.
Therefore, our findings demonstrate the mechanism by which IKK2/β/NF-κB is activated by Kras(G12D) through dual feedforward loops of IL-1α/p62.
PMID: 22264027
Relative Quantification of Serum Proteins from Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma Patients by Stable Isotope Dilution Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry.
We report an innovative multiplexed liquidchromatography-multiple reaction monitoring/mass spectrometry (LC-MRM/MS)-based assay for rapidly measuring a large number of disease specific protein biomarkers in human serum.
Furthermore, this approach uses stable isotope dilution methodology to reliably quantify candidate protein biomarkers.
Human serum was diluted using a stable isotope labeled proteome (SILAP) standard prepared from the secretome of pancreatic cell lines, subjected to immunoaffinity removal of the most highly abundant proteins, trypsin digested, and analyzed by LC-MRM/MS.
The method was found to be precise, linear, and specific for the relative quantification of 72 proteins when analyte response was normalized to the relevant internal standard (IS) from the SILAP.
The method made it possible to determine statistically different concentrations for three proteins (cystatin M, IGF binding protein 7, and villin 2) in control and pancreatic cancer patient samples.
This method proves the feasibility of using a SILAP standard in combination with stable isotope dilution LC-MRM/MS analysis of tryptic peptides to compare changes in the concentration of candidate protein biomarkers in human serum.
PMID: 22263802
A novel fusicoccin derivative preferentially targets hypoxic tumor cells and inhibits tumor growth in xenografts.
Malignant cells in solid tumors survive under prolonged hypoxia and can be a source of resistance to current cancer therapies.
Tumor hypoxia is also associated with a more malignant phenotype and poor survival in cancer patients.
Recent progress in our understanding of the biology of tumor cells under hypoxia has led to increased attention on targeting hypoxia for cancer therapy.
We report here that a novel fusicoccin derivative (ISIR-042), but not its parent or related compounds such as fusicoccin A and cotylenin A, is more cytotoxic to hypoxic cells than to normoxic cells.
The hypoxia-induced accumulation of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1α and the phosphorylation of Akt were effectively inhibited by treatment with ISIR-042, suggesting that the preferential cytotoxicity toward hypoxic cells is associated with a reduction of HIF-1α and Akt activation.
ISIR-042 inhibited the growth of human pancreatic cancer MIAPaCa-2 cells while sparing normal endothelial cells, and significantly inhibited the growth of MIAPaCa-2 cells as xenografts without apparent adverse effects.
Pancreatic cancer cells expressing CD24 and CD44 exhibited characteristics of stem cells.
Treatment with gemcitabine increased this stem cell-enriched population, and this effect was significantly inhibited by ISIR-042, suggesting that ISIR-042 preferentially inhibits stem/progenitors in pancreatic cancer cell lines compared with chemotherapeutic agents.
These results suggest that ISIR-042 may be a potential therapeutic agent for hypoxic tumors such as pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22262868
Apparent diffusion coefficient measurements of the pancreas, pancreas carcinoma and mass-forming focal pancreatitis.
BackgroundMass-forming focal pancreatitis (FP) may mimic pancreatic cancer (PC) on magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, and the preoperative differential diagnosis is often difficult.
Recently, the usefulness of diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) in the diagnosis of pancreatic cancer has been reported in several studies.PurposeTo investigate if apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) measurements based on diffusion-weighted echo-planar imaging (DW-EPI) may distinguish between normal pancreas parenchyma, mass-forming focal pancreatitis, and pancreas carcinoma.Material and MethodsMRI was performed on 64 patients: 24 with pancreas carcinoma (PC), 20 with mass-forming focal pancreatitis (FP), three patients with other focal pancreatic disease as well as 17 controls without any known pancreatic disease.
Diffusion-weighted sequence with ADC maps and T2-weighted sequence for anatomical information was performed.
Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps were automatically created and analyzed using a dedicated user interface.
In the group with pancreas disease the abnormal parenchyma was detected by using T1- and T2-weighted images and the region of interest (ROI) was transferred exactly to the ADC map and the coefficients were registered.
In the control group the ROI was set to the head of the pancreas followed by a similar registration of the ADCs.ResultsADC values for mass-forming FP and PC differed significantly from ADC values for normal pancreas parenchyma (P = 0.001/P = 0.002).
Mean ADC values for mass-forming FP were 0.69 ± 0.18 × 10(-3) mm(2)/s.
ADC values for PC were 0.78 ± 0.11 × 10(-3) mm(2)/s, compared to ADC values of 0.17 ± 0.06 × 10(-3) mm(2)/s in the control group.
However there was no significant difference in ADCs between PC and mass-forming FP (P = 0.15).ConclusionADC measurements clearly differentiated between normal pancreatic tissue and abnormal pancreas parenchyma (PC and mass-forming FP).
However there is an overlap in values of PC and mass-forming FP, with the consequent problem of their correct identification.
PMID: 22262543
Cytotoxic Salan-Titanium(IV) Complexes: High Activity Toward a Range of Sensitive and Drug-Resistant Cell Lines, and Mechanistic Insights.
The cytotoxicities of highly efficient salan-Ti(IV) complexes toward a range of cell lines, including drug-resistant cells, are reported along with preliminary mechanistic insights.
Five salan-Ti(IV) complexes were investigated toward eight different human and murine cancer-derived cell lines, including colon, ovarian, lung, cervical, pancreatic, leukemic, skin, and breast.
The salan complexes are more active toward the cells analyzed than cisplatin and the known titanium compound (bzac)(2) Ti(OiPr)(2) , and no cell line resistant to the salan complexes was identified.
Moreover, the salan-Ti(IV) complexes are highly active toward both cisplatin-sensitive (A2780) and cisplatin-resistant (A2780CisR) human ovarian cancer cell lines.
Similarly, the salan complexes are cytotoxic toward multi-drug-resistant (ABCB1-expressing) mouse lymphoma cell lines HU-1 and HU-2.
Importantly, minimal or no activity was observed toward primary murine cells (bone marrow, heart, liver, kidney, spleen, and lung), supporting selectivity for cancer cells.
Additionally, the salan complexes maintain high cytotoxicity for up to 24 h following exposure to cell culture medium, whereas reference complexes (bzac)(2) Ti(OiPr)(2) and Cp(2) TiCl(2) rapidly lose much of their activity upon exposure to medium, within ~1 h.
The upregulation of p53 followed by cell-cycle arrest in G(1) phase is likely one mechanism of action of the salan complexes.
Taken together, the results indicate that these compounds are selectively toxic to cancer cells and are able to circumvent two independent mechanisms of drug resistance, thus expanding the scope of their potential medicinal utility.
PMID: 22262369
Autophagy mediates survival of pancreatic tumour-initiating cells in a hypoxic microenvironment.
Involvement of dysregulated autophagy in cancer growth and progression has been shown in different tumour entities including pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA).
PDA is an extremely aggressive tumour characterized by a small population of highly therapy resistant cancer stem cells (CSC) capable of self-renewal and migration.
We examined whether autophagy might be involved in survival of CSC despite nutrition and oxygen deprivation typical for the hypoxic tumour microenvironment of PDA.
Immunohistochemistry revealed that markers for hypoxia, CSC and autophagy are co-expressed in patient-derived tissue of PDA.
Hypoxia-starvation (H/S) enhanced clonogenic survival and migration of established pancreatic cancer cells with stem-like properties (CSC(high) ), while pancreatic tumour cells with less stem cell markers (CSC(low) ) did not survive these conditions.
Electron microscopy revealed more advanced autophagic vesicles in CSC(high) cells, which exhibited higher expression of autophagy-related genes under normoxic conditions and relative to CSC(low) cells as found by RT-PCR and Western blot analysis.
LC3 was already fully converted to the active LC3-II form in both cell lines as evaluated by Western blot and detection of accumulated GFP-LC3 protein by fluorescence microscopy.
H/S increased formation of autophagic and acid vesicles, as well as expression of autophagy-related genes to a higher extend in CSC(high) cells.
Modulation of autophagy by inhibitors and activators re-sensitized CSC(high) to apoptosis and diminished clonogenicity, spheroid formation, expression of CSC-related genes, migratory activity and tumourigenicity in mice.
Our data suggest enhanced autophagy levels may enable survival of CSC(high) cells under H/S.
Interference with autophagy activating or inhibiting drugs disturbs the fine-tuned physiological balance of enhanced autophagy in CSC and switches survival signalling to suicide.
Copyright © 2012 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
PMID: 22262202
Adjuvant chemotherapy for resectable biliary tract cancer: current status and future direction.
The prognosis of patients with biliary tract cancer remains unsatisfactory even with surgery owing to the high recurrence rate.
Therefore, an effective adjuvant chemotherapy is required to prolong survival.
A few randomized controlled trials in patients with limited biliary tract cancer have been reported, but the efficacy of adjuvant chemotherapy could not be clarified.
To date, effective adjuvant chemotherapy with evidence has not been established, and the standard therapy for patients with resectable biliary tract cancer has only been surgical treatment.
Recently, a number of newer toxic agents have been shown to induce response in patients with advanced biliary tract cancer.
Moreover, the morbi-mortality rate of operation for this cancer has been decreasing owing to advances in operative techniques and perioperative management.
Given this background, a number of adjuvant chemotherapy trials have been started using gemcitabine, capecitabine, S-1, and combination chemotherapy with platinum.
The results of these trials will be reported in the near future.
Overall, the important aspects of adjuvant chemotherapy for biliary tract cancer are to establish well-organized and active clinical trial study groups, to conduct well-designed multicenter randomized controlled trials, and to continue such trials without interruption in the future.
PMID: 22261919
ENETS Consensus Guidelines for the Management of Patients with Digestive Neuroendocrine Neoplasms: Functional Pancreatic Endocrine Tumor Syndromes.
No abstract available.
PMID: 22261872
ENETS Consensus Guidelines for the Management of Patients with Digestive Neuroendocrine Neoplasms of the Digestive System: Well-Differentiated Pancreatic Non-Functioning Tumors.
No abstract available.
PMID: 22261810
Integrative Survival-Based Molecular Profiling of Human Pancreatic Cancer.
PURPOSE: To perform an integrative profile of human pancreatic cancer (PDAC) to identify prognosis-significant genes and their related pathways.EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A concordant survival-based whole genome in silico array analysis of DNA copy number, and mRNA & micro RNA (miRNA) expression in 25 early stage PDAC was performed.
A novel composite score simultaneously integrated gene expression with regulatory mechanisms to identify the signature genes with the most levels of prognosis-significant evidence.
The predominant signaling pathways were determined via a pathway-based approach.
Independent patient cohorts (n=148 and 42) were then used as in vitro validation of the array findings.RESULTS: The composite score identified 171 genes whose expressions were able to define two prognosis subgroups (p=3.8e-5).
Eighty-eight percent (151/171) of the genes were regulated by prognosis-significant miRNAs.
The PI3K/AKT pathway and SRC signaling were densely populated by prognosis significant genes and driven by genomic amplification of SRC and miRNA regulation of p85α and CBL.
On TMA validation (n=148), p85α protein expression was associated with improved survival for all patients (p=0.02), and activated P-SRC (Y418) was associated shorter survival for patients with low grade histology tumors (p=0.04).
Interacting P-SRC and p85α revealed that they define two distinct PDAC patient subgroups (p=0.0066).
Furthering the importance of these pathways, CBL protein expression was associated with improved survival (p=0.03) on a separate cohort (n=42).CONCLUSIONS: These pathways and related genes may represent putative clinical biomarkers and possible targets of individualized therapy in the distinct patient subgroups they define.
PMID: 22261712
Role of epidermal growth factor receptor expression on patient survival in pancreatic cancer: a meta-analysis.
Background/Aims: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) has been considered as an attractive and potential therapeutic target of pancreatic cancer.
However, the clinical importance of EGFR expression remains controversial.
Methods: We performed a meta-analysis of previous studies to quantitatively review the effects of EGFR expression on survival in patients with pancreatic cancer.
Results: Eight studies (570 patients) were included to perform a meta-analysis of the survival results.
Overall, positivity for EGFR expression was 45.1% in pancreatic carcinoma.
The combined hazard ratio was 1.225 (95% CI 1.014-1.481; p = 0.035), indicating that EGFR expression has a significant impact on survival.
Heterogeneity was absent between studies and publication bias, which suggests that the summary statistics obtained may approximate the actual average.
Three trials reported a survival disadvantage for patients with EGFR expression while five trials reported no statistically significant difference.
Conclusion: EGFR expression is a poor prognostic factor for survival in patients with pancreatic cancer.
and IAP.
PMID: 22261592
Immunocompetent Orthotopic Pancreatic Cancer Murine Model: A Step in the Right Direction.
PMID: 22261338
Increased Ras GTPase activity is regulated by miRNAs that can be attenuated by CDF treatment in pancreatic cancer cells.
Ras gene is frequently mutated, and also associated with increased Ras expression and its GTPase activity (activity) in pancreatic cancer (PC), which could in part be due to deregulated expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) contributing to tumor aggressiveness.
Here we report, for the first time, that Ras expression and its activity were significantly higher in MIAPaCa-2 cells compared to COLO-357 and BxPC-3 cell lines, which was correlated with loss of let-7 family and miR-143 expression in MIAPaCa-2 cells compared to COLO-357 and BxPC-3 cells.
Whereas the expression of miR-21, a frequently up-regulated miRNA in solid tumors was up-regulated in MIAPaCa-2 cells and it was correlated with increased Ras expression and its activity.
The miRNAs, let-7i and miR-143 was found to target Ras, and forced re-expression of let-7i and miR-143 inhibited Ras activity, cell proliferation and colony formation in vitro.
We also found that the treatment of cells in vitro or treatment of MIAPaCa-2 induced tumors in vivo with CDF, a novel synthetic analog of curcumin, led to the re-expression of let-7 and miR-143, and down-regulated miR-21 expression, which was consistent with attenuation of Ras expression and its activity.
Moreover, re-expression of let-7iin vivo resulted in decreased tumor growth and Ras activity.
These results suggest that the loss of expression of let-7 and miR-143, and increased expression of miR-21 leads to increased expression of Ras and its GTPase activity, which could be attenuated by CDF treatment and, thus CDF could become a novel therapeutic agent for the treatment of PC.
PMID: 22261331
CEA promoter-regulated oncolytic adenovirus-mediated Hsp70 expression in immune gene therapy for pancreatic cancer.
Gene therapy is an important means for the comprehensive treatment of pancreatic cancer.
Challenges associated with gene therapy include control of vector security and effective genetic screening.
In this paper, a CEA promoter-regulated oncolytic adenovirus vector was constructed.
The reporter gene assay demonstrated that the viral vector was confirmed to have tumor-specific replication features.
In vitro cytology studies showed that the CEA promoter regulated the proliferation of the adenovirus vector carrying the Hsp70 gene (AdCEAp-Hsp70), which significantly increased the expression levels of Hsp70 in the CEA-positive pancreatic cancer cells, resulting in an overall reduction in the survival of cancer cells.
In the human pancreatic cancer Panc-1 xenograft model in immune deficient nude mice, the CEA promoter-regulated adenovirus AdCEAp-Hsp70 significantly inhibited tumor growth.
In the rat pancreatic cancer DSL-6A/C1 xenograft model in rats, the viral proliferation and high expression levels of Hsp70 promoted the interstitial infiltration of CD4+, CD8+ and gamma/delta T cells into tumors, induced host secretion of the cytokines TGF-β, INF-γ, and IL-6 and had a dual anti-tumor effects that completely inhibited the growth of pancreatic cancer.
The results demonstrated that the oncolytic adenovirus under the control of CEA promoter provides additional assurances regarding the safety and efficiency of cancer gene therapy.
This gene therapy model improves anti-cancer efficiency and has broad applications and developmental prospects.
PMID: 22260836
Morphometrical Differences between Resectable and Non-Resectable Pancreatic Cancer: A Fractal Analysis.
Background/Aims: Pancreatic cancer is a highly aggressive cancer with a rising incidence and poor prognosis despite active surgical treatment.
Candidates for surgical resection should be carefully selected.
In order to avoid unnecessary laparotomy it is useful to identify reliable factors that may predict resectability.
Nuclear morphometry and fractal dimension of pancreatic nuclear features could provide important preoperative information in assessing pancreas resectability.
Methodology: Sixty-one patients diagnosed with pancreatic cancer were enrolled in this retrospective study between 2003 and 2005.
Patients were divided into two groups: one resectable cancer group and one with non-resectable pancreatic cancer.
Morphometric parameters measured were: nuclear area, length of minor axis and length of major axis.
Nuclear shape and chromatin distribution of the pancreatic tumor cells were both estimated using fractal dimension.
Results: Morphometric measurements have shown significant differences between the nuclear area of the resectable group and the non-resectable group (61.9±19.8µm vs.
42.2±15.6µm).
Fractal dimension of the nuclear outlines and chromatin distribution was found to have a higher value in the non-resectable group (p<0.05).
Conclusions: Objective measurements should be performed to improve risk assessment and therapeutic decisions in pancreatic cancer.
Nuclear morphometry of the pancreatic nuclear features can provide important pre-operative information in resectability assessment.
The fractal dimension of the nuclear shape and chromatin distribution may be considered a new promising adjunctive tool for conventional pathological analysis.
PMID: 22260657
Epac2: a sulfonylurea receptor?
Sulfonylureas are widely used oral drugs in the treatment of diabetes mellitus.
They function by the inhibition of ATP-sensitive K+ channels in pancreatic β-cells, which are thus considered the 'classical' sulfonylurea receptor.
Next to the ATP-sensitive K+ channels, additional sulfonylurea-interacting proteins were identified, which might contribute to the physiological effects of this drug family.
Most recently, Epac2 (exchange protein directly activated by cAMP 2) was added to the list of sulfonylurea receptors.
However, this finding caused controversy in the literature.
The critical discussion of the present paper comes to the conclusion that sulfonylureas are not able to activate Epac2 directly and are unlikely to bind to Epac2.
Increased blood glucose levels after food intake result in the secretion of insulin from pancreatic β-cells.
Glucose levels are detected 'indirectly' by β-cells: owing to increased glycolysis rates, the ratio of cellular ATP/ADP increases and causes the closure of ATP-sensitive K+ channels.
In consequence, cells depolarize and voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels open to cause an increase in the cellular Ca2+ concentration.
Finally, Ca2+ induces the fusion of insulin-containing granules with the plasma membrane.
Sulfonylureas, such as tolbutamide, glibenclamide or acetohexamide, form a class of orally applicable drugs used in the treatment of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
PMID: 22260016
[Advances in the study of organic anion transporting polypeptide 1B3].
OATP1B3, a member of SLC superfamily, is specifically expressed on the sinusoidal membrane of hepatocytes and is considered to be important in hepatic drug elimination.
The overexpression of OATP1B3 was found recently in tumor tissues such as prostate, colon, and pancreatic tumors.
Sequence variations in SLCO1B3 gene, such as SNPs, have been described and a common haplotype consisting of 334T>G and 699G>A SNPs is related to altered transport characteristics of OATP1B3.
OATP1B3 is of relevance to drug metabolism through affecting alteration of hepatic concentration of endo- and xenobiotic compounds that interact with nuclear receptors such as PXR and CAR, and thereby directly alter the extent of target gene transcription, including major CYP isoenzymes such as CYP3A4.
This review will provide an overview of substrates and inhibitors of OATP1B3 and subsequently to assess the effect of genetic mutation on transport activity.
The studies linking OATP1B3 with cancer clinical outcomes are also discussed in this review.
PMID: 22259055
Clinical Utility of Functional Imaging with 18F-FDOPA in Von Hippel-Lindau Syndrome.
Context:Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) syndrome is an inherited cancer syndrome in which patients are at risk of developing multiple tumors in different organs.
6-L-(18)F-fluorodihydroxyphenylalanine ((18)F-FDOPA) positron emission tomography (PET) is a relatively new metabolic imaging tracer proposed for the use of localizing sites of neuroendocrine tumors.
There are limited data on the clinical utility of using (18)F-FDOPA PET for identifying neuroendocrine tumors in a high-risk population such as VHL.Objective:The aim of this prospective study was to evaluate the clinical utility of (18)F-FDOPA PET in patients with VHL-related tumors.Design:Radiological findings were prospectively collected from four imaging modalities: computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose PET, and (18)F-FDOPA PET.
(18)F-FDOPA PET findings were compared with those from other imaging modalities, as well as with clinical and laboratory data, and pathology findings if patients underwent an operation.Results:In 52 patients with VHL, 390 lesions were identified by computed tomography (n = 139), MRI (n = 117), (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose PET (n = 94), and (18)F-FDOPA PET (n = 40).
(18)F-FDOPA PET identified 20 pancreatic and 20 extrapancreatic tumors, including lesions in the adrenal gland (n = 11), kidney (n = 3), liver (n = 4), lung (n = 1), and cervical paraganglioma (n = 1).
These tumor sites were not seen by conventional imaging studies in 9.6% of patients and 4.4% of lesions.
Seven of eight patients who had an (18)F-FDOPA PET-positive lesion underwent resection, and pathology showed a neuroendocrine tumor.
Four of 10 patients with positive adrenal uptake had elevated catecholamine levels, and six of 10 patients had a discrete mass on axial imaging.Conclusions:(18)F-FDOPA PET is a useful complementary imaging study to detect neuroendocrine tumors in patients with VHL undergoing surveillance, especially in those suspected to have adrenal pheochromocytoma or unusual ectopic locations.
PMID: 22259024
Thromboembolism is common and influences prognosis in patients with pancreatic cancer, study reports.
PMID: 22258879
Robotic Anterior RAMPS in Well-Selected Left-Sided Pancreatic Cancer.
PMID: 22258856
Discovery of drugs that possess activity against feline leukemia virus.
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV) is a gammaretrovirus that is a significant cause of neoplastic-related disorders affecting cats worldwide.
Treatment options for FeLV are limited, associated with serious side effects, and can be cost-prohibitive.
The development of drugs used to treat a related retrovirus, HIV-1, has been rapid leading to the approval of 5 drug classes.
Although structural differences affect the susceptibility of gammaretroviruses to anti-HIV drugs, the similarities in mechanism of replication suggest that some anti-HIV-1 drugs may also inhibit FeLV.
This study demonstrates the anti-FeLV activity of four FDA approved drugs at non-toxic concentrations.
Of these, tenofovir and raltegravir, are anti-HIV-1 drugs while, decitabine and gemcitabine, are approved to treat myelodysplastic syndromes and pancreatic cancer, but also have anti-HIV-1 activity in cell culture.
Our results indicate that these drugs may be useful for FeLV treatment and should be investigated for mechanism of action and suitability for veterinary use.
PMID: 22258816
Defined Clinical Classifications Are Associated with Outcome of Patients with Anatomically Resectable Pancreatic Adenocarcinoma Treated with Neoadjuvant Therapy.
BACKGROUND: We previously introduced a classification system for patients with localized pancreatic adenocarcinoma that integrates assessments of tumor anatomy, cancer biology, and patient physiology.
By means of this system, we sought to analyze outcomes of patients with resectable anatomy but heterogeneous biology and physiology who were treated with neoadjuvant therapy.
METHODS: We evaluated consecutive patients (2002-2007) with anatomically potentially resectable cancers treated with chemotherapy or chemoradiation before potential pancreatectomy.
We compared clinical factors and outcomes of patients classified as having disease that was clinically resectable (CR; no extrapancreatic disease, preserved performance status); suspicion for extrapancreatic disease (BR-B); or marginal performance status or significant comorbidity (BR-C).
Patients with borderline resectable anatomy (BR-A) were excluded.
RESULTS: Resection rates for 138 CR, 41 BR-B, and 38 BR-C patients were 75, 46, and 37%, respectively (P < 0.001).
Metastases, detected during treatment in 23% of patients, were the most common contraindication to resection among CR (15%) and BR-B (46%) patients.
Performance status rarely precluded surgery except among BR-C (32%) patients.
Factors associated with selection against surgery were older age, poor performance status, pain, and therapeutic complications (P < 0.05).
The median overall survival of all patients was 21 months.
Resected and unresected BR-B and BR-C patients had median overall survival durations similar to those of resected and unresected CR patients, respectively (P > 0.22).
CONCLUSIONS: This system describes discrete clinical subgroups of patients with pancreatic cancer who have similar, potentially resectable tumor anatomy but heterogeneous physiology and cancer biology.
It may be used with neoadjuvant therapy to predict outcomes, individualize treatment algorithms, and optimize survival.
PMID: 22258815
A Novel Genetically Modified Oncolytic Vaccinia Virus in Experimental Models is Effective Against a Wide Range of Human Cancers.
BACKGROUND: Replication-competent oncolytic viruses have shown great promise as a potential cancer treatment.
This study aimed to determine whether a novel vaccinia virus, GLV-1h151, with genetic modifications enhancing cancer specificity and enabling virus detection, is effective against a range of human cancers and is safe when administered in preclinical models.
METHODS: GLV-1h151 was modified with deletion of thymidine kinase enhancing specificity and insertion of the green fluorescent protein (GFP) gene.
The virus was tested in several human cancer cell lines for cytotoxicity including breast, lung, pancreatic, and colorectal.
Virus replication was assessed via visualization of GFP expression and bioluminescence, and viral plaque assays.
Finally, GLV-1h151 was administered systemically or intratumorally in mice with pancreatic cancer xenografts (PANC-1) to assess virus biodistribution, toxicity, and effect on tumor growth.
RESULTS: GLV-1h151 effectively infected, replicated in, and killed several cancer cell types.
Detection and visualization of virus replication was successful via fluorescence imaging of GFP expression, which was dose dependent.
When administered intravenously or intratumorally in vivo, GLV-1h151 regressed tumor growth (P < 0.001) and displayed a good biosafety profile.
GLV-1h151 infection and replication in tumors was successfully visualized via GFP and bioluminescence, with virus presence in tumors confirmed histologically.
CONCLUSIONS: GLV-1h151 is effective as an oncolytic agent against a wide range of cancers in cell culture and is effective against pancreatic human xenografts displaying a good biosafety profile and ability to be detected via optical imaging.
GLV-1h151 thus adds another potential medium for the killing of cancer and detection of virus in infected tissue.
PMID: 22258068
A Deimmunized Bispecific Ligand-Directed Toxin That Shows an Impressive Anti-Pancreatic Cancer Effect in a Systemic Nude Mouse Orthotopic Model.
OBJECTIVE: The objective was to test a bispecific ligand-directed toxin (BLT), with reduced immunogenicity for enhanced efficacy in targeting orthotopic pancreatic cancer in vivo.
METHOD: A new BLT was created in which both human epidermal growth factor (EGF) and interleukin 4 cytokines were cloned onto the same single chain molecule with deimmunized pseudomonas exotoxin (dEGF4KDEL).
Key amino acids dictating B-cell generation of neutralizing antitoxin antibodies were mutated.
Bioassays were used to determine whether mutation reduced potency, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay studies were performed to determine whether antitoxin antibodies were reduced.
A genetically altered luciferase MIA PaCa-2 xenograft model was used to image in real time and determine effects on systemic malignant human cancer.
Bispecific ligand-directed toxins targeting B cells were used as specificity controls.
RESULTS: Deimmunized EGF4KDEL was significantly effective after systemic injection against established orthotopic MIA PaCa-2 pancreatic cancer and selectively prevented metastasis.
Mutagenesis significantly reduced antitoxin levels in vivo with no apparent activity loss in vitro.
The drug was effective against 3 human pancreatic cancer lines in vitro, MIA PaCa-2, SW1990, and S2VP10.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the metastatic nature of the MIA PaCa-2 orthotopic tumor xenografted in nude mice, high percentages of tumors responded to extended dEGFKDEL treatment resulting in significant anticancer effects and disease-free survivors.
PMID: 22253833
Human Vav1 expression in hematopoietic and cancer cell lines is regulated by c-Myb and by CpG methylation.
Vav1 is a signal transducer protein that functions as a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for the Rho/Rac GTPases in the hematopoietic system where it is exclusively expressed.
Recently, Vav1 was shown to be involved in several human malignancies including neuroblastoma, lung cancer, and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA).
Although some factors that affect vav1 expression are known, neither the physiological nor pathological regulation of vav1 expression is completely understood.
We demonstrate herein that mutations in putative transcription factor binding sites at the vav1 promoter affect its transcription in cells of different histological origin.
Among these sites is a consensus site for c-Myb, a hematopoietic-specific transcription factor that is also found in Vav1-expressing lung cancer cell lines.
Depletion of c-Myb using siRNA led to a dramatic reduction in vav1 expression in these cells.
Consistent with this, co-transfection of c-Myb activated transcription of a vav1 promoter-luciferase reporter gene construct in lung cancer cells devoid of Vav1 expression.
Together, these results indicate that c-Myb is involved in vav1 expression in lung cancer cells.
We also explored the methylation status of the vav1 promoter.
Bisulfite sequencing revealed that the vav1 promoter was completely unmethylated in human lymphocytes, but methylated to various degrees in tissues that do not normally express vav1.
The vav1 promoter does not contain CpG islands in proximity to the transcription start site; however, we demonstrated that methylation of a CpG dinucleotide at a consensus Sp1 binding site in the vav1 promoter interferes with protein binding in vitro.
Our data identify two regulatory mechanisms for vav1 expression: binding of c-Myb and CpG methylation of 5' regulatory sequences.
Mutation of other putative transcription factor binding sites suggests that additional factors regulate vav1 expression as well.
PMID: 22253347
Pancreatic endocrine neoplasms: a current update on genetics and imaging.
Pancreatic endocrine neoplasms are rare pancreatic tumours that may occur sporadically or as part of inherited syndromes such as multiple endocrine neoplasia-1 syndrome, von Recklinghausen disease, von Hippel-Lindau syndrome and tuberous sclerosis complex.
Recent advances in the genetics and pathology of hereditary syndromes have provided valuable insights into the pathophysiology and biology of sporadic pancreatic endocrine neoplasms.
Evolving molecular data on the biology of these neoplasms has the potential for diagnostic, therapeutic and prognostic use.
PMID: 22252658
Pancreatic cancer: the role of molecular markers in diagnosis and management.
Despite an annual incidence of just 40,000 new cases per year, pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAC) remains the fourth most common cause of cancer-related mortality in the United States, a fact indicative of the considerable diagnostic and therapeutic challenges posed by this malignancy.
The availability of increasingly sophisticated molecular techniques over the last decade has intensified the search for biomarkers not only to predict outcome and response to therapy in established pancreatic malignancy but also to identify premalignant pancreatic lesions in at-risk individuals.
A wealth of information regarding the complex sequence of genetic abnormalities in PAC has been gained from recent in-depth molecular analyses, and lately the role of epigenetic alterations in the development and maintenance of pancreatic carcinogenesis has been more clearly described.
In addition, advances in serum proteomic methods and the collection of circulating tumor cells offer hope for the development of noninvasive techniques for biomarker discovery.
At present, we are awaiting the development and validation of robust biomarkers suitable for clinical application in this disease.
Herein, we discuss the current status of molecular markers in the diagnosis and management of PAC and review potential clinical applications thereof.
PMID: 22251937
Small cell and large cell neuroendocrine carcinomas of the pancreas are genetically similar and distinct from well-differentiated pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors.
Poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinomas (NECs) of the pancreas are rare malignant neoplasms with a poor prognosis.
The aim of this study was to determine the clinicopathologic and genetic features of poorly differentiated NECs and compare them with other types of pancreatic neoplasms.
We investigated alterations of KRAS, CDKN2A/p16, TP53, SMAD4/DPC4, DAXX, ATRX, PTEN, Bcl2, and RB1 by immunohistochemistry and/or targeted exomic sequencing in surgically resected specimens of 9 small cell NECs, 10 large cell NECs, and 11 well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors (PanNETs) of the pancreas.
Abnormal immunolabeling patterns of p53 and Rb were frequent (p53, 18 of 19, 95%; Rb, 14 of 19, 74%) in both small cell and large cell NECs, whereas Smad4/Dpc4, DAXX, and ATRX labeling was intact in virtually all of these same carcinomas.
Abnormal immunolabeling of p53 and Rb proteins correlated with intragenic mutations in the TP53 and RB1 genes.
In contrast, DAXX and ATRX labeling was lost in 45% of PanNETs, whereas p53 and Rb immunolabeling was intact in these same cases.
Overexpression of Bcl-2 protein was observed in all 9 small cell NECs (100%) and in 5 of 10 (50%) large cell NECs compared with only 2 of 11 (18%) PanNETs.
Bcl-2 overexpression was significantly correlated with higher mitotic rate and Ki67 labeling index in neoplasms in which it was present.
Small cell NECs are genetically similar to large cell NECs, and these genetic changes are distinct from those reported in PanNETs.
The finding of Bcl-2 overexpression in poorly differentiated NECs, particularly small cell NEC, suggests that Bcl-2 antagonists/inhibitors may be a viable treatment option for these patients.
PMID: 22251549
Surgical potentialities for the treatment of pancreatic cancer.
Background/Aims: The incidence of pancreatic cancer is rising in all developed countries.
The aim of this study is to define the surgical options in the treatment protocols for this disease and to evaluate the effect of radical resections.
Methodology: One hundred ninty six consecutive patients with pancreatic cancer, operated in our department in a 4-year period, were evaluated.
Among them, 106 were radically operated and the rest underwent palliative procedures.
Results: Twentyeight of the presented patients underwent pancreatic resection with simultaneous vessle resection, venous in 26 cases and arterial in 2 cases.
Seventeen extended resections were made.
The rate of postoperative morbidity of the radically operated was 36.8% (39 patients).
Early bleeding (10 cases) and pancreatic fistula (10 cases) were the most common major complications.
The 3-year survival rate of the radically operated patients was 21.5% vs.
0% in these with paliative procedures.
The data analysis revealed no statistically significant difference in the survival of patients with modifications of pancreaticoduodenectomy, Whipple and PPPD (p=0.065).
Conclusions: The radical surgery ensures better long-term results.
We recomend this type of surgery to be concentrated in highly specialized centers in order to improve the outcome.
PMID: 22250636
The management of EGFR inhibitor adverse events: a case series and treatment paradigm.
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors are widely used medications in the treatment of cancers.
To review the cutaneous adverse events related to EGFR inhibitors.
A retrospective chart review of all cases referred for the management of cutaneous adverse events after the initiation of EGFR inhibitor therapy between the years of 2006 and 2009 was performed.
The study was approved by the institutional review board.
Four men and 11 women had cutaneous adverse events while receiving erlotinib (mean dose: 112.5 mg) for lung and pancreatic cancer.
The most common cutaneous adverse reaction observed was a papulopustular rash in 12 cases (80%).
Eczema and xerosis were the only findings in three patients, alopecia in one case, and nail changes in three cases.
The treatment modalities prescribed were doxycycline and topical antibiotics for the papulopustular rash; topical high potency steroids, tacrolimus, pimecrolimus, and moisturizers for xerosis and eczema; and cetirizine for the pruritus.
The paronychia was treated with warm soaks, topical steroids, and podiatry referral.
The majority of patients improved with symptomatic therapy, with the exception of one patient who experienced herpes zoster super infection and Stevens-Johnson syndrome.
The patient was hospitalized and required discontinuation of the erlotinib therapy.
The most common cutaneous adverse event in our cohort was papulopustular rash, followed by eczema and xerosis.
Patients were managed with symptom target therapy, and suspension of the EGFR inhibitor was rarely required.
As the use of EGFR inhibitors increases, it is important to promptly identify and treat adverse events.
Further studies are necessary to develop targeted therapeutic and preventative measures.
PMID: 22250111
Oncological efficiency analysis of laparoscopic liver resection for primary and metastatic cancer: a single-center UK experience.
To assess the oncological efficiency of laparoscopic minor and major hepatectomy for primary and metastatic liver malignant neoplasms.
Retrospective single-center study.
Tertiary university hospital.
One hundred twenty-eight patients undergoing 133 laparoscopic liver resections for malignant diseases.
Perioperative results and midterm overall and disease-free survival.
Surgical indications were colorectal carcinoma liver metastasis (n = 83), hepatocellular carcinoma (n = 18), neuroendocrine tumor metastasis (n = 17), non-colorectal carcinoma liver metastasis (n = 11), lymphoma (n = 2), and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (n = 2).
Two patients had 2-stage laparoscopic resections for bilobar colorectal carcinoma liver metastasis.
Three patients had repeated liver resection for recurrent colorectal carcinoma liver metastasis.
Forty-two major hepatectomies (32%) were performed.
The median operative time was 210 minutes (range, 30-480 minutes).
The median postoperative length of stay was 4 days (range, 1-15 days).
Seven patients required conversion to formal open surgery and 4 patients required conversion to a laparoscopic-assisted procedure.
Sixteen patients (13%) developed significant postoperative complications.
One patient (0.8%) died in the hospital.
In the 17 patients with neuroendocrine tumor metastasis, 6 (35%) had microscopic positive resection margins.
Most of these patients underwent debulking and cytoreductive surgery.
A microscopic negative resection margin was obtained in the remaining 112 of 116 resections (97%).
We recorded 2-year overall survivals of 80%, 77%, and 91% in the groups with colorectal carcinoma liver metastasis, hepatocellular carcinoma, and neuroendocrine tumor metastasis, respectively.
Our data support the safety and oncological efficiency of laparoscopic resection for liver malignant neoplasms.
Adequate patient selection and extensive experience in hepatic and laparoscopic surgery are essential prerequisites to optimize outcomes.
PMID: 22250057
Neoadjuvant therapy of pancreatic cancer: the emerging paradigm?
Pancreatic cancer remains one of the deadliest cancers due to difficulty in early diagnosis and its high resistance to chemotherapy and radiation.
It is now clear that even patients with potentially resectable disease require multimodality treatment including chemotherapy and/or radiation to improve resectability and reduce recurrence.
Tremendous efforts are currently being invested in refining preoperative staging to identify optimal surgical candidates, and also in developing various neoadjuvant or adjuvant regimens to improve surgical outcome.
Although at present no studies have been done to directly compare the benefit of neoadjuvant versus adjuvant approaches, accumulating evidence suggests that the neoadjuvant approach is probably beneficial for a subset of the patient population, particularly those with borderline resectable disease in which complete surgical resection is almost certainly unachievable.
In this article, we review the literature and rationales of neoadjuvant chemotherapy and chemoradiation, as well as their potential limitations and caveats.
We also review the pathological findings following neoadjuvant therapies, and potential surgical complications that may be associated with neoadjuvant therapies.
PMID: 22249738
Pancreatic cancer: Pancreatic cancer risk alleles identified in Chinese populations.
PMID: 22249732
Hepatitis: HBV infection increases risk of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22249272
Randomized phase II study of gemcitabine and S-1 combination versus gemcitabine alone in the treatment of unresectable advanced pancreatic cancer (Japan Clinical Cancer Research Organization PC-01 study).
PURPOSE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of the combination of gemcitabine (GEM) and S-1 (GS) in comparison to GEM alone (G) for unresectable pancreatic cancer.
METHODS: In this multicenter randomized phase II study, we randomly assigned unresectable pancreatic cancer patients to either the GS group or the G group.
The GS group regimen consists of intravenous 1,000 mg/m(2) GEM during 30 min on days 1 and 8, combined with 80 mg/m(2) oral S-1 twice daily on days 1-14, repeated every 3 weeks.
On the other hand, the G group regimen consists of intravenous 1,000 mg/m(2) GEM on days 1, 8, and 15, repeated every 4 weeks.
The primary endpoint was objective response rate (ORR).
Secondary end points included treatment toxicity, clinical response benefit, progression-free survival (PFS), and overall survival.
RESULTS: We registered 117 patients from 16 institutions between June 2007 and August, 2010.
The ORR of the GS group was 28.3%, whereas that of the G group was 6.8%.
This difference was statistically significant (P = 0.005).
The disease control rate was 64.2% in the GS group and 44.1% in the G group.
Median PFS was 6.15 months in the GS group and 3.78 month in the G group.
This was also statistically significant (P = 0.0007).
Moreover, the median overall survival (OS) of the GS group was significantly longer than that of the G group (13.7 months vs.
8.0 months; P = 0.035).
The major grade 3-4 adverse events were neutropenia (54.7% in the GS group and 22.0% in the G group), thrombocytopenia (15.1% in the GS group and 5.1% in the G group), and skin rash (9.4% in the GS group).
CONCLUSIONS: The GS group showed stronger anticancer activity than the G group, suggesting the need for a large randomized phase III study to confirm GS advantages in a specific subset.
PMID: 22249132
Overexpression of FOXM1 Is Associated With Poor Prognosis and Clinicopathologic Stage of Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma.
OBJECTIVES: Oncogenic transcription factor forkhead box M1 (FoxM1)-related clinicopathologic characteristics and prognosis of patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) have not been identified.
Our aim of studying FoxM1 expression level and survival rate of PDA is to determine whether FoxM1 is a valuable prognostic predictor for PDA patients.
METHODS: Expressional levels of FoxM1 mRNA and protein in paired pancreatic cancer lesions and adjacent noncancerous tissues were examined by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting.
FoxM1 expression was analyzed by immunohistochemistry in 80 patients with PDA.
The correlations between FoxM1 immunostaining levels and clinicopathologic factors, as well as the follow-up data of patients, were analyzed statistically.
RESULTS: FoxM1 protein and mRNA levels were elevated in pancreatic carcinoma lesions compared with the paired adjacent noncancerous tissues.
A high level of expression of FoxM1 was significantly correlated with clinical staging (P = 0.004), lymph node metastasis (P = 0.009), and histological differentiation (P = 0.017).
Patients with a higher FoxM1 expression had a significantly shorter survival time than those patients with lower FoxM1 expression (P < 0.001).
The multivariate analysis revealed that FoxM1 could serve as an independent factor of poor prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our finding indicates that FoxM1 could be used as prognostic molecular marker and therapeutic target for PDA.
PMID: 22248802
Bmi-1 promotes the chemoresistance, invasion and tumorigenesis of pancreatic cancer cells.
Background/Aims: The polycomb protein Bmi-1 plays oncogenic roles in various cancers.
Here we aimed to investigate the contribution of Bmi-1 on the malignant behaviors of pancreatic cancer such as chemoresistance, invasion and tumorigenesis.
Methods and Results: The MTT cell proliferation assay showed that shRNA mediated Bmi-1 knockdown and enhanced the chemosensitivity of pancreatic cancer cells to gemcitabine.
The transwell invasion assay showed that Bmi-1 knockdown inhibited the invasion of pancreatic cancer cells in vitro.
Notably, the reduced abilities of chemoresistance and invasion were associated with the transition from the mesenchymal phenotype to the epithelial phenotype of pancreatic cancer cells.
Moreover, Bmi-1 knockdown led to the inhibition of the PI3K-Akt pathway and disrupted the sphere-forming abilities of pancreatic cancer cells.
A nude mouse xenograft experiment demonstrated that pancreatic cancer cells depleted of Bmi-1 showed weak tumorigenicity in vivo.
Conclusion: Our data suggest that Bmi-1 plays an important role in the progression of pancreatic cancer and represents a novel target for antitumor therapy of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22248601
EUS or percutaneously guided intratumoral TNFerade biologic with 5-fluorouracil and radiotherapy for first-line treatment of locally advanced pancreatic cancer: a phase I/II study.
TNFeradeBiologic (AdGVEGR.TNF.11D) is a replication-deficient adenoviral vector that expresses tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) under the control of the Egr-1 promoter, which is inducible by chemotherapy and radiation.
This study was conducted to determine the maximal tolerated dose of TNFeradeBiologic with standard chemoradiotherapy and preliminary activity and safety of the combination in the treatment of locally advanced pancreatic cancer (LAPC).
TNFeradeBiologic was injected into locally advanced pancreatic carcinomas by using EUS or percutaneous administration once a week for 5 weeks together with 50.4 Gy radiation and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) 200 mg/m(2) daily over 5.5 weeks.
Dose levels from 4 × 10(9) to 1 × 10(12) particle units (PU) were studied.
Multicentered, academic institutions.
Fifty patients with LAPC were treated.
Doses of TNFerade Biologic were administered to patients.
Toleration of TNFerade Biologic was measured through toxicity and tumor response, by using the criteria of the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors and the World Health Organization, and was reviewed by a central radiology facility.
Overall survival and progression-free survival were also measured.
Dose-limiting toxicities of pancreatitis and cholangitis were observed in 3 patients at the 1 × 10(12) PU dose, making 4 × 10(11) PU the maximum tolerated dose.
One complete response, 3 partial responses, and 12 patients with stable disease were noted.
Seven patients eventually went to surgery, 6 had clear margins, and 3 survived >24 months.
This is a Phase 1/2 non-randomized study.
Intratumoral delivery of TNFerade Biologic by EUS with fine-needle viral injection or percutaneously, combined with chemoradiation, shows promise in the treatment of LAPC.
There appeared to be better clinical outcome at the maximal tolerated dose than at lower doses.
The dose of 4 ×10(11) PU TNFerade Biologic was generally well tolerated, with encouraging indications of activity, and will be tested in the randomized phase of this study.
Delivery of TNFerade Biologic did not interfere with subsequent surgical resection.
PMID: 22248600
EUS-guided FNA for diagnosis of solid pancreatic neoplasms: a meta-analysis.
Preoperative diagnosis of solid pancreatic lesions remains challenging despite advancement in imaging technologies.
EUS has the benefit of being a minimally invasive, well-tolerated procedure, although results are operator-dependent.
The addition of FNA (EUS-guided FNA) provides samples for cytopathologic analysis, a major advantage over other imaging techniques.
To determine the diagnostic accuracy of EUS-FNA for pancreatic cancer.
This is a meta-analysis of published studies assessing the diagnostic capability of EUS-FNA.
Relevant studies were identified via MEDLINE and were included if they used a reference standard of definitive surgical histology or clinical follow-up of at least 6 months.
Data from selected studies were analyzed by using test accuracy meta-analysis software, providing a pooled value for sensitivity, specificity, diagnostic odds ratio, and summary receiver operating characteristic curve.
Cytology results were classified as inadequate, benign, atypical, suspicious, or malignant.
Predefined subgroup analysis was performed.
Thirty-three studies published between 1997 and 2009 were included, with a total number of 4984 patients.
The pooled sensitivity for malignant cytology was 85% (95% confidence interval [CI], 84-86), and pooled specificity was 98% (95% CI, 0.97-0.99).
If atypical and suspicious cytology results were included to determine true neoplasms, the sensitivity increased to 91% (95% CI, 90-92); however, the specificity was reduced to 94% (95% CI, 93-96).
The diagnostic accuracy of EUS-FNA was enhanced in prospective, multicenter studies.
Publication bias was not a significant determinant of pooled accuracy.
This meta-analysis demonstrates that EUS-FNA is a highly accurate diagnostic test for solid neoplasms of the pancreas and should be considered when algorithms for investigating solid pancreatic lesions are being planned.
PMID: 22247824
Optimal combination of radiofrequency ablation with chemoradiotherapy for locally advanced pancreatic cancer.
Problems have been reported in the treatment of pancreatic cancer with radiofrequency ablation (RFA), such as the friability of the organ itself.
This report presents possible solutions to such problems.
Although our patient suffered from locally advanced unresectable pancreatic cancer, she remained well at 18 mo after RFA with no evidence of recurrence.
To ameliorate the side effects of RFA, after a palliative bypass procedure, the subject was treated with combined radiotherapy and chemotherapy.
After this regimen had been administered, a contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan confirmed that RFA is a viable approach to the treatment of pancreatic cancer as the chemoradiotherapy had resulted in marked tumor shrinkage and pancreatic fibrosis; i.e., sufficient tumor ablation was achieved without serious RFA-related complications, such as pancreatitis or pancreatic fistulae.
The present case suggests that RFA combined with preceding chemoradiotherapy is safe and effective for the palliative treatment of locally advanced pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22247788
Design, Synthesis and Biological Evaluation of a Series of Novel Axl Kinase Inhibitors.
The receptor tyrosine kinase AXL has emerged in recent years as an potential oncology target due to its over expression in several types of cancers coupled with its ability to promote tumor growth and metastasis.
In order to identify small molecule inhibitors of AXL, we built a homology model of its catalytic domain to virtually screen and identify scaffolds displaying an affinity for AXL.
Further computational and structure-based design resulted in the synthesis of a series of 2,4,5-trisubstitued pyrimidines which demonstrated potent inhibition of AXL in vitro (IC(50) 19 nM) and strongly inhibited the growth of several pancreatic cell lines.
PMID: 22247287
Jaundice in primary care: a cohort study of adults aged >45 years using electronic medical records.
BACKGROUND: Jaundice is a rare but important symptom of malignant and benign conditions.
When patients present in primary care, understanding the relative likelihood of different disease processes can help GPs to investigate and refer patients appropriately.
OBJECTIVE: To identify and quantify the various causes of jaundice in adults presenting in primary care.
DESIGN: Historical cohort study using electronic primary care records.
SETTING: UK General Practice Research Database.
METHODS: Participants (186 814 men and women) aged >45 years with clinical events recorded in primary care records between 1 January 2005 and 31 December 2007.
Data were searched for episodes of jaundice and explanatory diagnoses identified within the subsequent 12 months.
If no diagnosis was found, the patient's preceding medical record was searched for relevant chronic diseases.
RESULTS: From the full cohort, 277 patients had at least one record of jaundice between 1 January 2005 and 31 December 2006.
Ninety-two (33%) were found to have bile duct stones; 74 (27%) had an explanatory cancer [pancreatic cancer 34 (12%), cholangiocarcinoma 13 (5%) and other diagnosed primary malignancy 27 (10%)].
Liver disease attributed to excess alcohol explained 26 (9%) and other diagnoses were identified in 24 (9%).
Sixty-one (22%) had no diagnosis related to jaundice recorded.
CONCLUSION: Although the most common cause of jaundice is bile duct stones, cancers are present in over a quarter of patients with jaundice in this study, demonstrating the importance of urgent investigation into the underlying cause.
PMID: 22246854
Accumulation of pro-cancer cytokines in the plasma fraction of stored packed red cells.
Perioperative blood transfusion has been linked to decreased survival in pancreatic cancer; however, the exact causal mechanism has not been elucidated.
Allogeneic transfusions are known to expose patients to foreign cells and lipid mediators.
We hypothesize that stored packed red cells (pRBCs) contain pro-cancer cytokines that augment tumor progression.
We analyzed the plasma fraction of stored pRBCs for pro-cancer cytokines and evaluated the affect of both storage time and leukocyte reduction on these mediators.
Chemiarray™ analysis for pro-cancer cytokines was performed on the acellular plasma fraction of stored leukocyte-reduced (LR) and non-leukocyte-reduced (NLR) pRBCs at day 1 (D.1-fresh) and day 42 (D.42-outdate) of storage.
Elevated expression of monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), regulated on activation, normal T cell expressed and secreted (RANTES), angiogenin, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), epidermal growth factor (EGF), and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) was found.
Specific enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was performed for each of these factors in LR and NLR blood at D.1, day 28, and D.42.
Data were analyzed by ANOVA.
A p value ≤0.05 was considered significant; N ≥ 4 per group.
Migration assays were performed using inhibitors of EGF (gefitinib) and PDGF (imatinib) on murine pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells (Pan02) exposed to D.1 and D.42 LR and NLR plasma.
Proliferation assays were performed on Pan02 cells to test the inhibition of PDGF.
MCP-1 levels increased with storage time in LR blood, 86.3 ± 6.3 pg/ml at D.1 vs.
121.2 ± 6.1 pg/ml at D.42 (p = 0.007), and NLR blood, 78.2 ± 7.3 pg/ml at D.1 vs.
647.8 ± 220.7 pg/ml at D.42 (p = 0.02).
RANTES levels are lower in LR compared to NLR stored blood, 3.0 ± 1.9 vs.
15.8 ± 0.7 pg/ml at D.42 (p < 0.001), but similar in D.1 blood, 13.8 ± 1.8 pg/ml in LR vs.
12.0 ± 1.6 pg/ml in NLR.
Angiogenin levels were different between LR and NLR blood, 0 pg/ml (undetectable) vs.
44.2 ± 3.7 pg/ml (p < 0.001).
Storage time did not affect concentration.
TNF-α levels were not different between LR and NLR blood, and there was no storage time effect on concentration.
EGF and PDGF levels increased with storage time in NLR blood only, 216.4 ± 3.8 pg/ml at D.1 vs.
1,436.4 ± 238.6 pg/ml at D.42 for EGF (p = 0.001), and 61.6 ± 6.0 pg/ml at D.1 vs.
76.5 ± 1.7 pg/ml at D.42 (p = 0.003) for PDGF.
Inhibition of EGF reduced migration in Pan02 cells treated with D.42 NLR blood, 245.9 ± 11.2 vs.
164.6 ± 10.6 cells/hpf (p < 0.001).
Inhibition of PDGF had no effect on Pan02 migration and reduced cell proliferation in cells treated with D.42 NLR, 181.1 ± 1.5% over control vs.
157.5 ± 2.1% (p < 0.001).
Pro-cancer cytokines that can augment tumor progression were identified in pRBCs.
Some of these factors are present in fresh blood.
The soluble factors identified herein may represent possible therapeutic targets to offset negative effects of transfusion.
These data stress the need for efforts in cancer patients to reduce transfusion requirements if needed.
PMID: 22246618
Uterine Serous Carcinoma: Increased Familial Risk for Lynch-Associated Malignancies.
Serous uterine cancer is not a feature of any known hereditary cancer syndrome.
This study evaluated familial risk of cancers for patients with serous uterine carcinoma, focusing on Lynch syndrome malignancies.
Fifty serous or mixed serous endometrial carcinoma cases were prospectively enrolled.
Pedigrees were developed for 29 probands and tumors were assessed for DNA mismatch repair (MMR) abnormalities.
Standardized incidence ratios for cancers in relatives were estimated.
A second-stage analysis was undertaken using data from Gynecologic Oncology Group (GOG)-210.
Incidence data for cancers reported in relatives of 348 patients with serous and mixed epithelial and 624 patients with endometrioid carcinoma were compared.
Nineteen of 29 (65.5%) patients in the single-institution series reported a Lynch-related cancer in relatives.
Endometrial and ovarian cancers were significantly overrepresented and a high number of probands (6 of 29, 20.7%) reported pancreatic cancers.
None of the probands' tumors had DNA MMR abnormalities.
There was no difference in endometrial or ovarian cancer incidence in relatives of serous and endometrioid cancer probands in the case-control study.
Pancreatic cancers were, however, significantly more common in relatives of patients with serous cancer [OR, 2.39; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.06-5.38].
We identified an excess of endometrial, ovarian, and pancreatic cancers in relatives of patients with serous cancer in a single-institution study.
Follow-up studies suggest that only pancreatic cancers are overrepresented in relatives.
DNA MMR defects in familial clustering of pancreatic and other Lynch-associated malignancies are unlikely.
The excess of pancreatic cancers in relatives may reflect an as yet unidentified hereditary syndrome that includes uterine serous cancers.
Cancer Prev Res; 5(3); 1-9.
©2012 AACR.
PMID: 22246595
Lymphangiogenesis and biological behavior in pancreatic carcinoma and other pancreatic tumors.
Lymphatic vessels in primary tumor tissue play an important role in lymphatic metastasis.
Lymphatic metastasis of malignant neoplasms is significantly related to prognosis, influencing both recurrence and survival.
The aim of this study was to investigate the correlation of intra-tumoral lymphatic vessel density (iLVD) and peri-tumoral lymphatic vessel density (pLVD) with biological behavior and prognostic parameters in pancreatic carcinoma (PC) and other pancreatic tumors.
Lymphangiogenesis was examined using the D2-40 monoclonal antibody in 33 cases of PC, 7 neuroendocrine tumors of the pancreas (NETP), 7 solid pseudopapillary tumors of the pancreas (SPTP) and 3 cystadenomas of the pancreas (CP).
Positively-stained microvessels were counted at magnification x400 in dense lymphatic vascular foci (hotspots).
The LVD of PC was compared to 3 other pancreatic tumors.
The relationships among the LVD, the extent of differentiation, lymphatic invasion, lymph node metastasis and other clinicopathological parameters of PC were analyzed.
There was no difference in the iLVD among PC, NETP, SPTP and CP.
The pLVD of NETP was markedly higher than that of PC, SPTP and CP.
The pLVD of PC was significantly higher than that of SPTP and CP, but there was no difference between SPTP and CP.
The pLVD of PC was significantly associated with the extent of differentiation, lymphatic invasion and lymph node metastasis, whereas it was not associated with age, gender, tumor size, tumor location and peri-pancreatic invasion.
The iLVD of PC was not correlated with these clinicopathological parameters.
There was no difference in iLVD and no marked difference in pLVD among the pancreatic tumors.
Detection of pLVD is of greater importance than detecting iLVD in these pancreatic tumors, as pLVD can be utilized for the prediction of lymph node metastasis, thus aiding in the evaluation of patient prognosis.
PMID: 22246533
Nestin as a novel therapeutic target for pancreatic cancer via tumor angiogenesis.
The class VI intermediate filament protein, nestin is reported to be a progenitor cell marker in various tissues.
In the present study, we analyzed the expression and roles of nestin in angiogenesis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas, and determined whether nestin is a potential target for inhibiting tumor angiogenesis using a gene silencing strategy.
Nestin expression was detected only in small vessels, whereas CD34, CD31 and factor VIII were also expressed in large-sized blood vessels in PDAC.
The number of nestin-positive vessels was approximately 20% the number of CD34-positive vessels, and the average dimension of nestin-positive vessels was approximately 75% that of CD34-positive vessels.
The PCNA labeling indices of nestin-positive vessels were higher than those of CD34-positive vessels and nestin-negative vessels.
Reducing nestin expression by use of siRNA targeting nestin transcripts inhibited growth of the vascular endothelial cell lines, but there was no difference in cell motility.
In xenograft models, administration of siRNA targeting mouse-nestin suppressed subcutaneous human pancreatic cancer cell growth in nude mice.
In conclusion, nestin was expressed in small proliferating blood vessels in pancreatic cancer tissues and may be a useful marker of angiogenesis in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma tissues.
Furthermore, nestin is a potential novel therapeutic target in pancreatic cancers to inhibit tumor angiogenesis.
PMID: 22246317
Heat shock protein 90 is a promising target for effective growth inhibition of gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors.
Treatment of gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (GEP-NET) is still unsatisfactory and innovative therapeutic approaches are urgently needed.
Heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) is overexpressed in a wide range of tumor types and is an emerging target for the treatment of cancer.
However, the potential activity of Hsp90 inhibitors in GEP-NET has not yet been investigated.
We studied the antineoplastic activity of the Hsp90 inhibitor IPI-504 on GEP‑NET cells, and characterized its mechanism of action.
In human insulinoma (CM) and pancreatic carcinoid (BON) cells IPI-504 induced a dose-dependent growth inhibition by almost 70%.
The antiproliferative effect of IPI-504 correlated with a reduction in protein levels of the IGF-1 receptor.
Additionally, several proteins of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway, downstream of IGF-1 receptor activation in GEP-NETs, were downregulated as a consequence of Hsp90 inhibition.
Combination treatment of IPI-504 with mTOR- or AKT-inhibitors led to additive antiproliferative effects.
In addition, effects of IGF-1 receptor tyrosine kinase inhibition were strongly enhanced by IPI-504.
Cancer gene expression profiling and FACS analysis revealed that IPI-504 antiproliferative effects were due to both induction of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.
A modified chick chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) assay confirmed the antineoplastic activity of IPI-504 in GEP-NETs in vivo.
In conclusion, this study showed that Hsp90 inhibition may be an attractive target for innovative GEP-NET treatment alone or in combination with either IGF-1R or mTOR inhibitors.
PMID: 22246279
Racial disparities in treatment for pancreatic cancer and impact on survival: a population-based analysis.
PURPOSE: Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related deaths in both men and women.
Mortality from pancreatic cancer is higher amongst blacks compared to other races.
We performed this analysis with the aim of examining racial disparity for receipt pancreatic cancer treatment and its association with survival.
METHODS: Using the surveillance, epidemiology, and end results (SEER) database from 1988 to 2008, cases with locoregional pancreatic cancer were analysed.
Kaplan-Meier survival curves were assessed to assess the survival amongst various races.
Cox proportional hazard model was built to assess the impact of receipt of treatment on the racial disparity in survival.
RESULTS: Of 16,282 cases with locoregional pancreatic cancer, 1,806 (11%) occurred in blacks.
Median survival was 8-9 months with poorest survival in blacks.
Blacks and Hispanics received radiation treatment less often compared to other races.
On Cox regression logistic regression analysis, blacks had 20% poorer survival compared to whites.
Treatment for pancreatic cancer explained only one-fourth of this poorer survival.
CONCLUSION: Blacks have worst survival from locoregional pancreatic cancer.
Receiving treatment for pancreatic cancer only explains 25% of the poorer survival amongst blacks, suggesting role of other factors.
Studies are suggested to (a) identify barriers in receipt of treatment for pancreatic cancer amongst blacks and (b) to assess role of genetic and other factors to examine racial differences in survival.
PMID: 22246215
Assessment of the novel tubulin-binding agent EHT 6706 in combination with ionizing radiation or chemotherapy.
The potential of EHT 6706, a novel tubulin-binding agent, was investigated in combination with ionizing radiation (IR) and with conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy agents.
Cell proliferation, cell cycle, apoptosis and clonogenic assays were performed in five human cancer cell lines: H460 (non small cell lung carcinoma, NSCLC), HCT116 and HCT116 p53-/- (colorectal cancer), MDA-MB-231 (breast cancer), and MiaPaca2 cells (pancreatic cancer).
The drug inhibited cell proliferation in all cell lines.
This effect was associated with G2/M arrest and activation of apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner.
The drug was then tested in combination with chemotherapy and IR in vitro.
Effects on proliferation and clonogenic survival were analyzed.
EHT 6706 treatment inhibited clonogenic survival synergistically with IR in H460 and MiaPaca2 cell lines.
In the remaining cell lines, the effects of EHT 6706 and IR were additive.
For H460 and MiaPaca2 cell lines, the highest effect was seen when cells were exposed for 20 h to EHT 6706 before being irradiated.
EHT 6706 also exerted additive inhibition of proliferation when given in combination with conventional chemotherapy agents, such as oxaliplatin, cisplatin and gemcitabine in H460 and MiaPaca2 tumor cell lines.
These data show that EHT 6706 could act synergistically with IR and additively with chemotherapy in tumor cell lines in vitro.
This provides a good rationale to further assess EHT 6706 in combination protocols and confirm these effects in vivo.
PMID: 22246103
Antiproliferative effect of alpinetin in BxPC-3 pancreatic cancer cells.
Alpinetin is a novel plant flavonoid derived from Alpinia katsumadai Hayata, found to possess strong anticancer effects.
However, the antitumor effect of alpinetin on pancreatic cancer cells and the detailed mechanism remain unclear.
The aim of this study was to investigate alpinetin's beneficial effect on pancreatic cancer and the possible molecular mechanism involved.
Pancreatic cancer cell lines were treated with alpinetin at various doses and for different times, and the effect of alpinetin on cell growth inhibition, apoptosis and the cell cycle was determined.
The expression of Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, XIAP and Bax, the activity of caspases and the levels of cytochrome c released were measured.
The results showed that alpinetin inhibited the viability of three pancreatic cancer cell lines and induced apoptosis of BxPC-3 cells in a dose- and time-dependent manner.
This was accompanied by regulation of the expression of Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, Bax and XIAP.
Furthermore, alpinetin treatment led to the release of cytochrome c and activation of caspases-3, -8 and -9 proteins.
Taken together, our studies indicate that alpinetin inhibited the proliferation of pancreatic cancer cells possibly through the regulation of the Bcl-2 family and XIAP expression, release of cytochrome c and the activation of caspases.
Alpinetin may serve as a potential agent for the development of pancreatic cancer cell therapies.
PMID: 22245972
Altered miRNA expression patterns in Tff2 knock-out mice correlate with cellular pathways of neoplastic development and caloric metabolism.
The trefoil peptide family, consisting in mammals of three members namely TFF1, 2 and 3, plays a cytoprotective role in epithelial cells of various tissues, mainly in the digestive tract.
Tff1, Tff2 or Tff3 knock-out mouse models developed various kinds of gastrointestinal impairment.
microRNAs are known to be novel gene regulators.
We aimed to investigate the physiological role of such miRNAs in Tff2 knock-out mice.
Whole miRNome profiling and in silico analysis were performed for Tff2-KO and WT mice.
Our latest data explored the role of miRNAs in the regulatory cascades and molecular processes of Tff2-/- mice.
As much as 6% of the Tff2-KO mice miRNome was significantly dys-regulated.
Further in silico analysis suggests that the respective dys-regulated part of the miRNome is involved in human pathological processes, including pancreatic, colorectal and basal cell cancer.
Additionally, the dys-regulated miRNome targets pathways involved in carbohydrate metabolism and adipocytokine signaling.
The latter links deficient caloric maintenance in Tff2 and previous observation in Tff3-KO mice with miRNAs.
In summary, our proof-of-concept study indicates that miRNAs may play an important role in the regulatory processes of the trefoil peptide family, especially in the regulation of cancer-related cascades.
PMID: 22245846
Frequent Detection of Pancreatic Lesions in Asymptomatic High-Risk Individuals.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: The risk of pancreatic cancer is increased in patients with a strong family history of pancreatic cancer or a predisposing germline mutation.
Screening can detect curable, noninvasive pancreatic neoplasms, but the optimal imaging approach is not known.
We determined the baseline prevalence and characteristics of pancreatic abnormalities using 3 imaging tests to screen asymptomatic, high-risk individuals (HRIs).
METHODS: We screened 225 asymptomatic adult HRIs at 5 academic US medical centers once, using computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS).
We compared results in a blinded, independent fashion.
RESULTS: Ninety-two of 216 HRIs (42%) were found to have at least 1 pancreatic mass (84 cystic, 3 solid) or a dilated pancreatic duct (n = 5) by any of the imaging modalities.
Fifty-one of the 84 HRIs with a cyst (60.7%) had multiple lesions, typically small (mean, 0.55 cm; range, 2-39 mm), in multiple locations.
The prevalence of pancreatic lesions increased with age; they were detected in 14% of subjects younger than 50 years old, 34% of subjects 50-59 years old, and 53% of subjects 60-69 years old (P < .0001).
CT, MRI, and EUS detected a pancreatic abnormality in 11%, 33.3%, and 42.6% of the HRIs, respectively.
Among these abnormalities, proven or suspected neoplasms were identified in 85 HRIs (82 intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms and 3 pancreatic endocrine tumors).
Three of 5 HRIs who underwent pancreatic resection had high-grade dysplasia in less than 3 cm intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms and in multiple intraepithelial neoplasias.
CONCLUSIONS: Screening of asymptomatic HRIs frequently detects small pancreatic cysts, including curable, noninvasive high-grade neoplasms.
EUS and MRI detect pancreatic lesions better than CT.
PMID: 22245832
A new branch on the tree: Next-generation sequencing in the study of cancer evolution.
Cancer is a disease caused by the accumulation of genetic alterations in association with successive waves of clonal expansion.
Mapping of the human genome sequence, in conjunction with technical advances in the ability to sequence entire genomes, have provided new insight into the mutational spectra and genetic events associated with clonal evolution of cancer.
Moving forward, a clearer understanding of those alterations that undergo positive and negative selection throughout carcinogenesis and leading to metastatic dissemination would provide a boon not only to our understanding of cancer evolution, but to the development of potential targets for therapeutic intervention as well.
PMID: 22245693
Metformin alters the expression profiles of microRNAs in human pancreatic cancer cells.
AIMS: To investigate the effect of metformin on the expression profiles of microRNAs in human pancreatic cancer cells.
METHODS: MicroRNAs real-time PCR Array was applied to investigate differentially expressed miRNAs in Sw1990 cells treated with or without metformin.
Stem-loop real time RT-PCR was used to confirm the results of the array assay in Sw1990 and Panc-1 cells.
The effects of miR-26a on cell growth, apoptosis, invasion and migration abilities were respectively examined by CCK8 assay, Apoptosis assay, Matrigel invasion and migration assay.
HMGA1 was proved to be a target of miR-26a by Luciferase reporter assay, Real-time PCR and Western-blotting.
RESULTS: Nine miRNAs were significantly up-regulated in metformin treated cells.
Metformin up-regulated the expression of miR-26a, miR-192 and let-7c in a dose-dependent manner.
Forced expression of miR-26a significantly inhibited cell proliferation, invasion, migration and increased cell apoptosis, whereas knockdown of miR-26a obtained the opposite effect.
Furthermore, we demonstrated that HMGA1, an oncogene, is a direct target of miR-26a.
Nude mice xenograft models confirmed that metformin up-regulated the level of miR-26a and surpressed the expression of HMGA1 in vivo.
CONCLUSION: These observations suggested that modulation of miRNA expression may be an important mechanism underlying the biological effects of metformin.
PMID: 22245197
Protons Offer Reduced Normal-Tissue Exposure for Patients Receiving Postoperative Radiotherapy for Resected Pancreatic Head Cancer.
PURPOSE: To determine the potential role for adjuvant proton-based radiotherapy (PT) for resected pancreatic head cancer.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Between June 2008 and November 2008, 8 consecutive patients with resected pancreatic head cancers underwent optimized intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) treatment planning.
IMRT plans used between 10 and 18 fields and delivered 45 Gy to the initial planning target volume (PTV) and a 5.4 Gy boost to a reduced PTV.
PTVs were defined according to the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 9704 radiotherapy guidelines.
Ninety-five percent of PTVs received 100% of the target dose and 100% of the PTVs received 95% of the target dose.
Normal tissue constraints were as follows: right kidney V18 Gy to <70%; left kidney V18 Gy to <30%; small bowel/stomach V20 Gy to <50%, V45 Gy to <15%, V50 Gy to <10%, and V54 Gy to <5%; liver V30 Gy to <60%; and spinal cord maximum to 46 Gy.
Optimized two- to three-field three-dimensional conformal proton plans were retrospectively generated on the same patients.
The team generating the proton plans was blinded to the dose distributions achieved by the IMRT plans.
The IMRT and proton plans were then compared.
A Wilcoxon paired t-test was performed to compare various dosimetric points between the two plans for each patient.
RESULTS: All proton plans met all normal tissue constraints and were isoeffective with the corresponding IMRT plans in terms of PTV coverage.
The proton plans offered significantly reduced normal-tissue exposure over the IMRT plans with respect to the following: median small bowel V20 Gy, 15.4% with protons versus 47.0% with IMRT (p = 0.0156); median gastric V20 Gy, 2.3% with protons versus 20.0% with IMRT (p = 0.0313); and median right kidney V18 Gy, 27.3% with protons versus 50.5% with IMRT (p = 0.0156).
CONCLUSIONS: By reducing small bowel and stomach exposure, protons have the potential to reduce the acute and late toxicities of postoperative chemoradiation in this setting.
PMID: 22244849
Individuals at high-risk for pancreatic cancer development: Management options and the role of surgery.
Pancreatic cancer (PC) is a highly lethal disease.
Despite advances regarding the safety and long-term results of pancreatectomies, early diagnosis remains the only hope for cure.
This necessitates the implementation of an intensive screening program (based mainly on modern imaging), which - given the incidence of PC - is not cost effective for the general population.
However, this screening program is recommended for individuals at high-risk for PC development.
Indications for screening include the following three clinical settings: hereditary cancer predisposition syndromes associated with PC, hereditary pancreatitis and familial pancreatic cancer syndrome.
The aim of this strategy is to identify pre-invasive (precursor) lesions, which are curable.
Surgery is recommended in the presence of recognizable lesion on imaging lesions.
Partial (anatomic) pancreatectomy - depending on the location of the suspicious lesion - is the most widely accepted type of surgical intervention in this setting; occasionally, however, total pancreatectomy may be required, in carefully selected patients.
Despite that experience still remains limited, there is evidence that this aggressive strategy allows early detection of neoplastic lesions, thereby improving the effectiveness of surgery and prognosis.
PMID: 22244303
Impact of comorbidities and surgery on health related transitions in pancreatic cancer admissions: A multi state model.
AIM: Pancreatic cancer is one of the least common tumors, nevertheless it is one of the most lethal.
This lethality is mainly due to the fact that the vast majority of patients are diagnosed in an advanced stage.
The objective of this work is investigate how different covariates affect the transition to death after a first admission due to pancreatic cancer.
METHODS: We analyze the impact of different factors on health related transitions after a first hospital admission related to pancreatic cancer based on a multi state model.
RESULTS: Transitions of interest include the transition to death (i.e.
survival time), but also the time between a first admission and discharge or between discharge and readmission.
We consider comorbidities, the type of admission, and especially the performance of pancreas surgery as covariates with a potential effect on the transition intensities.
CONCLUSION: The multi state model allows for a very detailed analysis since all covariate effects may change depending on the current state of the patient.
PMID: 22244181
Prognostic impact of marginal resection for patients with solitary hepatocellular carcinoma: Evidence from 570 hepatectomies.
BACKGROUND: During resection of a hepatocellular carcinoma, surgeons encounter occasionally a situation where marginal resection is inevitable because of a close association between the hepatocellular carcinoma and major vasculature and/or underlying impaired liver function.
We investigated the impact of marginal resection on recurrence-free survival after a resection of a solitary hepatocellular carcinoma.
METHODS: The data of 570 patients who underwent macroscopically curative hepatectomy for a solitary hepatocellular carcinoma in our institution between 1990 and 2007 were analyzed.
Marginal resection and non-marginal resection were defined as a cancer-negative surgical margin of ≤1 mm and a surgical margin of >1 mm, respectively.
The macroscopic appearance of the hepatocellular carcinoma was classified as the simple nodular type or non-simple nodular type based on the classification of the Liver Cancer Study Group of Japan, and patients were categorized into 4 groups: group A, simple nodular type with cirrhosis; group B, simple nodular type without cirrhosis; group C, non-simple nodular type with cirrhosis; and group D, non-simple nodular type without cirrhosis.
RESULTS: The surgical margins were diagnosed as cancer-positive in 31 patients, as marginal resection in 165 patients, and as non-marginal resection in 374 patients.
The marginal resection group showed a better recurrence-free survival than the positive surgical margin group (P = .001), and also a worse recurrence-free survival than the non-marginal resection group (P = .003).
In groups A, B, and C, the recurrence-free survival rates were similar between marginal resection and non-marginal resection patients (P = .458), while in group D, marginal resection was a significant poor prognostic factor of recurrence-free survival in both univariate and multivariate analyses.
CONCLUSION: Marginal resection is acceptable in group A, B, and C patients, because it did not negatively affect postoperative recurrence-free survival.
PMID: 22244109
Multicellular tumor spheroid model to evaluate spatio-temporal dynamics effect of chemotherapeutics: application to the gemcitabine/CHK1 inhibitor combination in pancreatic cancer.
ABSTRACT:.
The multicellular tumor spheroid (MCTS) is an in vitro model associating malignant-cell microenvironment and 3D organization as currently observed in avascular tumors.
In order to evaluate the relevance of this model for pre-clinical studies of drug combinations, we analyzed the effect of gemcitabine alone and in combination with the CHIR-124 CHK1 inhibitor in a Capan-2 pancreatic cell MCTS model.
Compared to monolayer cultures, Capan-2 MCTS exhibited resistance to gemcitabine cytotoxic effect.
This resistance was amplified in EGF-deprived quiescent spheroid suggesting that quiescent cells are playing a role in gemcitabine multicellular resistance.
After a prolonged incubation with gemcitabine, DNA damages and massive apoptosis were observed throughout the spheroid while cell cycle arrest was restricted to the outer cell layer, indicating that gemcitabine-induced apoptosis is directly correlated to DNA damages.
The combination of gemcitabine and CHIR-124 in this MCTS model, enhanced the sensitivity to the gemcitabine antiproliferative effect in correlation with an increase in DNA damage and apoptosis.
These results demonstrate that our pancreatic MCTS model, suitable for both screening and imaging analysis, is a valuable advanced tool for evaluating the spatio-temporal effect of drugs and drug combinations in a chemoresistant and microenvironment-depending tumor model.
PMID: 22243968
A restricted spectrum of mutations in the SMAD4 tumor-suppressor gene underlies Myhre syndrome.
Myhre syndrome is a developmental disorder characterized by reduced growth, generalized muscular hypertrophy, facial dysmorphism, deafness, cognitive deficits, joint stiffness, and skeletal anomalies.
Here, by performing exome sequencing of a single affected individual and coupling the results to a hypothesis-driven filtering strategy, we establish that heterozygous mutations in SMAD4, which encodes for a transducer mediating transforming growth factor β and bone morphogenetic protein signaling branches, underlie this rare Mendelian trait.
Two recurrent de novo SMAD4 mutations were identified in eight unrelated subjects.
Both mutations were missense changes altering Ile500 within the evolutionary conserved MAD homology 2 domain, a well known mutational hot spot in malignancies.
Structural analyses suggest that the substituted residues are likely to perturb the binding properties of the mutant protein to signaling partners.
Although SMAD4 has been established as a tumor suppressor gene somatically mutated in pancreatic, gastrointestinal, and skin cancers, and germline loss-of-function lesions and deletions of this gene have been documented to cause disorders that predispose individuals to gastrointestinal cancer and vascular dysplasias, the present report identifies a previously unrecognized class of mutations in the gene with profound impact on development and growth.
PMID: 22241962
Requirement of nuclear factor κB for Smac mimetic-mediated sensitization of pancreatic carcinoma cells for gemcitabine-induced apoptosis.
Defects in apoptosis contribute to treatment resistance and poor outcome of pancreatic cancer, calling for novel therapeutic strategies.
Here, we provide the first evidence that nuclear factor (NF) κB is required for Smac mimetic-mediated sensitization of pancreatic carcinoma cells for gemcitabine-induced apoptosis.
The Smac mimetic BV6 cooperates with gemcitabine to reduce cell viability and to induce apoptosis.
In addition, BV6 significantly enhances the cytotoxicity of several anticancer drugs against pancreatic carcinoma cells, including doxorubicin, cisplatin, and 5-fluorouracil.
Molecular studies reveal that BV6 stimulates NF-κB activation, which is further increased in the presence of gemcitabine.
Importantly, inhibition of NF-κB by overexpression of the dominant-negative IκBα superrepressor significantly decreases BV6- and gemcitabine-induced apoptosis, demonstrating that NF-κB exerts a proapoptotic function in this model of apoptosis.
In support of this notion, inhibition of tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα) by the TNFα blocking antibody Enbrel reduces BV6- and gemcitabine-induced activation of caspase 8 and 3, loss of mitochondrial membrane potential, and apoptosis.
By demonstrating that BV6 and gemcitabine trigger a NF-κB-dependent, TNFα-mediated loop to activate apoptosis signaling pathways and caspase-dependent apoptotic cell death, our findings have important implications for the development of Smac mimetic-based combination protocols in the treatment of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22241899
The prognostic and predictive value of serum CA19.9 in pancreatic cancer.
Background Current staging methods for pancreatic cancer (PC) are inadequate, and biomarkers to aid clinical decision making are lacking.
Despite the availability of the serum marker carbohydrate antigen 19.9 (CA19.9) for over two decades, its precise role in the management of PC is yet to be defined, and as a consequence, it is not widely used.Methods We assessed the relationship between perioperative serum CA19.9 levels, survival and adjuvant chemotherapeutic responsiveness in a cohort of 260 patients who underwent operative resection for PC.Results By specifically assessing the subgroup of patients with detectable CA19.9, we identified potential utility at key clinical decision points.
Low postoperative CA19.9 at 3 months (median survival 25.6 vs 14.8 months, P = 0.0052) and before adjuvant chemotherapy were independent prognostic factors.
Patients with postoperative CA 19.9 levels >90 U/ml did not benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy (P = 0.7194) compared with those with a CA19.9 of ≤ 90 U/ml (median 26.0 vs 16.7 months, P = 0.0108).
Normalization of CA19.9 within 6 months of resection was also an independent favorable prognostic factor (median 29.9 vs 14.8 months, P = 0.0004) and normal perioperative CA19.9 levels identified a good prognostic group, which was associated with a 5-year survival of 42%.Conclusions Perioperative serum CA19.9 measurements are informative in patients with detectable CA19.9 (defined by serum levels of >5 U/ml) and have potential clinical utility in predicting outcome and response to adjuvant chemotherapy.
Future clinical trials should prioritize incorporation of CA19.9 measurement at key decision points to prospectively validate these findings and facilitate implementation.
PMID: 22241738
Intrapancreatic accessory spleen: A case report and review of literature.
Intrapancreatic accessory spleen is not an uncommon entity and usually located in the tail of the pancreas.
Most of them are asymptomatic and incidental findings on radiologic study or at autopsy.
On imaging study, it appears to be a well-defined, solitary, and hypervascular lesion; therefore, it may be confused with pancreatic neoplasms, such as neuroendocrine neoplasm, well-differentiated adenocarcinoma, solid pseudopapillary tumor, or metastatic tumor to the pancreas.
As such, the diagnostic fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the lesion may be performed.
Several case reports describing cytological features of the lesion have been published in recent years.
Among them, the most commonly identified cytological findings are sheets of a heterogeneous population of lymphocytes and prominent traversing blood vessels.
Herein, we report an unusual EUS-FNA case of intrapancreatic accessory spleen.
In addition to above previously well-described cytological features, our case revealed many cells with fine granular chromatin and areas with pseudo rosette-like architecture, mimicking and engendering the differential diagnosis of pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors.
Although cytological findings of our case are rare, they may extend our current knowledge and provide additional differential diagnostic information for this entity.
Diagn.
Cytopathol.
2012; © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22241445
[Jaundice and pancreatic mass: typical clinical presentation of a rare disease].
History and admission findings: An 81-year-old man presented with jaundice and a pancreatic tumor.
6 years ago transperitoneal nephrectomy had been performed because of a clear cell renal cancer (pT3b pN0 pM0).Investigations: Laboratory tests showed normocytic anemia and signs of cholestasis.
Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a well-defined mass of the head of the pancreas with a diameter of about 4 cm, and a previously diagnosed adrenal mass which had slightly increased in size.
Contrast-enhanced ultrasound demonstrated a hyperenhancing of the pancreatic mass, untypical for primary adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.
Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration disclosed a metastasis of the previously resected renal cancer.Treatment and course: Bilary spincterotomy and stent insertion were performed.
Because of proven pancreatic metastasis and suspected adrenal metastasis of renal cancer palliative treatment with multi-targeted receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor sunitinib was initiated.Conclusion: Renal cell carcinomas are the most common primary tumors leading to pancreatic metastasis.
In contrast to ductal adenocarcinoma pancreatic metastasis shows hyperenhancement when examined by using contrast-enhanced ultrasonography.
Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration helps to confirm the suspected diagnosis.
PMID: 22241371
[Low-dose mirtazapine improved nausea and appetite loss during s-1 therapy].
This paper presents a man in his 80's with pancreatic cancer(cStage IV).
He suffered from nausea duringS -1 therapy, and therefore, prochlorperazine maleate at a daily dose of 15 mgwas administered.
However, refractory nausea was diagnosed because it did not improve, and mirtazapine at a daily dose of 7.
5 mgbefore bedtime was started.
Nausea was improved in the next morning, and the patient ate almost all of his breakfast.
After that, no nausea appeared, and his food intake was robust.
Mirtazapine is a new antidepressant called noradrenergic and specific serotonergic antidepressant(NaSSA)and blocks 5-HT3 receptors to improve nausea.
Mirtazapine is usually started at a daily dose of 15 mg, but this dose induces somnolence.
Therefore, mirtazapine was administered at a low daily dose of 7.
5 mgin the present case.
No somnolence or disturbance of daily life was seen, and administration was safely continued.
We conclude that low-dose mirtazapine is one effective option for refractory nausea duringS -1 therapy.
PMID: 22241369
[A case of curatively resected locally advanced cancer of the pancreatic body treated by distal pancreatectomy with en bloc celiac axis resection after neoadjuvant chemotherapy].
A 68-year-old man with locally advanced pancreatic body cancer invading the celiac axis(CA, including common hepatic artery)and in contact with the superior mesenteric artery(SMA)underwent 2 courses of neoadjuvant chemotherapy(NAC); gemcitabine hydrochloride(GEM 1, 000mg/m / / 2, on day 1 and 15)and S-1(100mg/m2day, 2-weeks of continuous administration followed by 1-week rest).
The tumor volume and the contact area to SMA were greatly diminished.
All tumor markers were reduced.
He underwent R0 resection by distal pancreatectomy with en bloc celiac axis resection(DP-CAR).
After the surgery, he could continue adjuvant chemotherapy; (GEM 1, 000mg/m2)only twice because of malnutrition.
Nine months later CT revealed local recurrence and multiple lung metastases.
The patient died 371 days after surgery.
Appropriate NAC can contribute to R0 resection in locally advanced pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22240836
The prognosis for pancreatic cancer patients--better than feared.
PMID: 22240790
Red and processed meat consumption and risk of pancreatic cancer: meta-analysis of prospective studies.
Background:Whether red and processed meat consumption is a risk factor for pancreatic cancer remains unclear.
We conducted a meta-analysis to summarise the evidence from prospective studies of red and processed meat consumption and pancreatic cancer risk.Methods:Relevant studies were identified by searching PubMed and EMBASE databases through November 2011.
Study-specific results were pooled using a random-effects model.Results:Eleven prospective studies, with 6643 pancreatic cancer cases, were included in the meta-analysis.
An increase in red meat consumption of 120 g per day was associated with an overall relative risk (RR) of 1.13 (95% confidence interval (CI)=0.93-1.39; P(heterogeneity)<0.001).
Red meat consumption was positively associated with pancreatic cancer risk in men (RR=1.29; 95% CI=1.08-1.53; P(heterogeneity)=0.28; five studies), but not in women (RR=0.93; 95% CI=0.74-1.16; P(heterogeneity)=0.21; six studies).
The RR of pancreatic cancer for a 50 g per day increase in processed meat consumption was 1.19 (95% CI=1.04-1.36; P(heterogeneity)=0.46).Conclusion:Findings from this meta-analysis indicate that processed meat consumption is positively associated with pancreatic cancer risk.
Red meat consumption was associated with an increased risk of pancreatic cancer in men.
Further prospective studies are needed to confirm these findings.
PMID: 22238308
Vesicular Stomatitis Virus as an Oncolytic Agent against Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma.
Vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) is a promising oncolytic agent against a variety of cancers.
However, it has never been tested in any pancreatic cancer model.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is the most common and aggressive form of pancreatic cancer.
In this study, the oncolytic potentials of several VSV variants were analyzed in a panel of 13 clinically relevant human PDA cell lines and compared to conditionally replicative adenoviruses (CRAds), Sendai virus and respiratory syncytial virus.
VSV variants showed oncolytic abilities superior to those of other viruses, and some cell lines that exhibited resistance to other viruses were successfully killed by VSV.
However, PDA cells were highly heterogeneous in their susceptibility to virus-induced oncolysis, and several cell lines were resistant to all tested viruses.
Resistant cells showed low levels of very early VSV RNA synthesis, indicating possible defects at initial stages of infection.
In addition, unlike permissive PDA cell lines, most of the resistant cell lines were able to both produce and respond to interferon, suggesting that intact type I interferon responses contributed to their resistance phenotype.
Four cell lines that varied in their permissiveness to VSV-ΔM51 and CRAd dl1520 were tested in mice, and the in vivo results closely mimicked those in vitro.
While our results demonstrate that VSV is a promising oncolytic agent against PDA, further studies are needed to better understand the molecular mechanisms of resistance of some PDAs to oncolytic virotherapy.
PMID: 22238072
A Cell-Delivered and Cell-Activated SN38-Dextran Prodrug Increases Survival in a Murine Disseminated Pancreatic Cancer Model.
Enzyme-activated prodrugs have been investigated and sought after as highly specific, low-side-effect treatments, especially for cancer therapy.
Unfortunately, excellent targets for enzyme-activated therapy are rare.
Here a system based on cell delivery that can carry both a prodrug and an activating enzyme to the cancer site is demonstrated.
Raw264.7 cells (mouse monocyte/macrophage-like cells, Mo/Ma) are engineered to express intracellular rabbit carboxylesterase (InCE), which is a potent activator of the prodrug irinotecan to SN38.
InCE expression is regulated by the TetOn® system, which silences the gene unless a tetracycline, such as doxycycline, is present.
Concurrently, an irinotecan-like prodrug, which is conjugated to dextran and can be loaded into the cytoplasm of Mo/Ma, is synthesized.
To test the system, a murine pancreatic cancer model is generated by intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of Pan02 cells.
Engineered Mo/Ma are loaded with the prodrug and are injected i.p.
Two days later, doxycycline was given i.p.
to activate InCE, which activated the prodrug.
A survival study demonstrates that this system significantly increased survival in a murine pancreatic cancer model.
Thus, for the first time, a prodrug/activating enzyme system, which is self-contained within tumor-homing cells and can prolong the life of i.p.
pancreatic tumor bearing mice, is demonstrated.
PMID: 22237835
Adjuvant PEFG (Cisplatin, Epirubicin, 5-Fluorouracil, Gemcitabine) or Gemcitabine Followed by Chemoradiation in Pancreatic Cancer: A Randomized Phase II Trial.
BACKGROUND: Information from randomized trials on the role of combination chemotherapy in the adjuvant treatment of pancreatic adenocarcinoma is limited.
This randomized phase II trial aimed to identify the most promising regimen warranting phase III evaluation.
METHODS: Therapy-naive patients, age 18-75 years, Karnofsky Performance Status (KPS) >60, gross total resection of stage IB-III pancreatic adenocarcinoma, stratified for center and surgical margins, were randomly assigned to receive either gemcitabine 1 g/m(2) weekly on days 1, 8, and 15 (arm A) or the PEFG regimen (cisplatin and epirubicin 40 mg/m(2), day 1; gemcitabine 600 mg/m(2), days 1, 8; 5-fluorouracil 200 mg/m(2) daily, days 1-28) (arm B).
Chemotherapy was administered every 4 weeks for 3 months and followed by irradiation concurrent to continuous infusion of 5-fluorouracil 250 mg/m(2) daily.
Primary endpoint was the probability of being disease-free at 1 year from surgery.
Assuming P0 = 35% and P1 = 55%, α = .05 and β = .10, the study was to enroll 51 patients per arm.
RESULTS: A total of 102 patients were randomized; 100 were eligible (arm A: 51; arm B: 49).
Baseline characteristic (A/B) were: Median age was 61/60 years; 75% had KPS >80 75/76%; 36% grade 3 tumor 29/43%, 79% stage IIB/III 75/84%, 31% R1 resection 35/29%.
Survival figures (A/B) were: Median disease-free survival was 11.7 and 15.2 months; 1-year disease-free survival 49.0% (95% confidence interval [95% CI] 35-63%) and 69.4% (95% CI 56-83%); median survival 24.8 and 28.9 months.
Combination chemotherapy produced more hematological toxicity without relevant differences in nonhematological toxicities.
CONCLUSIONS: The 4-drug regimen deserves further assessment in resectable pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22237731
Impact of nationwide centralization of pancreaticoduodenectomy on hospital mortality.
BACKGROUND: The impact of nationwide centralization of pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) on mortality is largely unknown.
The aim of this study was to analyse changes in hospital volumes and in-hospital mortality after PD in the Netherlands between 2004 and 2009.
METHODS: Nationwide data on International Classification of Diseases, ninth revision (ICD-9) code 5-526 (PD, including Whipple), patient age, sex and mortality were retrieved from the independent nationwide KiwaPrismant registry.
Based on established cut-off points of annually performed PDs, hospitals were categorized as very low (fewer than 5), low (5-10), medium (11-19) or high (at least 20) volume.
A subgroup analysis based on a cut-off age of 70 years was also performed.
RESULTS: Some 2155 PDs were included.
The number of hospitals performing PD decreased from 48 in 2004 to 30 in 2009 (P = 0·011).
In these specific years, the proportion of patients undergoing PD in a medium- or high-volume centre increased from 52·9 to 91·2 per cent (P < 0·001).
Nationwide mortality rates after PD decreased from 9·8 to 5·1 per cent (P = 0·044).
The mortality rate during the 6-year period was 14·7, 9·8, 6·3 and 3·3 per cent in very low-, low-, medium- and high-volume hospitals respectively (P < 0·001).
The difference in mortality between medium- and high-volume centres was statistically significant (P = 0·004).
The volume-outcome relationship was not influenced by age (P = 0·467).
The mortality rate after PD in patients aged at least 70 years was 10·4 per cent compared with 4·4 per cent in younger patients (P < 0·001).
CONCLUSION: With nationwide centralization of PD, the in-hospital mortality rate after this procedure decreased.
Further centralization of PD is likely to decrease mortality further, especially in the elderly.
Copyright © 2012 British Journal of Surgery Society Ltd.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
PMID: 22237676
Sulfonylurea receptor as a target for molecular imaging of pancreas beta cells with (99m)Tc-DTPA-glipizide.
OBJECTIVE: This study was aimed to assess pancreas beta cell activity using (99m)Tc-diethyleneaminepentaacetic acid-glipizide (DTPA-GLP), a sulfonylurea receptor agent.
The effect of DTPA-GLP on the blood glucose level in rats was also evaluated.
METHODS: DTPA dianhydride was conjugated with GLP in the presence of sodium amide, yielding 60%.
Biodistribution and planar images were obtained at 30-120 min after injection of (99m)Tc-DTPA-GLP (1 mg/rat, 0.74 and 11.1 MBq per rat, respectively) in normal female Fischer 344 rats.
The control group was given (99m)Tc-DTPA.
To demonstrate pancreas beta cell uptake of (99m)Tc-DTPA-GLP via a receptor-mediated process, a group of rats was pretreated with streptozotocin (a beta cell toxin, 55 mg/kg, i.v.) and the images were acquired at immediately-65 min on day 5 post-treatment.
The effect on the glucose levels after a single administration (ip) of DTPA-GLP was compared to glipizide (GLP) for up to 6 h.
RESULTS: The structure of DTPA-GLP was confirmed by NMR, mass spectrometry and HPLC.
Radiochemical purity assessed by ITLC was >96%.
(99m)Tc-DTPA-GLP showed increased pancreas-to-muscle ratios, whereas (99m)Tc-DTPA showed decreased ratios at various time points.
Pancreas could be visualized with (99m)Tc-DTPA-GLP in normal rat, however, (99m)Tc-DTPA has poor uptake suggesting the specificity of (99m)Tc-DTPA-GLP.
Pancreas beta cell uptake could be blocked by pre-treatment with streptozotocin.
DTPA-GLP showed an equal or better response in lowering the glucose levels compared to the existing GLP drug.
CONCLUSIONS: It is feasible to use (99m)Tc-DTPA-GLP to assess pancreas beta cell receptor recognition.
(99m)Tc-DTPA-GLP may be helpful in evaluating patients with diabetes, pancreatitis and pancreatic tumors.
PMID: 22237599
Characteristic magnetic resonance features of focal autoimmune pancreatitis useful for differentiation from pancreatic cancer.
PURPOSE: To identify characteristic magnetic resonance (MR) features of focal autoimmune pancreatitis (f-AIP) useful for differentiation from pancreatic cancer (PC).
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed MR imaging findings of 20 f-AIP lesions and 40 PC lesions smaller than 40 mm in diameter.
On fat-suppressed T2-weighted images and dynamic contrast-enhanced fat-suppressed T1-weighted images (DCE-T1WI), we classified MR features of internal signal intensity for each lesion into homogeneous, speckled, or target type.
We assessed the sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of these findings in the diagnosis of f-AIP.
We also investigated the incidence of previously reported findings for differentiation between f-AIP and PC.
RESULTS: Speckled enhancement within a hypointense or isointense lesion on pancreatic phase DCE-T1WI (speckled type) was observed more frequently in f-AIP than in PC, with high sensitivity, high specificity, and high accuracy.
Hypointensity to hyperintensity surrounding a less enhanced focal area on DCE-T1WIs (target type) and upper stream main pancreatic duct dilatation were observed more frequently in PC than in f-AIP.
CONCLUSION: Speckled enhancement inside an f-AIP lesion on pancreatic phase DCE-T1WI was useful for differentiation from PC.
PMID: 22237148
Supportive Care Considerations During Concurrent Chemoradiotherapy for Pancreatic Adenocarcinoma: Lessons Learned From Clinical Experience.
Concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy (chemoradiotherapy) for the management of pancreatic adenocarcinoma in either adjuvant or locally regional advanced settings produces predictable acute toxicities that are proportional in severity to the intensity and type of systemic therapy and to the parameters of radiotherapy.
In addition, relevant to the adjuvant setting, surgery for pancreatic cancer often produces physiologic alterations that may impact a patient's ability to tolerate chemoradiotherapy.
Failures to anticipate, monitor, and proactively manage the effects of surgery and toxicities of chemoradiotherapy can result in the need for unplanned treatment interruptions and/or inability to complete all planned therapy.
In this review, complications of pancreatic cancer itself and of pancreatic resection as well as toxicities of chemoradiotherapy are delineated, and approaches to their management before, during, and after chemoradiotherapy are presented.
Planning for the treatment of side effects before the anticancer therapy begins facilitates therapy administration and improves patient tolerance.
PMID: 22236871
Autoimmune pancreatitis mimicking carcinoma of the head of the pancreas: a case report.
ABSTRACT:.
We report on a case of autoimmune pancreatitis presenting as pancreatic head cancer, which is extremely rare in Iran.
Currently, on the PubMed database, no such cases exist.
A 70-year-old Iranian man presented with recurrent abdominal pain, jaundice and elevated bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase levels.
An abdominal computed tomography scan revealed a heterogeneous presence in the pancreatic head as well as dilated intra- and extrahepatic bile ducts.
A common bile duct stent had been inserted.
Our patient was subsequently diagnosed with pancreatic head cancer.Due to his continued recurrent abdominal pain, our patient returned to the hospital.
His levels of bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase and tumor markers were all normal but his immunoglobulin G4 and antinuclear antibodies were extremely high.
A biopsy of the pancreatic head heterogeneity by endoscopic ultrasonography was performed.Pathologic samples showed fibrosis associated with lymphoplasmacytic infiltration and no evidence of malignancy.
A diagnosis of autoimmune pancreatitis was confirmed, the bile duct stent removed, and an appropriate treatment plan was undertaken.
Autoimmune pancreatitis should be considered in suspected cases of pancreatic cancer.
In these instances, a biopsy of the pancreas will help to differentiate between the two and prevent complications due to disease progression as well as unnecessary surgery.
PMID: 22236743
Pancreatic Cystic Lesions without Overt Cytologic Atypia: Proposed Diagnostic Categories for Endoscopic Ultrasound-Guided Fine-Needle Aspiration Cytology with Utilization of Fluid Carcinoembryonic Antigen Level.
Objectives: It was the aim of this study to examine pancreatic cyst cases that lack markedly atypical or malignant epithelium on endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspirations.
Study Design: We conducted a retrospective case review study, including 24 cases that were either acellular or lacked cytologic atypia and were subsequently resected.
The cases were retrospectively divided into 3 categories: (1) non-diagnostic, (2) cyst contents only, and (3) cyst contents with bland-appearing epithelium.
The cyst contents were subdivided into mucinous and non-mucinous types.
The cytologic diagnoses were correlated with cyst fluid carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels and subsequent histologic diagnoses.
Results: Category 1 comprised 4 cases: 2 cases (CEA >800 ng/ml) with mucin-producing neoplasms and 2 cases (CEA not determined) with microcystic serous cystadenomas.
Category 2 included 4 cases with non-mucinous and 4 with mucinous contents.
In the first subgroup, 2 cases (CEA >800 ng/ml) showed mucinous cystic neoplasms and 2 cases (CEA negligible or not determined) pseudocysts.
In the second subgroup, there were 3 cases with neoplastic mucinous cysts (1 CEA >800 ng/ml, 2 not determined) and 1 case with a lymphoepithelial cyst with mucinous metaplasia (CEA >800 ng/ml).
Almost all cases (10/11) in category 3 had neoplastic mucinous cysts regardless of the CEA levels.
Conclusions: The proposed 3 cytologic categories of pancreatic cystic lesion combined with cyst fluid CEA levels provide useful clinical information.
PMID: 22234980
Concurrent PEDF deficiency and Kras mutation induce invasive pancreatic cancer and adipose-rich stroma in mice.
Background and aimsPigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF), a non-inhibitory SERPIN with potent antiangiogenic activity, has been recently implicated in metabolism and adipogenesis, both of which are known to influence pancreatic cancer progression.
Increased pancreatic fat in human pancreatic tumour correlates with greater tumour dissemination while PEDF deficiency in mice promotes pancreatic hyperplasia and visceral obesity.
Oncogenic Ras, the most common mutation in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), has similarly been shown to promote adipogenesis and premalignant lesions.MethodsIn order to determine whether concurrent loss of PEDF is sufficient to promote adipogenesis and tumorigenesis in the pancreas, the authors ablated PEDF in an EL-Kras(G12D) mouse model of non-invasive cystic papillary neoplasms.ResultsEL-Kras(G12D)/PEDF deficient mice developed invasive PDAC associated with enhanced matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and MMP-9 expression and increased peripancreatic fat with adipocyte hypertrophy and intrapancreatic adipocyte infiltration (pancreatic steatosis).
In support of increased adipogenesis, the stroma of the pancreas of EL-Kras(G12D)/PEDF deficient mice demonstrated higher tissue levels of two lipid droplet associated proteins, tail-interacting protein 47 (TIP47, perilipin 3) and adipose differentiation-related protein (ADRP, Pperilipin 2), while adipose triglyceride lipase, a key factor in lipolysis, was decreased.
In patients with PDAC, both tissue and serum levels of PEDF were decreased, stromal TIP47 expression was higher and the tissue VEGF to PEDF ratio was increased (p<0.05).ConclusionsThese data highlight the importance of lipid metabolism in the tumour microenvironment and identify PEDF as a critical negative regulator of both adiposity and tumour invasion in the pancreas.
PMID: 22233948
Carcinoma of the tail of the pancreas presenting as acute abdomen.
Large bowel obstruction with perforation is an anomalous presentation of pancreatic tail carcinoma.
Pancreatic cancer is often difficult to diagnose clinically and is especially furtive when it is located in the tail of the pancreas.
We describe a patient who presented with large bowel obstruction due to splenic flexure mass which proved to be due to pancreatic mucinous adenocarcinoma.
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma can rarely have the same presentation as colon cancer, and should therefore be considered in the differential diagnosis of large bowel obstruction.
PMID: 22233946
Newcastle disease virus LaSota strain kills human pancreatic cancer cells in vitro with high selectivity.
Pancreatic cancer is highly resistant to treatment.
Previously, we showed that Newcastle disease virus (NDV) strain 73-T was highly cytotoxic to a range of tumor types in vitro and in vivo but the effects of NDV on pancreatic tumors are unknown.
We determined the cytotoxicity of the lentogenic LaSota strain of NDV (NDV-LS) toward 7 different human pancreatic tumor cell lines and 4 normal human cell lines (keratinocytes, fibroblasts, pancreatic ductal cells, and vascular endothelial cells).
Cytotoxicity assays used serially diluted NDV incubated for 96 hours post-infection.
Cells were fixed, stained, and minimum cytotoxic plaque forming unit (PFU) doses were determined (n = 10-24/cell line).
Normal cells were killed only by high doses of NDV-LS.
The cytotoxic doses for pancreatic ductal cells, fibroblasts, and vascular endothelial cells were 729, 626, and 1,217 plaque forming units, respectively.
In contrast, most pancreatic cancer cells were killed by much lower doses.
The doses for PL45, Panc 10.05, PANC-1, BxPC3, SU.86.86, Capan-1 and CFPAC-1 were 0.15, 0.41, 0.43, 0.55, 1.30, 17.1 and 153 plaque forming units, respectively.
Most pancreatic tumor cells were more than 700 times more sensitive to NDV-LS killing than normal cells.
Such avirulent, lentogenic NDV strains may have therapeutic potential in the treatment of pancreatic cancers.
PMID: 22233809
Convergent structural alterations define SWItch/Sucrose NonFermentable (SWI/SNF) chromatin remodeler as a central tumor suppressive complex in pancreatic cancer.
Defining the molecular genetic alterations underlying pancreatic cancer may provide unique therapeutic insight for this deadly disease.
Toward this goal, we report here an integrative DNA microarray and sequencing-based analysis of pancreatic cancer genomes.
Notable among the alterations newly identified, genomic deletions, mutations, and rearrangements recurrently targeted genes encoding components of the SWItch/Sucrose NonFermentable (SWI/SNF) chromatin remodeling complex, including all three putative DNA binding subunits (ARID1A, ARID1B, and PBRM1) and both enzymatic subunits (SMARCA2 and SMARCA4).
Whereas alterations of each individual SWI/SNF subunit occurred at modest-frequency, as mutational "hills" in the genomic landscape, together they affected at least one-third of all pancreatic cancers, defining SWI/SNF as a major mutational "mountain." Consistent with a tumor-suppressive role, re-expression of SMARCA4 in SMARCA4-deficient pancreatic cancer cell lines reduced cell growth and promoted senescence, whereas its overexpression in a SWI/SNF-intact line had no such effect.
In addition, expression profiling analyses revealed that SWI/SNF likely antagonizes Polycomb repressive complex 2, implicating this as one possible mechanism of tumor suppression.
Our findings reveal SWI/SNF to be a central tumor suppressive complex in pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22233582
Myxoma Virus Sensitizes Cancer Cells to Gemcitabine and Is an Effective Oncolytic Virotherapeutic in Models of Disseminated Pancreatic Cancer.
Myxoma virus (MYXV) is a novel oncolytic virus that has been shown to replicate in pancreatic cancer cells, but its efficacy in animal models of pancreatic cancer has not been determined.
The efficacy of MYXV as monotherapy or in combination with gemcitabine was evaluated in intraperitoneal dissemination (IPD) models of pancreatic cancer.
The effects of an intact immune system on the efficacy of MYXV therapy was tested by comparing immunodeficient versus immunocompetent murine models and combination therapy with gemcitabine was also evaluated.
In cell culture, MYXV replication was robust in a broad range of pancreatic cancer cells and also showed increased oncolysis in combination with gemcitabine.
In animal models, MYXV treatment conferred survival benefits over control or gemcitabine-treated cohorts regardless of the cell line or animal model used.
MYXV monotherapy was most effective in an immunocompetent IPD model, and resulted in 60% long-term survivors.
In Pan02 engrafted immunocompetent IPD models, sequential treatment in which MYXV was administered first, followed by gemcitabine, was the most effective and resulted in 100% long-term survivors.
MYXV is an effective oncolytic virus for pancreatic cancer and can be combined with gemcitabine to enhance survival, particularly in the presence of an intact host immune system.
PMID: 22232734
Impact of Circulating Vitamin D Binding Protein Levels on the Association between 25-Hydroxyvitamin D and Pancreatic Cancer Risk: A Nested Case-Control Study.
High concentrations of circulating 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D] have been associated with elevated pancreatic cancer risk.
As this is contrary to an expected inverse association between vitamin D status and cancer, we examined whether vitamin D binding protein (DBP), the primary carrier of vitamin D compounds in circulation, plays a role in this relationship.
Prediagnostic serum DBP and 25(OH)D were studied in relation to risk of pancreatic cancer in a nested case-control study of 234 cases and 234 controls in the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention Study of Finnish men.
ORs and 95% CIs were estimated using logistic regression, and statistical tests were two-sided.
We found that DBP and 25(OH)D were correlated (r = 0.27, P < 0.0001), and DBP was inversely associated with pancreatic cancer risk (OR = 0.66, 95% CI = 0.39-1.12, for the highest vs.
lowest quartile; P(trend) = 0.02).
Importantly, this association seemed to have a threshold between quartiles 2 to 4 and quartile 1, and was primarily evident among men with concurrent high 25(OH)D concentrations (OR = 0.33, 95% CI = 0.16-0.70 for highest vs.
lowest quartile; P(trend) = 0.002), with no association in men with lower serum 25(OH)D (OR = 1.28, 95% CI = 0.62-2.61 for highest vs.
lowest quartile, P(trend) 0.63, P(interaction) = 0.01).
Men with higher 25(OH)D concentrations and serum DBP below the median showed greatly elevated risk of pancreatic cancer (OR = 5.01, 95% CI 2.33-10.78, for highest vs.
lowest quartile; P(trend) < 0.0001), while risk was weakly inversely associated with serum 25(OH)D when DBP concentrations were higher (P(interaction) = 0.001).
Taken together, our findings indicate that higher DBP concentrations may sequester more 25(OH)D and reduce free 25(OH)D bioavailability.
Simultaneous examination of DBP and 25(OH)D may be important in determining the association of vitamin D with cancer risk.
Cancer Res; 72(5); 1-9.
©2012 AACR.
PMID: 22232731
Phase I Trial of Sorafenib in Combination With 5-Fluorouracil/Leucovorin in Advanced Solid Tumors.
This dose escalation, uncontrolled phase I study evaluated the tolerability, pharmacokinetics (PK), and antitumor activity of oral sorafenib 100, 200, or 400 mg twice daily (bid, continuous regimen) in combination with 5-fluorouracil/leucovorin (5-FU/LCV, intravenous infusion or bolus) in patients with advanced, solid tumors.
A total of 47 patients (median age 57 years; colon cancer, 55%; pancreatic cancer, 21%; prior systemic therapy, 96%) received treatment; 24 were included in the PK analyses, and 38 were evaluable for tumor response.
Treatment-emergent adverse events were observed in 98% of patients (≥grade 3, 55%); the most frequently reported were fatigue (51%), stomatitis/pharyngitis (47%), and hand-foot skin reaction (45%).
Concomitant 5-FU/LCV resulted in no clinically relevant changes in the area under the plasma concentration-time curve in the dosing interval (AUC(0-12)) and maximum plasma concentration (C(max)) of sorafenib (100-400 mg bid) at steady state.
Although the start of infusion until the last quantifiable plasma concentration (AUC(0-tn)) and C(max) of 5-FU were increased by concomitant sorafenib 100 to 200 mg, no consistent effect was observed with 400 mg sorafenib.
Two (5%) patients with colon cancer achieved partial response; 16 (42%) patients (the majority with colon and pancreatic cancer) had stable disease.
Sorafenib plus 5-FU/LCV was generally well tolerated with encouraging antitumor activity and no clinically relevant drug-drug interactions in patients with advanced solid tumors.
PMID: 22232555
Interplay between β1-Integrin and Rho Signaling Regulates Differential Scattering and Motility of Pancreatic Cancer Cells by Snail and Slug Proteins.
The Snail family of transcription factors has been implicated in pancreatic cancer progression.
We recently showed that Snail (Snai1) promotes membrane-type 1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP)- and ERK1/2-dependent scattering of pancreatic cancer cells in three-dimensional type I collagen.
In this study, we examine the role of Slug (Snai2) in regulating pancreatic cancer cell scattering in three-dimensional type I collagen.
Although Slug increased MT1-MMP expression and ERK1/2 activity, Slug-expressing cells failed to scatter in three-dimensional collagen.
Moreover, in contrast to Snail-expressing cells, Slug-expressing cells did not demonstrate increased collagen I binding, collagen I-driven motility, or α2β1-integrin expression.
Significantly, inhibiting β1-integrin function decreased migration and scattering of Snail-expressing cells in three-dimensional collagen.
As Rho GTPases have been implicated in invasion and migration, we also analyzed the contribution of Rac1 and Rho signaling to the differential migration and scattering of pancreatic cancer cells.
Snail-induced migration and scattering were attenuated by Rac1 inhibition.
In contrast, inhibiting Rho-associated kinase ROCK1/2 increased migration and scattering of Slug-expressing cells in three-dimensional collagen and thus phenocopied the effects of Snail in pancreatic cancer cells.
Additionally, the increased migration and scattering in three-dimensional collagen of Slug-expressing cells following ROCK1/2 inhibition was dependent on β1-integrin function.
Overall, these results demonstrate differential effects of Snail and Slug in pancreatic cancer and identify the interplay between Rho signaling and β1-integrin that functions to regulate the differential scattering and migration of Snail- and Slug-expressing pancreatic cancer cells.
PMID: 22232209
Oncogenic Kras is required for both the initiation and maintenance of pancreatic cancer in mice.
Pancreatic cancer is almost invariably associated with mutations in the KRAS gene, most commonly KRASG12D, that result in a dominant-active form of the KRAS GTPase.
However, how KRAS mutations promote pancreatic carcinogenesis is not fully understood, and whether oncogenic KRAS is required for the maintenance of pancreatic cancer has not been established.
To address these questions, we generated two mouse models of pancreatic tumorigenesis: mice transgenic for inducible KrasG12D, which allows for inducible, pancreas-specific, and reversible expression of the oncogenic KrasG12D, with or without inactivation of one allele of the tumor suppressor gene p53.
Here, we report that, early in tumorigenesis, induction of oncogenic KrasG12D reversibly altered normal epithelial differentiation following tissue damage, leading to precancerous lesions.
Inactivation of KrasG12D in established precursor lesions and during progression to cancer led to regression of the lesions, indicating that KrasG12D was required for tumor cell survival.
Strikingly, during all stages of carcinogenesis, KrasG12D upregulated Hedgehog signaling, inflammatory pathways, and several pathways known to mediate paracrine interactions between epithelial cells and their surrounding microenvironment, thus promoting formation and maintenance of the fibroinflammatory stroma that plays a pivotal role in pancreatic cancer.
Our data establish that epithelial KrasG12D influences multiple cell types to drive pancreatic tumorigenesis and is essential for tumor maintenance.
They also strongly support the notion that inhibiting KrasG12D, or its downstream effectors, could provide a new approach for the treatment of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22231631
How to counter the problem of r1 resection in duodenopancreatectomy for pancreatic cancer?
Although duodenopancreatectomy has been standardized for many years, the pathological examination of the specimen was re-described in the last years.
In methodical pathological studies up to 85% had an R1 margin.1,2 These mainly involved the posterior und medial resection margin.3 As a consequence we need to optimize and standardize the pathological workup of the specimen and to extend the surgical resection, where possible without risk for the patient.
In an instructive video we show the technique of duodenopancreatectomy with emphasis on the dorsal and medial resection margin.
Furthermore we show the standardized pathological workup of the specimen, involving the reporting of all the resection margins.
To accurately determine R1 status at the posterior and medial resection margin, a close collaboration between pathologist and surgeon is crucial.
Pathologists do a standardized workup of the resected specimen with staining of the surfaces and systematic analysis of all the resection margins.
Surgeons need to extend the resection of the pancreatic head to the superior mesenteric artery by dorsal dissection.
PMID: 22231028
Therapeutic Gene Delivery and Transfection in Human Pancreatic Cancer Cells using Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor-targeted Gelatin Nanoparticles.
More than 32,000 patients are diagnosed with pancreatic cancer in the United States per year and the disease is associated with very high mortality (1).
Urgent need exists to develop novel clinically-translatable therapeutic strategies that can improve on the dismal survival statistics of pancreatic cancer patients.
Although gene therapy in cancer has shown a tremendous promise, the major challenge is in the development of safe and effective delivery system, which can lead to sustained transgene expression.
Gelatin is one of the most versatile natural biopolymer, widely used in food and pharmaceutical products.
Previous studies from our laboratory have shown that type B gelatin could physical encapsulate DNA, which preserved the supercoiled structure of the plasmid and improved transfection efficiency upon intracellular delivery.
By thiolation of gelatin, the sulfhydryl groups could be introduced into the polymer and would form disulfide bond within nanoparticles, which stabilizes the whole complex and once disulfide bond is broken due to the presence of glutathione in cytosol, payload would be released (2-5).
Poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)-modified GENS, when administered into the systemic circulation, provides long-circulation times and preferentially targets to the tumor mass due to the hyper-permeability of the neovasculature by the enhanced permeability and retention effect (6).
Studies have shown over-expression of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) on Panc-1 human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells (7).
In order to actively target pancreatic cancer cell line, EGFR specific peptide was conjugated on the particle surface through a PEG spacer.(8) Most anti-tumor gene therapies are focused on administration of the tumor suppressor genes, such as wild-type p53 (wt-p53), to restore the pro-apoptotic function in the cells (9).
The p53 mechanism functions as a critical signaling pathway in cell growth, which regulates apoptosis, cell cycle arrest, metabolism and other processes (10).
In pancreatic cancer, most cells have mutations in p53 protein, causing the loss of apoptotic activity.
With the introduction of wt-p53, the apoptosis could be repaired and further triggers cell death in cancer cells (11).
Based on the above rationale, we have designed EGFR targeting peptide-modified thiolated gelatin nanoparticles for wt-p53 gene delivery and evaluated delivery efficiency and transfection in Panc-1 cells.
PMID: 22231026
History of cholelithiasis and cancer risk in a network of case-control studies.
BACKGROUND: We analyzed the relationship between cholelithiasis and cancer risk in a network of case-control studies conducted in Italy and Switzerland in 1982-2009.
METHODS: The analyses included 1997 oropharyngeal, 917 esophageal, 999 gastric, 23 small intestinal, 3726 colorectal, 684 liver, 688 pancreatic, 1240 laryngeal, 6447 breast, 1458 endometrial, 2002 ovarian, 1582 prostate, 1125 renal cell, 741 bladder cancers, and 21 284 controls.
The odds ratios (ORs) were estimated by multiple logistic regression models.
RESULTS: The ORs for subjects with history of cholelithiasis compared with those without were significantly elevated for small intestinal (OR = 3.96), prostate (OR = 1.36), and kidney cancers (OR = 1.57).
These positive associations were observed ≥10 years after diagnosis of cholelithiasis and were consistent across strata of age, sex, and body mass index.
No relation was found with the other selected cancers.
A meta-analysis including this and three other studies on the relation of cholelithiasis with small intestinal cancer gave a pooled relative risk of 2.35 [95% confidence interval (CI) 1.82-3.03].
CONCLUSION: In subjects with cholelithiasis, we showed an appreciably increased risk of small intestinal cancer and suggested a moderate increased risk of prostate and kidney cancers.
We found no material association with the other cancers considered.
PMID: 22229078
Lipoma of the pancreas, a case report and a review of the literature.
Lipomas of the pancreas are very rare.
There are fewer than 25 reported cases of lipoma originating from the pancreas.
We present a case of pancreatic lipoma in a 61-year-old woman with magnetic resonance imaging findings and confirmatory histological findings.
We discuss and highlight the radiological features distinguishing a pancreatic lipoma from other fatty lesions of the pancreas and pancreatic liposarcoma and provide a brief review of the literature.
PMID: 22228972
Risk factors for adverse outcome in low rectal cancer.
To demonstrate the oncologic outcomes of low rectal cancer and to clarify the risk factors for survival, focusing particularly on the type of surgery performed.
Data from patients with low rectal carcinomas who underwent surgery, either sphincter-preserving surgery (SPS) or abdominoperineal resection (APR), at The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University in China from August 1994 to December 2005 were retrospectively analyzed.
Of 331 patients with low rectal cancer, 159 (48.0%) were treated with SPS.
A higher incidence of positive resection margins and a higher 5-year cumulative local recurrence rate (14.7% vs 6.8%, P = 0.041) were observed in patients after APR compared to SPS.
The five-year overall survival (OS) was 54.6% after APR and 66.8% after SPS (P = 0.018), and the 5-year disease-free survival (DFS) was 52.9% after APR and 65.5% after SPS (P = 0.013).
In multivariate analysis, poor OS and DFS were significantly related to positive resection margins, pT3-4, and pTNM III-IV but not to the type of surgery.
Despite a higher rate of positive resection margins after APR, the type of surgery was not identified as an independent risk factor for survival.
PMID: 22228907
The utility of a novel antibody in the pathological diagnosis of pancreatic acinar cell carcinoma.
AimsAcinar cell carcinomas (ACCs) are rare tumours of the exocrine pancreas accounting for about 1-2% of all pancreatic neoplasms in adults.
It is therefore difficult to come across a large number of ACC cases in a single medical institution, and only a few serial studies have been published.
Since ACCs present a wide variety of morphological patterns, immunohistochemical analysis is useful.
In this study, the authors established a novel monoclonal antibody 2P-1-2-1 by means of a subtractive immunisation method.MethodsImmunohistochemical staining was performed using 50 primary pancreatic tumors, including 7 ACCs, 7 neuroendocrine tumours (NETs), 5 solid-pseudopapillary neoplasms (SPNs), and 31 ductal carcinomas and organs other than the pancreas.ResultsNon-neoplastic acinar cells were stained diffusely, but epithelial cells of the pancreatic duct and the islets of Langerhans were not stained.
In pancreatic tumours, all the seven ACCs were diffusely positive for the 2P-1-2-1 antibody.
However, no positive staining was found in other pancreatic tumours including NETs, SPNs and ductal adenocarcinomas.
The sensitivity and specificity of the 2P-1-2-1 antibody for ACCs were both 100%.
In other organs studied, positive staining was observed only in the ectopic pancreas.ConclusionsIt was shown that the 2P-1-2-1 antibody specifically stained the pancreatic acinar cells and tumours of acinar cell origin, such as ACCs.
Although it remains unclear at this time to which proteins the monoclonal antibody 2P-1-2-1 is directed, it is suggested to be useful for the pathological diagnosis of ACCs and for the exclusion of other pancreatic tumours.
PMID: 22228630
New Gene-Immunotherapy Combining TRAIL-Lymphocytes and EpCAMxCD3 Bispecific Antibody for Tumor Targeting.
To enhance T-cell responsiveness toward cancer cells, we overexpressed TRAIL in lymphocytes, as this death ligand induces tumor-specific apoptosis.
To increase contact time of lymphocytes with tumor cells and thereby of TRAIL with its death receptors, lymphocytes were linked to the CD3 arm of bispecific antibody EpCAMxCD3, to guide the lymphocytes to tumor cells positive for the cancer stem cell marker EpCAM/ESA.
Lymphocytes were transduced with TRAIL lentivirus and the antitumor effect in presence and absence of EpCAMxCD3 was evaluated in vitro and in xenograft studies using epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM)-positive pancreatic and prostate cancer cells.
Compared with control lymphocytes, TRAIL-lymphocytes increased cytotoxicity and further induced expression of several apoptosis-related molecules.
Cotransplantation of TRAIL-lymphocytes and tumor cells in mice or peritumoral injection of TRAIL-lymphocytes in larger xenografts retarded growth and induced apoptosis.
Combination of TRAIL-lymphocytes with EpCAMxCD3 potentiated tumor eradication by enhancing antiapoptotic and antiproliferative signaling and by decreasing tumor vasculature.
Intratumoral cyst formation was involved and associated with enhanced chemokine secretion and infiltration of mouse macrophages, suggesting contribution of an inflammatory host response.
Most importantly, tumorigenicity of pancreatic cancer cells with cancer stem cell features resistant to conventional chemotherapy was strongly reduced.
This gene-immunotherapeutic approach may be a new tool to support endogenous immune responses toward cancer even in its advanced stages.
Clin Cancer Res; 18(4); 1028-38.
©2012 AACR.
PMID: 22228431
Molecular and clinical characterization of an in frame deletion of uncertain clinical significance in the BRCA2 gene.
In this study, we analyzed a "variant of uncertain significance" (VUS) located in exon 23 of the BRCA2 gene exhibited by six members of five distinct families with hereditary breast cancer (BC).
The variant was identified by DNA sequencing, and cDNA analysis revealed its co-expression with wild-type mRNA.
We analyzed co-occurrence with other pathological mutations in BRCA1/2, performed a case-control study, looked for evolutionary data and used in-silico analyses to predict its potential clinical significance.
Sequencing revealed an in frame deletion of 126 nucleotides in exon 23, leading to a deletion of 42 amino acids (c.9203_9328del126, p.Pro2992_Thr3033del).
All of the VUS-carriers suffered from either BC or ovarian/pancreatic cancer.
No other definite pathologic mutation of BRCA genes was found in the five families.
The identified deletion could not be observed in a control cohort of 2,652 healthy individuals, but in 5 out of 916 (0.5%) tested BC families without a bona fide pathogenic BRCA1/2 mutation (P = 0.0011).
According to these results, the in frame deletion c.9203_9328del126 is a rare mutation strongly associated with familial BC.
In summary, our investigations indicate that this BRCA2 deletion is pathogenic.
PMID: 22228104
An International Multicenter Randomized Controlled Trial of G17DT in Patients With Pancreatic Cancer.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to investigate G17DT, an immunogen producing neutralizing antibodies against the tumor growth factors amidated and glycine-extended forms of gastrin-17, in the treatment of pancreatic cancer.
METHODS: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, group-sequential multicenter trial of G17DT in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer unsuitable for or unwilling to take chemotherapy.
Inclusion criteria were a Karnofsky performance score of 60 or higher and a life expectancy of more than 2 months.
Patients received G17DT or placebo emulsion at weeks 0, 1, 3, 24, and 52.
The primary end point was survival, and secondary end points were tolerability, Karnofsky performance.
RESULTS: A total of 154 patients were recruited: 79 G17DT and 75 placebo.
A final analysis of the intention-to-treat population, using a proportional hazards model, stratifying by disease stage and adjusting for interim analysis, gave a hazard ratio for mortality of 0.75 (95% confidence interval, 0.51-1.10, P = 0.138; G17DT/placebo).
A conventional analysis without adjustment for disease stage or interim analysis, censoring for chemotherapy and excluding protocol violators, gave median survival periods of 151 (G17DT) and 82 days (placebo) (log-rank test, P = 0.03).Patients developing anti-G17DT responses (73.8%) survived longer than nonresponders or those on placebo (median survival, 176 vs 63 vs 83; log-rank test, P = 0.003).
G17DT was well tolerated.
PMID: 22228052
Clinicopathologic Study of Intrapancreatic Cancer Spread in Carcinoma of the Body and Tail of the Pancreas.
OBJECTIVE: The aims of this study were to clarify the type of intrapancreatic spread of cancer of the pancreatic body and tail and to assess whether a 2-cm transection margin is adequate to ensure negative margins.
METHODS: We selected 66 patients who underwent distal pancreatectomy for cancer of the pancreatic body and tail.
We investigated intrapancreatic cancer spread in these patients histopathologically and analyzed the relationship between 2-cm-margin positivity and other clinicopathological characteristics.
RESULTS: Two-centimeter-margin positivity was observed in 17 cases.
In these, tumors had a tendency to spread toward the pancreatic head along the main pancreatic duct.
As a result of statistical analysis, we considered venous invasion (odds ratio [OR], 15.48; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.61-148.94; P = 0.0177), 2-cm-margin fibrosis (OR, 173.88; 95% CI, 8.96-3375.03; P = 0.0007), and 2-cm-margin hardness (OR, 5.97; 95% CI, 1.07-33.46; P = 0.0420) as being independently related to 2-cm-margin positivity.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that 2 cm is not a safe length to ensure a negative margin.
In the future, preoperative and intraoperative evaluation of the degree of fibrosis of pancreatic parenchyma could lead to cancer-free pancreatic cut-end margins.
PMID: 22228050
Diagnostic Strategy for Differentiating Autoimmune Pancreatitis From Pancreatic Cancer: Is an Endoscopic Retrograde Pancreatography Essential?
OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to determine whether the choice for performance of endoscopic retrograde pancreatography (ERP) could be tailored to findings on computed tomography (CT) in patients with suspected autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP).
METHODS: Eighty-four AIP patients and 73 pathology-proven pancreatic cancer patients from a prospectively maintained database were retrospectively included.
Computed tomography and ERP images were reviewed in consensus by 2 blinded radiologists.
The diagnostic performance of CT alone and combined use of CT and ERP (CT-ERP) were compared.
RESULTS: The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of CT-ERP was significantly greater than that of CT alone (0.97 vs 0.87, P < 0.001).
When patients with AIP were divided into 2 subgroups according to CT features (typical vs atypical), 24 (69%) of 35 AIP patients with atypical CT findings were correctly diagnosed with AIP at CT-ERP and received benefits from additional ERP.
Endoscopic retrograde pancreatography had little added benefit in patients with typical CT findings for AIP (n = 49), because no alternative diagnoses were established after ERP.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with suspected AIP, the decision to perform ERP could be tailored to findings on CT.
PMID: 22228049
Clinicopathologic Assessment of Pancreatic Ductal Carcinoma Located at the Head of the Pancreas, in Relation to Embryonic Development.
OBJECTIVES: Pancreaticoduodenectomy is performed for pancreatic head cancer that originated from the dorsal or ventral primordium.
Although the extent of lymph node (LN) dissection is the same irrespective of the origin, the lymphatic continuities may differ between the 2 primordia.
METHODS: Between March 2003 and September 2010, 152 patients underwent pancreaticoduodenectomy for pancreatic cancer.
One hundred six patients were assigned into 2 groups according to tumor location on preoperative computed tomography, and their clinical and pathological features were retrospectively analyzed in view of the embryonic development of the pancreas.
RESULTS: Sixty of 106 patients were classified with tumors that were derived from the dorsal pancreas (D group) and 46 from the ventral pancreas (V group).
The frequency of LN involvement around the middle colic artery (LN 15) in the D group was higher than in the V group (P = 0.008).
The rate of additional resection of the pancreas tended to be higher in the D group (P = 0.067).
CONCLUSIONS: The present study showed the detailed pattern of spread of pancreatic ductal carcinoma to the LNs and provided important information for determining the optimal surgical strategy.
PMID: 22227579
Evidence for activation of mutated p53 by apigenin in human pancreatic cancer.
Pancreatic cancer is an exceedingly lethal disease with a five-year survival that ranks among the lowest of gastrointestinal malignancies.
Part of its lethality is attributable to a generally poor response to existing chemotherapeutic regimens.
New therapeutic approaches are urgently needed.
We aimed to elucidate the anti-neoplastic mechanisms of apigenin-an abundant, naturally-occurring plant flavonoid-with a particular focus on p53 function.
Pancreatic cancer cells (BxPC-3, MiaPaCa-2) experienced dose and time-dependent growth inhibition and increased apoptosis with apigenin treatment.
p53 post-translational modification, nuclear translocation, DNA binding, and upregulation of p21 and PUMA were all enhanced by apigenin treatment despite mutated p53 in both cell lines.
Transcription-dependent p53 activity was reversed by pifithrin-α, a specific DNA binding inhibitor of p53, but not growth inhibition or apoptosis suggesting transcription-independent p53 activity.
This was supported by immunoprecipitation assays which demonstrated disassociation of p53/BclXL and PUMA/BclXL and formation of complexes with Bak followed by cytochrome c release.
Treated animals grew smaller tumors with increased cellular apoptosis than those fed control diet.
These results suggest that despite deactivating mutation, p53 retains some of its function which is augmented following treatment with apigenin.
Cell cycle arrest and apoptosis induction may be mediated by transcription-independent p53 function via interactions with BclXL and PUMA.
Further study of flavonoids as chemotherapeutics is warranted.
PMID: 22226782
Presence of Somatic Mutations in Most Early-Stage Pancreatic Intraepithelial Neoplasia.
More information is needed about genetic factors that initiate development of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasms-the most common precursors of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
We show that more than 99% of the earliest-stage, lowest-grade, pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasm-1 lesions contain mutations in KRAS, p16/CDKN2A, GNAS, or BRAF.
These findings could improve our understanding of the development and progression of these premalignant lesions.
PMID: 22226241
Systemic treatment of advanced pancreatic cancer.
Pancreatic cancer belongs to the most malignant gastrointestinal cancers and, in its advanced stage, remains a deadly disease for nearly all affected patients.
Treatment of metastatic adenocarcinoma of the pancreas not only involves chemotherapy and targeted therapy, but also requires attention to accompanying comorbidities as well as frequently intensive supportive treatment and psychosocial support.
Gemcitabine-based combinations with fluoropyrimidines and platin analogs have essentially failed to provide a substantial prolongation of survival and may constitute a treatment option only in patients with a good performance status.
Among targeted therapies, only the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor erlotinib has shown activity which is marginal in the overall population, but clinically relevant in patients developing skin rash.
New avenues of polychemotherapy are presently explored since the gemcitabine-free FOLFIRINOX-regimen (infusional 5-fluorouracil/folinic acid plus irinotecan and oxaliplatin) was shown to be markedly superior to gemcitabine in selected good-performance patients.
Pancreatic cancer is notably characterized as a hypovascular tumor rich in desmoplastic stromal tissue.
An innovative approach to treatment therefore focuses on peritumoral fibroblasts and aims to induce a depletion of the stroma either by inhibition of the hedgehog pathway or by targeting SPARC (secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine) via application of albumin-bound paclitaxel.
PMID: 22225963
Hereditary intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas.
Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) is a rare pancreatic tumor defined as intraductal mucin-producting neoplasm with tall, columnar, mucin-containing epithelium.
IPMN have already been described in association with inherited genetic disorder including familial adenomatous polyposis and Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.
However, there is no reported description of familial history of IPMN.
We reported in this case-report IPMN in the first-degree relatives without familial history of colorectal polyposis or previous extra-pancreatic cancer.
The rarety of IPMN suggests that the coexistence of this tumor in two first-degree relatives is probably due to a genetic inherited factor that remains to be elucidated.
PMID: 22225274
Dosimetric investigation of breath-hold intensity-modulated radiotherapy for pancreatic cancer.
Purpose: To experimentally investigate the effects of variations in respiratory motion during breath-holding (BH) at end-exhalation (EE) on intensity-modulated radiotherapy (BH-IMRT) dose distribution using a motor-driven base, films, and an ionization chamber.Methods: Measurements were performed on a linear accelerator, which has a 120-leaf independently moving multileaf collimator with 5-mm leaf width at the isocenter for the 20-cm central field.
Polystyrene phantoms with dimensions of 40 × 40 × 10 cm were set on a motor-driven base.
All gantry angles of seven IMRT plans (a total of 35 fields) were changed to zero, and doses were then delivered to a film placed at a depth of 4 cm and an ionization chamber at a depth of 5 cm in the phantom with a dose rate of 600 MU/min under the following conditions: pulsation from the abdominal aorta and baseline drift with speeds of 0.2 mm/s (BD(0.2mm/s)) and 0.4 mm/s (BD(0.4mm/s)).
As a reference for comparison, doses were also delivered to the chamber and film under stationary conditions.Results: In chamber measurements, means ± standard deviations of the dose deviations between stationary and moving conditions were -0.52% ± 1.03% (range: -3.41-1.05%), -0.07% ± 1.21% (range: -1.88-4.31%), and 0.03% ± 1.70% (range: -2.70-6.41%) for pulsation, BD(0.2mm/s), and BD(0.4mm/s), respectively.
The γ passing rate ranged from 99.5% to 100.0%, even with the criterion of 2%/1 mm for pulsation pattern.
In the case of BD(0.4mm/s), the γ passing rate for four of 35 fields (11.4%) did not reach 90% with a criterion of 3%/3 mm.
The differences in γ passing rate between BD(0.2mm/s) and BD(0.4mm/s) were statistically significant for each criterion.
Taking γ passing rates of > 90% as acceptable with a criterion of 3%/3 mm, large differences were observed in the γ passing rate between the baseline drift of ≤5 mm and that of >5 mm (minimum γ passing rate: 92.0% vs 82.7%; p < 0.01).Conclusions: This study suggested that the baseline drift of >5 mm should be avoided in the BH-IMRT.
PMID: 22223849
DJ-1 promotes invasion and metastasis of pancreatic cancer cells by activating SRC/ERK/uPA.
A major hallmark of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is extensive local tumor invasion and early systemic dissemination.
DJ-1 has been shown to prevent cell death via the Akt pathway, thereby playing an important role in cancer progression and Parkinson's disease development.
Here, we investigated the role of DJ-1 in tumor invasion and metastasis of pancreatic cancer and showed that DJ-1 is upregulated in 68.5% of pancreatic cancer specimens, correlated with tumor stage and predictive of short overall survival.
Knockdown of DJ-1 expression in two PDAC cell lines reduced cell migration and invasion potential in vitro and inhibited metastasis in vivo.
Knockdown of DJ-1 led to cytoskeleton disruption and diminished urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) activity and expression, without affecting plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 and uPA receptor (uPAR) expression.
All these effects were reversed by restoration of DJ-1 expression.
In determining the pathway through which DJ-1 regulated cell migration and invasion, DJ-1 was found not to regulate Akt phosphorylation.
Rather, it promoted extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and SRC phosphorylation.
Inhibition of the ERK pathway in PDAC mimicked the effects of DJ-1 on cell migration, invasion, actin cytoskeleton and uPA/uPAR system and abolished the effects on promoting PDAC cell invasion and migration.
These data represent the first identification of an important function of DJ-1, which is to regulate the invasion and metastasis properties of PDAC through the ERK/uPA cascade.
PMID: 22222710
Muscarinic receptor agonists and antagonists: effects on cancer.
Many epithelial and endothelial cells express a cholinergic autocrine loop in which acetylcholine acts as a growth factor to stimulate cell growth.
Cancers derived from these tissues similarly express a cholinergic autocrine loop and ACh secreted by the cancer or neighboring cells interacts with M3 muscarinic receptors expressed on the cancer cells to stimulate tumor growth.
Primary proliferative pathways involve MAPK and Akt activation.
The ability of muscarinic agonists to stimulate, and M3 antagonists to inhibit tumor growth has clearly been demonstrated for lung and colon cancer.
The ability of muscarinic agonists to stimulate growth has been shown for melanoma, pancreatic, breast, ovarian, prostate and brain cancers, suggesting that M3 antagonists will also inhibit growth of these tumors as well.
As yet no clinical trials have proven the efficacy of M3 antagonists as cancer therapeutics, though the widespread clinical use and low toxicity of M3 antagonists support the potential role of these drugs as adjuvants to current cancer therapies.
PMID: 22222635
Overexpression and oncogenic function of aldo-keto reductase family 1B10 (AKR1B10) in pancreatic carcinoma.
Aldo-keto reductase family 1B10 (AKR1B10) exhibits more restricted lipid substrate specificity (including farnesal, geranylgeranial, retinal and carbonyls), and metabolizing these lipid substrates has a crucial role in promoting carcinogenesis.
Overexpression of AKR1B10 has been identified in smoking-related carcinomas such as lung cancer.
As development of pancreatic cancer is firmly linked to smoking, the aim of the present study was to examine the expression and oncogenic role of AKR1B10 in pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
AKR1B10 expression was analyzed in 50 paraffin-embedded clinical pancreatic cancer samples using immunohistochemistry.
Oncogenic function of AKR1B10 was examined in pancreatic carcinoma cells in vitro using western blotting and siRNA approaches, mainly on cell apoptosis and protein prenylation including KRAS protein and its downstream signals.
Immunohistochemistry analysis revealed that AKR1B10 overexpressed in 70% (35/50) of pancreatic adenocarcinomas and majority of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia, but not in adjacent morphologically normal pancreatic tissue.
Compared with a normal pancreatic ductal epithelial cell (HPDE6E7), all of the six cultured pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell lines had an overexpression of AKR1B10 using immunoblotting, which correlated with increase of enzyme activity.
siRNA-mediated silencing of AKR1B10 expression in pancreatic cancer cells resulted in (1) increased cell apoptosis, (2) increased non-farnesyled HDJ2 protein and (3) decreased membrane-bound prenylated KRAS protein and its downstream signaling molecules including phosphorylated ERK and MEK and membrane-bound E-cadherin.
Our findings provide first time evidence that AKR1B10 is a unique enzyme involved in pancreatic carcinogenesis possibly via modulation of cell apoptosis and protein prenylation.Modern Pathology advance online publication, 6 January 2012; doi:10.1038/modpathol.2011.191.
PMID: 22222427
Hydrogen sulfide-releasing NSAIDs inhibit the growth of human cancer cells: A general property and evidence of a tissue type-independent effect.
Hydrogen sulfide-releasing non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (HS-NSAIDs) are an emerging novel class of compounds with significant anti-inflammatory properties.
They consist of a traditional NSAID to which an H(2)S-releasing moiety is covalently attached.
We examined the effects of four different HS-NSAIDs on the growth properties of eleven different human cancer cell lines of six different tissue origins.
Human colon, breast, pancreatic, prostate, lung, and leukemia cancer cell lines were treated with HS-aspirin, -sulindac, -iburofen, -naproxen, and their traditional counterparts.
HS-NSAIDs inhibited the growth of all cancer cell lines studied, with potencies of 28- to >3000-fold greater than that of their traditional counterparts.
HS-aspirin (HS-ASA) was consistently the most potent.
HS-NSAIDs inhibited cell proliferation, induced apoptosis, and caused G(0)/G(1) cell cycle block.
Metabolism of HS-ASA by colon cells showed that the acetyl group of ASA was hydrolyzed rapidly, followed by hydrolysis of the ester bond linking the salicylate anion to the H(2)S releasing moiety, producing salicylic acid and ADT-OH from which H(2)S is released.
In reconstitution studies, ASA and ADT-OH were individually less active than the intact HS-ASA towards cell growth inhibition.
Additionally, the combination of these two components representing a fairly close approximation to the intact HS-ASA, was 95-fold less active than the intact HS-ASA for growth inhibition.
Taken together, these results demonstrate that HS-NSAIDs have potential anti-growth activity against a wide variety of human cancer cells.
PMID: 22222375
RAS oncogenic signal upregulates EZH2 in pancreatic cancer.
The neoplastic transformation by mutant RAS is thought to require remodeling of expression of an entire set of genes.
However, the underlying mechanism for initiation of gene expression remodeling in tumorigenesis remains elusive.
This study was aimed to define the oncogenic role of EZH2, a histone modifier protein that is induced by oncogenic mutant RAS, using pancreatic cancers of transgenic rats exogenously expressing human mutant RAS.
Immunohistochemical observation of preneoplastic or cancerous lesions in the animal model suggested that upregulation of Ezh2 protein is an initiating event in pancreatic carcinogenesis.
MEK-inhibition or Elk-1-knockdown downregulated EZH2, and MEK-inhibition or EZH2-knockdown restored expression of a tumor suppressor, RUNX3 in human and rat pancreatic cancer cells activated by the oncogenic RAS.
Furthermore, Elk-1- or EZH2-knockdown inhibited growth of the cancer cells.
These results strongly suggested that the oncogenic RAS upregulates EZH2 through MEK-ERK signaling, resulted in downregulation of tumor suppressors including RUNX3 in pancreatic carcinogenesis.
PMID: 22221899
Distinctive expression of CD133 between intraductal papillary neoplasms of the bile duct and bile duct adenocarcinomas.
Aim:  Intraductal papillary neoplasm of the bile duct (IPNB), a novel entity of biliary disease, is recently advocated as the counterpart of pancreatic intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) because both are in common with a large amount of mucin production and papillary growth.
Based on our recent finding that expression of CD133, a cancer stem cell marker, is lacking in pancreatic IPMN, we herein focused on CD133 expression of IPNB in comparison with intrahepatic cholangiocellular carcinoma (IHCCC) or hilar bile duct cancer (HBDC).
Methods:  Expression of CD133 protein was immunohistochemically determined in patients with IPNB (n = 7), IHCCC (n = 16) or HBDC (n = 8).
In addition, morphological and immunohistochemical mucin expression patterns were characterized in IPNB, and clinicopathological features including prognosis were compared between IPNB and other biliary tumors.
Results:  The IPNB group included significantly more females than the other two groups, and had a longer survival time.
While no CD133 expression was observed in IPNB tumor, 16.4% of cancer cells in IHCCC and 17.2% of cells in HBDC expressed CD133.
Among seven patients with IPNB, six (86%) were morphologically the pancreatobiliary type and four of six showed mucin expression pattern of the typical pancreatobiliary type (MUC1+/MUC2-/MUC5AC+).
Conclusion:  Loss of CD133 expression supports the hypothesis that IPNB is a counterpart of pancreatic IPMN with a differing carcinogenesis from conventional bile duct adenocarcinomas.
PMID: 22221784
Gastrointestinal, hepatobiliary, pancreatic, and iron-related diseases in long-term survivors of allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation.
Gastrointestinal and hepatobiliary problems in the second year after allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT) are usually a continuation of symptoms of protracted acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), chronic GVHD, medication side effects, and infection related to immune suppression.
As time passes, as tolerance develops, and as immunity improves, the frequency and severity of these problems wane, but new problems involving the gut and liver may arise, sometimes insidiously and sometimes decades after the transplant.
Examples are esophageal strictures related to chronic GVHD, gallstones, cirrhosis caused by chronic hepatitis C, secondary malignancy, and rare cases of pancreatic atrophy.
One very common complication of transplantation, iron overload, is often associated with substantial iron accumulation in the liver; however, the most troublesome complications are not hepatic but cardiac and endocrine-related.
PMID: 22221702
Serotonin expression in pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors correlates with a trabecular histologic pattern and large duct involvement.
Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors with prominent stromal fibrosis are often clinically, radiographically, and grossly indistinguishable from ductal adenocarcinoma.
We recently described a small series of fibrotic pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors that express serotonin.
To understand better the relationship between histopathologic patterns and serotonin expression, we reviewed 361 pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors to identify those with prominent stromal fibrosis exceeding 30% of total tumor area.
We identified 52 cases and immunolabeled these neoplasms with antibodies to serotonin and Ki-67.
Two predominant histologic subtypes were identified: 14 (26.9%) of 52 had a trabecular or trabecular-glandular cellular pattern with interspersed fibrosis, whereas 38 (73.1%) of 52 had solid architecture.
Of the 52, 14 (26.9%) pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors showed at least focal serotonin immunoreactivity.
Tumors with predominantly trabecular architecture were significantly more likely to express serotonin than those with solid architecture (P < .01).
Only 2 of 34 pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors with fibrosis less than 30% of total tumor area expressed serotonin.
The 14 serotonin-expressing tumors were less likely to have lymph node metastases (P = .016) and more likely to involve large pancreatic ducts (P < .01) than were the 38 serotonin-negative tumors.
The serotonin-expressing tumors were also found in a younger patient population (P < .01).
There was no significant association of serotonin immunoreactivity with Ki-67 proliferation index, tumor size, or distant metastases.
Our data demonstrate a strong correlation between trabecular architecture and serotonin immunoreactivity in pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors with stromal fibrosis.
Serotonin-expressing tumors are also less likely to have lymph node metastases and more likely to involve large pancreatic ducts.
PMID: 22221606
Individualizing Care for Locoregional Pancreatic Cancer?
PMID: 22221605
Novel Immunocompetent Murine Models Representing Advanced Local and Metastatic Pancreatic Cancer.
BACKGROUND: The development of novel therapeutics for pancreatic cancer has been hindered by a lack of relevant preclinical models.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the clinical relevancy of two pancreatic cancer models using standard-of-care therapeutic agent gemcitabine.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Murine Panc02 cells were injected directly into the spleen or pancreas of C57BL/6 mice to respectively create models of metastatic and locally advanced pancreatic cancer.
Beginning 7 d post-Panc02 injection, treated mice received 20 mg/kg gemcitabine i.p.
every 3 d.
Animals were sacrificed when the untreated mice became moribund and tumor/liver weight used to assess tumor burden.
RESULTS: Untreated mice became moribund 22 d after pancreatic Panc02 injection.
Gross analysis revealed localized pancreatic tumors weighing 1.063 g.
Intrasplenic Panc02 injection produced extensive liver metastasis by d 15 when the untreated mice first became moribund.
Liver weights at this time averaged 3.6 g compared with the average non-tumor-bearing weight of 1.23 g.
Gemcitabine therapy resulted in a 54% decrease in localized pancreatic tumor weight and 62.5% decrease in metastatic liver weight.
Additionally, gemcitabine therapy extended animal survival to 20.5 d compared with 18.0 d average for the untreated mice.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe two models depicting both locally advanced and metastatic pancreatic cancer in immunocompetent mice.
In efforts to establish baseline therapeutic efficacy, we determined that gemcitabine reduces tumor burden in both models and enhances survival in the metastatic model.
These clinically relevant models provide valuable tools to evaluate novel therapeutics in pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22221575
Repeated pancreatectomy after pancreato-duodenectomy for a intraductal papillary mucinous tumour: advantage of pancreatico-gastrostomy with a gastric partition.
  Regular follow-up and monitoring of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN) is important as there is a risk of recurrence in both the non-invasive and invasive IPMN.
  Three patients developed pancreatic remnant recurrence after a pancreatico-duodenectomy for IPMN.
Pancreatico-gastrostomy anastomosis was performed in all patients.
Long-term follow-up was performed with radiographical surveillance and by endoscopic gastroscopy.
  Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) revealed in one patient, 2 years after surgery, a 3-cm mass at the site of the anastomosis and dilatation of the Wirsung duct >6 mm in two other patients (2 and 3 years after surgery, respectively).
The diagnosis of recurrence was confirmed endoscopically by the presence of a large amount of mucin at the anastomotic site.
Cytological examination revealed moderate dysplasia.
Opacification of the Wirsung duct after endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) was only possible in one patient in whom an irregular stenosis of the duct was observed.
  Long-term follow-up of the pancreatic remnant after pancreato-duodenectomy for IPMN is better achieved with pancreatico-gastrostomy anastomosis.
PMID: 22221480
Percutaneous irreversible electroporation of surgically unresectable pancreatic cancer: a case report.
The present report describes a case of percutaneous irreversible electroporation (IRE) in a 78-year-old man with surgically unresectable stage III (tumor/node/metastasis stages, T4N0M0) pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
Two ablations were performed for a 4.1-cm mass encasing the celiac and superior mesenteric artery.
At 3 months, a solitary liver metastasis developed, which was treated with radiofrequency ablation followed by gemcitabine chemotherapy.
At 6-month follow-up, magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated no residual disease and a decreasing cancer antigen 19-9 level.
Percutaneous IRE shows promise as a feasible and potentially safe method for local tumor control in patients with surgically unresectable disease.
PMID: 22220212
Epigenetic changes of CXCR4 and its ligand CXCL12 as prognostic factors for sporadic breast cancer.
Chemokines and their receptors are involved in the development and cancer progression.
The chemokine CXCL12 interacts with its receptor, CXCR4, to promote cellular adhesion, survival, proliferation and migration.
The CXCR4 gene is upregulated in several types of cancers, including skin, lung, pancreas, brain and breast tumors.
In pancreatic cancer and melanoma, CXCR4 expression is regulated by DNA methylation within its promoter region.
In this study we examined the role of cytosine methylation in the regulation of CXCR4 expression in breast cancer cell lines and also correlated the methylation pattern with the clinicopathological aspects of sixty-nine primary breast tumors from a cohort of Brazilian women.
RT-PCR showed that the PMC-42, MCF7 and MDA-MB-436 breast tumor cell lines expressed high levels of CXCR4.
Conversely, the MDA-MB-435 cell line only expressed CXCR4 after treatment with 5-Aza-CdR, which suggests that CXCR4 expression is regulated by DNA methylation.
To confirm this hypothesis, a 184 bp fragment of the CXCR4 gene promoter region was cloned after sodium bisulfite DNA treatment.
Sequencing data showed that cell lines that expressed CXCR4 had only 15% of methylated CpG dinucleotides, while the cell line that not have CXCR4 expression, had a high density of methylation (91%).
Loss of DNA methylation in the CXCR4 promoter was detected in 67% of the breast cancer analyzed.
The absence of CXCR4 methylation was associated with the tumor stage, size, histological grade, lymph node status, ESR1 methylation and CXCL12 methylation, metastasis and patient death.
Kaplan-Meier curves demonstrated that patients with an unmethylated CXCR4 promoter had a poorer overall survival and disease-free survival.
Furthermore, patients with both CXCL12 methylation and unmethylated CXCR4 had a shorter overall survival and disease-free survival.
These findings suggest that the DNA methylation status of both CXCR4 and CXCL12 genes could be used as a biomarker for prognosis in breast cancer.
PMID: 22220206
Enhanced discrimination of malignant from benign pancreatic disease by measuring the CA 19-9 antigen on specific protein carriers.
The CA 19-9 assay detects a carbohydrate antigen on multiple protein carriers, some of which may be preferential carriers of the antigen in cancer.
We tested the hypothesis that the measurement of the CA 19-9 antigen on individual proteins could improve performance over the standard CA 19-9 assay.
We used antibody arrays to measure the levels of the CA 19-9 antigen on multiple proteins in serum or plasma samples from patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma or pancreatitis.
Sample sets from three different institutions were examined, comprising 531 individual samples.
The measurement of the CA 19-9 antigen on any individual protein did not improve upon the performance of the standard CA 19-9 assay (82% sensitivity at 75% specificity for early-stage cancer), owing to diversity among patients in their CA 19-9 protein carriers.
However, a subset of cancer patients with no elevation in the standard CA 19-9 assay showed elevations of the CA 19-9 antigen specifically on the proteins MUC5AC or MUC16 in all sample sets.
By combining measurements of the standard CA 19-9 assay with detection of CA 19-9 on MUC5AC and MUC16, the sensitivity of cancer detection was improved relative to CA 19-9 alone in each sample set, achieving 67-80% sensitivity at 98% specificity.
This finding demonstrates the value of measuring glycans on specific proteins for improving biomarker performance.
Diagnostic tests with improved sensitivity for detecting pancreatic cancer could have important applications for improving the treatment and management of patients suffering from this disease.
PMID: 22220202
Retinoid signaling in pancreatic cancer, injury and regeneration.
Activation of embryonic signaling pathways quiescent in the adult pancreas is a feature of pancreatic cancer (PC).
These discoveries have led to the development of novel inhibitors of pathways such as Notch and Hedgehog signaling that are currently in early phase clinical trials in the treatment of several cancer types.
Retinoid signaling is also essential for pancreatic development, and retinoid therapy is used successfully in other malignancies such as leukemia, but little is known concerning retinoid signaling in PC.
We investigated the role of retinoid signaling in vitro and in vivo in normal pancreas, pancreatic injury, regeneration and cancer.
Retinoid signaling is active in occasional cells in the adult pancreas but is markedly augmented throughout the parenchyma during injury and regeneration.
Both chemically induced and genetically engineered mouse models of PC exhibit a lack of retinoid signaling activity compared to normal pancreas.
As a consequence, we investigated Cellular Retinoid Binding Protein 1 (CRBP1), a key regulator of retinoid signaling known to play a role in breast cancer development, as a potential therapeutic target.
Loss, or significant downregulation of CRBP1 was present in 70% of human PC, and was evident in the very earliest precursor lesions (PanIN-1A).
However, in vitro gain and loss of function studies and CRBP1 knockout mice suggested that loss of CRBP1 expression alone was not sufficient to induce carcinogenesis or to alter PC sensitivity to retinoid based therapies.
In conclusion, retinoid signalling appears to play a role in pancreatic regeneration and carcinogenesis, but unlike breast cancer, it is not mediated directly by CRBP1.
PMID: 22219598
Impact of changing our cannulation method on the incidence of post-endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography pancreatitis after pancreatic guidewire placement.
To clarify whether the incidence of post-endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) pancreatitis (PEP) after pancreatic guidewire placement (PGW) can be reduced by using a different cannulation method.
Between April 2001 and October 2009, PGW was performed in 142 patients with native papilla to overcome difficult biliary cannulation.
Our cannulation method for ERCP was changed from contrast injection (CI) using a single-lumen catheter (April 2001-May 2008) to wire-guided cannulation (WGC) using a double-lumen catheter (June 2008-October 2009).
The CI protocol was also changed during the study period: in the first period it was used for routine pancreatography for detecting small pancreatic cancer (April 2001-November 2002), whereas in the second period it was not (December 2002-May 2008).
In PGW with CI using a single-lumen catheter, the contrast medium in the catheter lumen was injected into the pancreatic duct.
The success rate of biliary cannulation, the incidence of PEP according to the cannulation method, and the impact of CI using a single-lumen catheter on PEP in comparison with WGC using a double-lumen catheter were investigated.
CI with routine pancreatography, CI without routine pancreatography, and WGC were performed in 27 patients, 77 patients and 38 patients, respectively.
Routine pancreatography did not contribute to the early diagnosis of pancreatic cancer in our study period.
In CI without routine pancreatography and WGC, diagnostic pancreatography was performed in 17 patients and no patients, respectively.
The success rate of biliary cannulation by PGW alone was 69%, and the final success rate was increased to 80.3% by the addition of consecutive maneuvers or a second ERCP.
PEP occurred in 22 patients (15.5%), and the severity was mild in all cases.
When analyzed according to cannulation method, the incidence of PEP was 37.0% (10/27) in the patients who underwent CI with routine pancreatography, 14.3% (11/77) in those who underwent CI without routine pancreatography, and 2.6% (1/38) in those who underwent WGC.
In all patients who underwent CI using a single-lumen catheter, the incidence of PEP was 20% (21/104), which was significantly higher than that in WGC using a double-lumen catheter.
In univariate and multivariate analysis, CI using a single-lumen catheter showed a high, statistically significant, odds ratio for PEP after PGW.
The practice of a cannulation method involving the use of a double-lumen catheter minimizes the CI dose administered to the pancreatic duct and reduces the incidence of PEP after PGW.
PMID: 22219001
The founder Ashkenazi Jewish mutations in the MSH2 and MSH6 genes in Israeli patients with gastric and pancreatic cancer.
The genetic basis for gastric and pancreatic cancer is largely undetermined.
These cancers are overrepresented in hereditary non polyposis colon cancer (HNPCC), inherited cancer syndrome attributed to germline mutations primarily in the MSH2, MLH1 and MSH6 genes.
Among Ashkenazi Jewish HNPCC cases, recurring mutations in the MSH2 (1906G>C; A636P) and MSH6 (c.3984_3987dupGTCA; c.3959_3962delCAAG) genes can be detected.
The MSH6*c.3984_3987dupGTCA mutation was recently detected in an Ashkenazi family with inherited gastric cancer.
We hypothesized that it may be possible to detect the recurring MSH2 and MSH6 mutations in Jewish individuals with familial and sporadic gastric and pancreatic cancer.
To test this notion, we genotyped 143 unrelated Jewish Israeli patients with gastric (n = 23) and pancreatic (n = 120) cancer.
The majority of cases (100/143-70%) were Ashkenazi Jews, and 10% (n = 16)-of mixed Ashkenazi-non Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry, and most participants (n = 96-67.1%) had a positive family history of cancer.
Genotyping the MSH2*A636P mutation was performed by PCR followed by restriction enzyme digest, and the MSH6*c.3984_3987dupGTCA and c.3959_3962delCAAG mutations were detected by fragment size analysis by capillary electrophoresis and sequencing.
None of the participants harbored any of the genotyped MSH2 or MSH6 mutations.
We conclude that the recurring Ashkenazi MSH2 and MSH6 mutations contribute little if any to sporadic and familial gastric and pancreatic cases in Israeli patients.
PMID: 22217246
Drugs in preclinical and early-stage clinical development for pancreatic cancer.
INTRODUCTION: Pancreatic cancer (PC) is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the US and Europe, and the lethality of this cancer is demonstrated by the fact that the annual incidences are approximately equal to the annual deaths.
Current therapy for PC is multimodal, involving surgery and chemotherapy.
Clinical symptoms are unspecific, and consequently about 85% of patients with PC are diagnosed at advanced tumor stages without any surgical therapy options.
Since the therapeutic rates for PC are so dismal, it is essential to review the clinical targets for diagnosis and treatment of this lethal cancer.
AREAS COVERED: In this review, we discuss potential treatment options for PC by identifying molecular targets including those involved in cell proliferation, survival, migration, invasion and angiogenesis.
Targeting these molecules in combination with surgery could improve the clinical outcome for PC patients.
EXPERT OPINION: For a decade, gemcitabine has remained the single first-line chemotherapeutic agent for advanced adenocarcinoma of the pancreas; however, less than 25% of patients benefit from gemcitabine.
The reason for frequent reoccurrence of PC after conventional methods such as surgery, radiation and/or chemotherapy is due to the lack of understanding of the basic underlying metabolic cause of the cancer and thus consequently remains uncorrected.
Our understanding of drug resistance in PC is still not clear and may be answered by focusing on new useful biomarkers and their role in chemo- and radioresistance.
PMID: 22216460
An appreciation of Ralph Marvin Steinman (1943–2011).
Ralph Steinman, an editor at the Journal of Experimental Medicine since 1978, shared the 2011 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his discovery of dendritic cells (DCs) and their role in immunity.
Ralph never knew.
He died of pancreatic cancer on September 30, 3 days before the Nobel announcement.
Unaware of his death at the time of their announcement, the Nobel Committee made the unprecedented decision that his award would stand.
Ralph was the consummate physician-scientist to the end.
After his diagnosis, he actively participated in his 4.5 years of treatments, creating experimental therapies using his own DCs in conjunction with the therapies devised by his physicians, all the while traveling, lecturing, and most of all pursuing new investigations in his laboratory.
For 38 years—from his discovery of DCs to his Nobel Prize—Ralph pioneered the criteria and methods used to identify, isolate, grow, and study DCs.
He and his colleagues demonstrated that DCs are initiators of immunity and regulators of tolerance.
In his most recent studies, Ralph was harnessing the specialized features of DCs to design improved vaccines.
The following synopsis describes some of his seminal discoveries.
PMID: 22215331
[Results of pancreaticoduodenectomy in the treatment of periampullary tumors].
The diagnosis and treatment of periampullary tumors represents a challenge for current medicine.
To review the results of pancreaticoduodenectomy (PDD) in the treatment of periampullary tumors and to identify risk factors that impact the long-term survival.
We performed a retrospective study of patients who underwent a PDD for periampullary tumors between 1993 and 2009.
We reviewed perioperative results and long term survival.
We performed a multivariate analysis for long-term survival.
A PDD was performed in 181 patients aged 58 ± 12 years (98 females).
Piloric preservation was done in 53% and a pancreatogastric anastomosis was used in 94% of cases.
Morbidity was 62% and postoperative mortality was 5.5%.
Pancreatic cancer was the most frequent pathological finding in 41%, followed by ampullary cancer in 28% and distal bile duct cancer in 16%.
Median survival was 17 months, with a five years survival of 24%.
Survival for ampullary tumors was 28 months with a five years survival of 32%.
The median and five years survival were 14 months and 16% for bile duct cancer and 11 months and 14% for pancreatic cancer.
Multivariate analysis identified tumor type (pancreas /bile duct) and lymph node dissemination as independent predictors of mortality.
One quarter of patients experienced long term survival.
Mortality predictors were tumor type and lymph node dissemination.
PMID: 22215137
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma induces bone marrow mobilization of myeloid-derived suppressor cells which promote primary tumor growth.
PURPOSE: Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) are a heterogeneous population of immunosuppressive cells that are upregulated in cancer.
Little is known about the prevalence and importance of MDSC in pancreas adenocarcinoma (PA).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Peripheral blood, bone marrow, and tumor samples were collected from pancreatic cancer patients, analyzed for MDSC (CD15(+)CD11b(+)) by flow cytometry and compared to cancer-free controls.
The suppressive capacity of MDSC (CD11b(+)Gr-1(+)) and the effectiveness of MDSC depletion were assessed in C57BL/6 mice inoculated with Pan02, a murine PA, and treated with placebo or zoledronic acid, a potent aminobisphosphonate previously shown to target MDSC.
The tumor microenvironment was analyzed for MDSC (Gr1(+)CD11b(+)), effector T cells, and tumor cytokine levels.
RESULTS: Patients with PA demonstrated increased frequency of MDSC in the bone marrow and peripheral circulation which correlated with disease stage.
Normal pancreas tissue showed no MDSC infiltrate, while human tumors avidly recruited MDSC.
Murine tumors similarly recruited MDSC that suppressed CD8(+) T cells in vitro and accelerated tumor growth in vivo.
Treatment with zoledronic acid impaired intratumoral MDSC accumulation resulting in delayed tumor growth rate, prolonged median survival, and increased recruitment of T cells to the tumor.
This was associated with a more robust type 1 response with increased levels of IFN-γ and decreased levels of IL-10.
CONCLUSIONS: MDSC are important mediators of tumor-induced immunosuppression in pancreatic cancer.
Inhibiting MDSC accumulation with zoledronic acid improves the host anti-tumor response in animal studies suggesting that efforts to block MDSC may represent a novel treatment strategy for pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22214289
Targeting CEA in Pancreas Cancer Xenografts with a Mutated scFv-Fc Antibody Fragment.
ABSTRACT:.
Sensitive antibody-based tumor targeting has the potential not only to image metastatic and micrometastatic disease, but also to be the basis of targeted therapy.
The vast majority of pancreas cancers express carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA).
Thus, we sought to evaluate the potential of CEA as a pancreatic cancer target utilizing a rapidly clearing engineered anti-CEA scFv-Fc antibody fragment with a mutation in the Fc region [anti-CEA scFv-Fc H310A].
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) with the antibody fragment was used to confirm expression of CEA on human pancreas cancer specimens.
In vivo tumor targeting was evaluated by tail vein injection of I124-labeled anti-CEA scFv-Fc(H310A) into mice harboring CEA-positive and -negative xenografts.
MicroPET/CT imaging was performed at successive time intervals.
Radioactivity in blood and tumor was measured after the last time point.
Additionally, unlabeled anti-CEA scFv-Fc(H310A) was injected into CEA-positive tumor bearing mice and ex vivo IHC was performed to identify the presence of the antibody to define the microscopic intratumoral pattern of targeting.
Moderate to strong staining by IHC was noted on 84% of our human pancreatic cancer specimens and was comparable to staining of our xenografts.
Pancreas xenograft imaging with the radiolabeled anti-CEA scFv-Fc(H310A) antibody demonstrated average tumor/blood ratios of 4.0.
Immunolocalization demonstrated peripheral antibody fragment penetration of one to five cell diameters (0.75 to 1.5 μm).
We characterized a preclinical xenograft model with respect to CEA expression that was comparable to human cases.
We demonstrated that the anti-CEA scFv-Fc(H310A) antibody exhibited antigen-specific tumor targeting and shows promise as an imaging and potentially therapeutic agent.
PMID: 22213847
Personalizing surgical risk: "To be or not to be" should not be the question.
PMID: 22213587
Breast cancer in a case of Shwachman Diamond syndrome.
Shwachman Diamond syndrome (SDS) is a rare inherited bone marrow failure syndrome (IBMFS) characterized by neutropenia, exocrine pancreatic dysfunction, and cancer predisposition.
Patients are at risk for myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) but, unlike other IBMFS, there have been no reported cases of solid tumors.
We report a novel case of a solid tumor in a patient with SDS and biallelic mutations in the Shwachman Bodian Diamond Syndrome gene (SBDS).
Whether the development of breast cancer in this patient is due to SDS or an isolated case due to unknown factors requires further study.
Pediatr Blood Cancer © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22213458
Novel anti-ErbB3 monoclonal antibodies show therapeutic efficacy in xenografted and spontaneous mouse tumors.
The role of the ErbB3 receptor in signal transduction is to augment the signaling repertoire of active heterodimeric ErbB receptor complexes through activating the PI3K/AKT pathway, which in turn promotes survival and proliferation.
ErbB3 has recently been proposed to be involved in acquired resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), and is therefore a promising new drug cancer target.
Since ErbB3 is a kinase defective receptor, it cannot be targeted by small molecule inhibitors, whereas monoclonal antibodies may offer a viable strategy for pharmacological intervention.
In this study, we have utilized DNA electroporation (DNA-EP) to generate a set of novel hybridomas directed against human ErbB3, which have been characterized for their biochemical and functional properties and selected for their ability to negatively regulate the ErbB3-mediated signaling pathway.
In vitro, the anti-ErbB3 antibodies modulate the growth rate of cancer cells of different origins.
In vivo they show antitumoral properties in a xenograft model of human pancreatic tumor and in the ErbB2-driven carcinogenesis genetically engineered mouse model (GEMM) for mammary tumor, the BALB/neuT.
Our data confirm that downregulating the ErbB3-mediated signals with the use of anti-ErbB3 monoclonal antibodies is both feasible and relevant for therapeutic purposes and provides new opportunities for novel anti-ErbB3 combinatory strategies for cancer treatment.
J.
Cell.
Physiol.
© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22213426
Inactivation of Ink4a/Arf leads to deregulated expression of miRNAs in K-Ras transgenic mouse model of pancreatic cancer.
Human Pancreatic Cancer (PC) is an aggressive disease, which has been recapitulated in transgenic animal model that provides unique opportunity for mechanistic understanding of disease progression and also for testing the efficacy of novel therapeutics.
Emerging evidence suggests deregulated expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) in human PC, and thus we investigated the expression of miRNAs in pancreas tissues obtained from transgenic mouse models of K-Ras (K), Pdx1-Cre (C), K-Ras;Pdx1-Cre (KC) and K-Ras;Pdx1-Cre;INK4a/Arf (KCI), initially from pooled RNA samples using miRNA profiling, and further confirmed in individual specimens by quantitative RT-PCR.
We found over-expression of miR-21, miR-221, miR-27a, miR-27b and miR-155, and down-regulation of miR-216a, miR-216b, miR-217 and miR-146a expression in tumors derived from KC and KCI mouse model, which was consistent with data from KCI-derived RInk-1 cells.
Mechanistic investigations revealed a significant induction of EGFR, K-Ras, and MT1-MMP protein expression in tissues from both KC and KCI mouse compared to tissues from K or C, and these results were consistent with similar findings in RInk-1 cells compared to human MIAPaCa-2 cells.
Furthermore, miR-155 knock-down in RInk-1 cells resulted in the inhibition of cell growth and colony formation consistent with down-regulation of EGFR, MT1-MMP and K-Ras expression.
In addition, miR-216b which target Ras, and forced re-expression of miR-216b in RInk-1 cells showed inhibition of cell proliferation and colony formation, which was correlated with reduced expression of Ras, EGFR and MT1-MMP.
These findings suggest that these models would be useful for preclinical evaluation of novel miRNA-targeted agents for designing personalized therapy for PC.
J.
Cell.
Physiol.
© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22213329
Optimal serum calcidiol concentration for cancer prevention.
It has been demonstrated in several studies that serum calcidiol (25 OH vitamin D(3)) concentration is in a reversed and linear relationship with cancer risk.
However, there are also studies showing no such association and some even suggest the opposite.
The risk of pancreatic and oesophageal cancer seems to increase, when serum calcidiol concentration increases.
A bias in these studies might be that their basic assumption is linear dependence of cancer on serum calcidiol concentration.
Some studies suggest a U-shaped association between the disease and the serum calcidiol concentration.
Evidence, in the literature, of the relationship between serum calcidiol concentration and disease is reviewed and an optimal level of 40-80 nmol/L (16-32 ng/ml) is suggested.
Serum calcidiol seems to be a better predictor of cancer development than calcitriol (1α, 25 (OH)(2) vitamin D(3)).
A calcidiol insufficiency, as well as an insufficient solar exposure, is associated with an increased risk of several solid carcinomas.
In a recent study, our group demonstrated that calcidiol is an active hormone in CYP24 (24-hydroxylase) deficient cells.
In these cells, calcidiol and calcitriol act synergistically, therefore fluctuations of the serum calcidiol concentration may define the hormonal activity and cancer development.
CONCLUSION: Serum calcidiol concentration and the risk of many common diseases and aging phenomena seem to show a U-shaped association suggesting a lower and upper limit for healthy serum calcidiol concentration.
An imbalance of hormonal calcidiol rather than that of calcitriol is a risk factor in carcinomas and chronic diseases, which might be prevented by an optimal serum calcidiol concentration.
Multiple daily dosing of cholecalcipherol or skin patches could best provide an optimal dosing and stable serum concentration.
Alternatively, narrow-band UV-B lamps are a possible optimal solution, when given by trained personnel.
PMID: 22213311
Ecological studies of the UVB-vitamin D-cancer hypothesis.
This paper reviews ecological studies of the ultraviolet-B (UVB)-vitamin D-cancer hypothesis based on geographical variation of cancer incidence and/or mortality rates.
The review is based largely on three ecological studies of cancer rates from the United States; one each from Australia, China, France, Japan, and Spain; and eight multicountry, multifactorial studies of cancer incidence rates from more than 100 countries.
This review consistently found strong inverse correlations with solar UVB for 15 types of cancer: bladder, breast, cervical, colon, endometrial, esophageal, gastric, lung, ovarian, pancreatic, rectal, renal, and vulvar cancer; and Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
Weaker evidence exists for nine other types of cancer: brain, gallbladder, laryngeal, oral/pharyngeal, prostate, and thyroid cancer; leukemia; melanoma; and multiple myeloma.
The evidence for the UVB-vitamin D-cancer hypothesis is very strong in general and for many types of cancer in particular.
PMID: 22213176
Magnetization transfer MRI in pancreatic cancer xenograft models.
Magnetization transfer magnetic resonance imaging measurements were performed in three pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma mouse xenograft models.
For each of 28 pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma xenografts, MT ratios (MTRs) were calculated and compared to histologic fibrosis levels from reference standard trichrome staining.
MTR was found to be significantly higher in tumors grown using BxPC-3 cell line (39.4 ± 5.1, mean ± SD) compared to the MTR for the tumors grown from Panc-1 (32.4 ± 2.8) and Capan-1 (27.3 ± 2.9) cell lines (P < 0.05 for each comparison).
Histologic measurements showed a similar trend with BxPC-3 tumors demonstrating significantly higher fibrosis levels (percentage of fibrotic tissue area, 6.48 ± 2.59) when compared to Panc-1 (3.54 ± 2.18) and Capan-1 (2.07 ± 1.60) tumors.
MTR measurements were well correlated to quantitative fibrosis levels (r = 0.69, P = 0.01).
Results indicated that MTR measurements offer the potential to serve as a valuable in vivo biomarker of desmoplasia in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
Magn Reson Med, 2011.
© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22213144
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition and mesenchymal-epithelial transition via regulation of ZEB-1 and ZEB-2 expression in pancreatic cancer.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIES: Phenotypic plasticity of cancer cells via epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET) is essential for tumor progression and metastasis.
METHODS: Tissue samples were obtained from 76 pancreatic head cancers.
We assessed the expression of E-cadherin, vimentin, ZEB-1, and ZEB-2 by immunohistochemical and immunofluorescence staining.
Next, 147 metastatic lymph nodes from 45 pancreatic cancers with low expression of E-cadherin were obtained and divided into two categories according to the maximum diameter of the metastases: 2 mm or more and less than 2 mm.
RESULTS: High expressions of ZEB-1 and ZEB-2 in the primary tumors were significantly associated with repression of E-cadherin (P = 0.0007), and poorer prognosis (P = 0.0322).
Forty-three (29.3%) of the 147 metastatic tumors from pancreatic cancers with low expression of E-cadherin showed high E-cadherin expression.
Cancer cells in the larger metastases showed high expression of E-cadherin (P = 0.0061) and low expression of ZEB-1 (P = 0.0170) and ZEB-2 (P = 0.0036) compared with those in the smaller metastases.
CONCLUSIONS: In primary pancreatic tumors and metastatic lymph nodes, high and low expression of ZEB-1 and ZEB-2 was associated with mesenchymal and epithelial phenotype of cancer cells, respectively.
J.
Surg.
Oncol © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22213040
Omega-3-Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids Suppress Pancreatic Cancer Cell Growth in vitro and in vivo via Downregulation of Wnt/Beta-Catenin Signaling.
Background/Aims: ω3-polyunsaturated fatty acids (ω3- PUFAs) are known to possess anticancer properties.
However, the relationship between ω3-PUFAs and β-catenin, one of the key components of the Wnt signaling pathway, in human pancreatic cancer remains poorly characterized.
Methods: Human pancreatic cancer cells (SW1990 and PANC-1) were exposed to two ω3-PUFAs, docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), to investigate the relationship between ω3-PUFAs and the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway in vitro.
Mouse pancreatic cancer (PANC02) cells were implanted into fat-1 transgenic mice, which express ω3 desaturases and result in elevated levels of ω3-PUFAs endogenously.
The tumor size, levels of Wnt/β-catenin signaling molecules and apoptosis levels were analyzed to examine the influence of ω3-PUFAs in vivo.
Results: DHA and EPA significantly inhibited cell growth and increased cell death in pancreatic cancer cells.
DHA also reduced β-catenin expression, T cell factor/lymphoid-enhancing factor reporter activity and induced β-catenin/Axin/GSK-3β complex formation, a known precursor to β-catenin degradation.
Furthermore, Wnt3a, a natural canonical Wnt pathway ligand, reversed DHA-induced growth inhibition in PANC-1 cells.
Immunohistochemical analysis showed aberrant upregulation and increased nuclear staining of β-catenin in tumor tissues from pancreatic cancer patients.
However, β-catenin levels in tumor tissues from fat-1 transgenic mice were reduced with a significant increase in apoptosis compared with those from control mice.
Conclusion: ω3-PUFAs may be an effective therapy for the chemoprevention and treatment of human pancreatic cancer.
and IAP.
PMID: 22212610
Measured body mass index in adolescence and the incidence of pancreatic cancer in a cohort of 720,000 Jewish men.
The increasing prevalence of adolescent obesity affects adult health.
We investigated the association of adolescent overweight with pancreatic cancer incidence in a cohort of 720,927 Jewish Israeli men.
Body mass index (BMI) was measured during a general health examination at ages 16-19 between the years 1967 and 1995.
Overweight was defined as BMI ≥ 85th percentile of the reference US-CDC distribution in adolescence.
Pancreatic cancer was identified by linkage with the Israel National Cancer Registry up to 2006.
The mean follow-up period was 23.3 ± 8.0 years.
During 16.8 million person-years, 98 cases of pancreatic cancer were detected.
Using Cox proportional hazards modeling, overweight in adolescence predicted an increased risk of pancreatic cancer [hazard ratio (HR) = 2.09; 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.26-3.50, p = 0.005].
Compared with adolescents with 'normal' range BMI Z-scores (-1 to +1), adolescents with Z-scores > 1 showed significantly increased risk [HR, 2.28 (95% CI: 1.43-3.64), p = 0.001].
Lower education level (10 or less years of schooling vs.
11-12 years) was also associated with increased risk of pancreatic cancer [HR 1.90 (95% CI: 1.27-2.86, p = 0.002)], whereas height, country of origin and immigration status were not.
Adolescent overweight is substantially associated with pancreatic cancer incidence in young to middle-aged adults.
Applying our point estimates to the 16.8% prevalence of excess weight in Israeli adolescents in the past decade suggests a population fraction of 15.5% (95% CI: 4.2-29.6%) for pancreatic cancer attributable to adolescent overweight in Israel.
PMID: 22212556
The KL-VS sequence variant of Klotho and cancer risk in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers.
Klotho (KL) is a putative tumor suppressor gene in breast and pancreatic cancers located at chromosome 13q12.
A functional sequence variant of Klotho (KL-VS) was previously reported to modify breast cancer risk in Jewish BRCA1 mutation carriers.
The effect of this variant on breast and ovarian cancer risks in non-Jewish BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation carriers has not been reported.
The KL-VS variant was genotyped in women of European ancestry carrying a BRCA mutation: 5,741 BRCA1 mutation carriers (2,997 with breast cancer, 705 with ovarian cancer, and 2,039 cancer free women) and 3,339 BRCA2 mutation carriers (1,846 with breast cancer, 207 with ovarian cancer, and 1,286 cancer free women) from 16 centers.
Genotyping was accomplished using TaqMan(®) allelic discrimination or matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry.
Data were analyzed within a retrospective cohort approach, stratified by country of origin and Ashkenazi Jewish origin.
The per-allele hazard ratio (HR) for breast cancer was 1.02 (95% CI 0.93-1.12, P = 0.66) for BRCA1 mutation carriers and 0.92 (95% CI 0.82-1.04, P = 0.17) for BRCA2 mutation carriers.
Results remained unaltered when analysis excluded prevalent breast cancer cases.
Similarly, the per-allele HR for ovarian cancer was 1.01 (95% CI 0.84-1.20, P = 0.95) for BRCA1 mutation carriers and 0.9 (95% CI 0.66-1.22, P = 0.45) for BRCA2 mutation carriers.
The risk did not change when carriers of the 6174delT mutation were excluded.
There was a lack of association of the KL-VS Klotho variant with either breast or ovarian cancer risk in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers.
PMID: 22212451
Age-dependent reduction of the PI3K regulatory subunit p85α suppresses pancreatic acinar cell proliferation.
The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt pathway is important for tissue proliferation.
Previously, we found that tissue regeneration after partial pancreatic resection was markedly attenuated in aged mice as compared to young mice and that this attenuation was because of an age-dependent reduction of PI3K/Akt signaling in the pancreatic acini; however, the mechanisms for the age-associated decline of pancreatic PI3K/Akt signaling remained unknown.
To better delineate the mechanisms for the decreased PI3K/Akt activation with aging, age-associated changes in cell proliferation and PI3K/Akt signaling were investigated in the present study using in vitro primary pancreatic acinar cell cultures derived from young and aged mice.
In response to treatment with insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), acinar cells from young but not aged mice showed increased activation of PI3K/Akt signaling and cell proliferation, indicating that intrinsic cellular mechanisms cause the age-associated changes in pancreatic acinar cells.
We also found that the expression of PI3K p85α subunit, but not IGF-1 receptor or other PI3K subunits, was significantly reduced in pancreatic acinar cells from aged mice; this age-associated reduction of p85α was confirmed in both mouse and human pancreatic tissues.
Finally, small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown of p85α expression in acinar cells from young mice resulted in markedly attenuated activation of PI3K/Akt downstream signaling in response to IGF-1.
From these results, we conclude that exocrine pancreatic expression of PI3K p85α subunit is attenuated by aging, which is likely responsible for the age-associated decrease in activation of pancreatic PI3K signaling and acinar cell proliferation in response to growth-promoting stimuli.
PMID: 22211710
Comparison of outcomes and the use of multimodality therapy in young and elderly people undergoing surgical resection of pancreatic cancer.
To compare outcomes and the use of multimodality therapy in young and elderly people with pancreatic cancer undergoing surgical resection.
Retrospective, single-institution study.
National Cancer Institute/National Comprehensive Cancer Network cancer center.
Two hundred three individuals who underwent pancreaticoduodenectomy for pancreatic adenocarcinoma at Duke University Medical Center comprised the study population.
Participants were divided into three groups based on age (<65, n = 97; 65-74, n = 74; ≥75, N = 32).
Perioperative outcomes, the use of multimodality therapy, and overall survival of the different age groups were compared.
Similar rates of perioperative mortality and morbidity were observed in all age groups, but elderly adults were more likely to be discharged to a rehabilitation or skilled nursing facility.
A similar proportion of participants received neoadjuvant therapy, but a smaller proportion of elderly participants received adjuvant therapy.
Overall survival was similar between the age groups.
Predictors of poorer overall survival included coronary artery disease, positive resection margin, and less-differentiated tumor histology.
Treatment with neoadjuvant and adjuvant therapy were predictors of better overall survival.
Carefully selected elderly individuals experience similar perioperative outcomes and overall survival to those of younger individuals after resection of pancreatic cancer.
There appears to be a significant disparity in the use of adjuvant therapy between young and elderly individuals.
PMID: 22211100
Enhanced antitumor efficacy of gemcitabine by evodiamine on pancreatic cancer via regulating PI3K/Akt pathway.
Evodiamine has therapeutic potential against cancers.
This study was designed to investigate whether combination therapy with gemcitabine and evodiamine enhanced antitumor efficacy in pancreatic cancer.
In vitro application of the combination therapy triggered significantly higher frequency of pancreatic cancer cells apoptosis, inhibited the activities of PI3K, Akt, PKA, mTOR and PTEN, and decreased the activation of NF-κB and expression of NF-κB-regulated products.
In vivo application of the combination therapy induced significant enhancement of tumor cell apoptosis, reductions in tumor volume, and inhibited activation of mTOR and PTEN.
In conclusion, evodiamine can augment the therapeutic effect of gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer through direct or indirect negative regulation of the PI3K/Akt pathway.
PMID: 22210438
The Clinical Relevance of the Increasing Incidence of Intraductal Papillary Mucinous Neoplasm.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: The incidence of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) is believed to be increasing; we investigated whether this is the result of increasing burden of disease or more diagnostic scrutiny.
METHODS: In a retrospective cohort study, we calculated a trend in reported incidence of IPMN using data collected from Olmsted County, Minnesota, from 1985 to 2005.
Total IPMN cases from the Olmsted database were identified through a keyword and International Classification of Diseases, 9th revision, search using a database from the Rochester Epidemiology Project, with all cases verified by subsequent chart review.
The subsequent rate of IPMN-related carcinoma was calculated using data from the national Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results-9 database, reflecting trends from 1982 to 2007.
Cases of IPMN-related carcinoma were identified in the Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results database by limiting the search to histology codes for noninvasive and invasive IPMN.
RESULTS: Between 1985 and 2005, there was a 14-fold increase in the age- and sex-adjusted incidence of IPMN, from 0.31 to 4.35 per 100,000 persons.
From 2000 to 2001, the rate of reported carcinoma increased from 0.008 to 0.032 per 100,000 persons, but stabilized afterward, with a rate of 0.06 per 100,000 persons in 2007.
Mortality from all causes of pancreatic cancer was stable between 1975 and 2007 (approximately 11 deaths per 100, 000 individuals).
CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of IPMN has increased in the absence of an increase in IPMN-related or overall pancreatic cancer-related mortality, so it likely results from an increase in diagnostic scrutiny, rather than greater numbers of patients with clinically relevant disease.
PMID: 22210381
Combined treatment of L1CAM antibodies and cytostatic drugs improve the therapeutic response of pancreatic and ovarian carcinoma.
The adhesion molecule L1CAM (CD171) accounts for enhanced motility, invasiveness and chemoresistance of tumor cells and represents a novel marker for various tumor entities including pancreatic and ovarian carcinoma.
Recently, we showed that L1CAM inhibition increases the apoptotic response of tumor cells towards cytostatic drugs pointing to the potential of L1CAM to serve as a chemosensitizer in anti-cancer therapy.
Thus, the present study evaluated the therapeutic potential of combined treatment with L1CAM antibodies and chemotherapeutic drugs in pancreatic and ovarian carcinoma model systems in vivo.
Two L1CAM-specific antibodies (L1-14.10 and L1-9.3/2a) exhibiting high binding affinity to the L1CAM expressing pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell line Colo357 and the ovarian carcinoma cell line SKOV3ip were used for treatment.
The combined therapy of SCID mice with either L1CAM antibody and gemcitabine and paclitaxel, respectively, reduced the growth of subcutaneously grown Colo357 or SKOV3ip tumors more efficiently than treatment with the cytostatic drug alone or in combination with control IgG.
This was accompanied by an increased number of apoptotic tumor cells along with an elevated procaspase-8 expression.
Furthermore, a lowered activation of NF-κB along with a reduced expression of VEGF and a diminished number of CD31-positive blood vessels were observed in tumors after combined therapy compared to control treatments, while the infiltration of F4/80-positive macrophages increased.
Overall, these data provide new insights into the mechanism of the anti-cancer activity of L1CAM-blocking antibodies in vivo and support the suitability of L1CAM as a target for chemosensitization and of L1CAM-interfering antibodies as an appropriate tool to increase the therapeutic response of pancreatic and ovarian carcinoma.
PMID: 22209958
Image-Guided Robotic Radiosurgery (CyberKnife) for Pancreatic Insulinoma: Is Laparoscopy Becoming Old?
Insulinomas constitute about 25% of endocrine pancreatic tumors.
Laparoscopic surgery is the treatment of choice.
However, pancreas-related complications rate is very high, even in experienced hands, ranging up to 37%.
Alternative procedures such as embolization with trisacryl have not been accepted by the surgical community.
Image-guided robotic radiosurgery or stereotactic radiosurgery (CyberKnife) is a minimally invasive procedure delivering large doses of ionizing radiation to a well-defined target.
CyberKnife radiosurgery is successfully used in brain cancer, lung cancer, prostate cancer, liver metastases, kidney cancer, and pancreatic cancer.
The authors present the first case to their knowledge of a benign functioning insulinoma successfully treated by a CyberKnife technique with a 3-year follow-up.
PMID: 22209766
Continuous inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor phosphorylation by erlotinib enhances antitumor activity of chemotherapy in erlotinib-resistant tumor xenografts.
Erlotinib, an epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, has been shown to have benefits for non-small cell lung cancer and pancreatic cancer patients; however, almost all patients develop progressive disease during the therapy.
On the other hand, it has been reported that a tumor continues to express epidermal growth factor receptor even after developing progressive disease.
To demonstrate the clinical relevance of erlotinib treatment after progressive disease, we investigated whether continuous administration of erlotinib in combination with chemotherapy has a useful effect on progressive disease development during erlotinib treatment.
For this purpose, we examined the antitumor effect of a combination therapy of a chemotherapeutic agent with erlotinib using two types of erlotinib-resistant tumor xenograft models: a non-small cell lung cancer model, in which EBC-1, H1975 and HCC827TR3 tumors were implanted, and an HPAC pancreatic cancer cell xenograft which generates erlotinib-resistant tumors in vivo.
As a result, the combination therapy showed a significantly higher antitumor activity compared with chemomonotherapy in all xenograft models except the H1975 xenografts.
Furthermore, erlotinib alone suppressed the phosphorylation of epidermal growth factor receptor in HPAC tumors and the two non-small cell lung cancer cell lines other than H1975.
Therefore, combination therapy which uses erlotinib can be considered effective if epidermal growth factor receptor phosphorylation is inhibited by erlotinib, even in erlotinib-resistant tumor xenograft models.
Our results suggest that the continuous inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor phosphorylation by erlotinib after progressive disease enhances the antitumor activity of chemotherapy.
PMID: 22209537
Pancreatectomy with synchronous vascular resection - An argument in favour.
BACKGROUND: The first case-series of pancreatectomy with synchronous en-bloc vascular resection with the aim to improve pancreatic cancer survival was published in 1977.
Advances in surgical techniques, intensive care management and teaching centers with high volume cases have dramatically reduced mortality and morbidity of major pancreatic resections.
This has led to a progressively wider use of venous and/or arterial resections during pancreatic surgery in selected patients to achieve negative resection margins.
METHODS: We review the current literature and discuss our experience in pancreatectomies with en-bloc vascular resections.
RESULTS: Survival of patients with pancreatic cancer who undergo an R0 resection with venous reconstruction is comparable to those who have a standard pancreaticoduodenectomy with no added mortality or morbidity.
Conversely, arterial resection is associated with a higher morbidity, mortality and overall poorer survival, perhaps reflecting more advanced disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Since the need for vascular resection may not be always apparent on pre-operative imaging, surgeons who perform major pancreatic surgery should be familiar with vascular resection and reconstruction techniques in order to offer to these patients the best chance to prolong survival.
PMID: 22208966
Radiation Therapy with Full-Dose Gemcitabine and Oxaliplatin for Unresectable Pancreatic Cancer.
PURPOSE: We completed a Phase I trial of gemcitabine and oxaliplatin with concurrent radiotherapy in patients with previously untreated pancreatic cancer.
The results of a subset of patients with unresectable disease who went on to receive planned additional therapy are reported here.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: All patients received two 28-day cycles of gemcitabine (1,000 mg/m(2) on Days 1, 8, and 15) and oxaliplatin (40-85 mg/m(2) on Days 1 and 15, per a dose-escalation schema).
Radiation therapy was delivered concurrently with Cycle 1 (27 Gy in 1.8-Gy fractions).
At 9 weeks, patients were reassessed for resectability.
Those deemed to have unresectable disease were offered a second round of treatment consisting of 2 cycles of gemcitabine and oxaliplatin and 27 Gy of radiation therapy (total, 54 Gy).
Radiation was delivered to the gross tumor volume plus 1 cm by use of a three-dimensional conformal technique.
We used the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events to assess acute toxicity.
Late toxicity was scored per the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group scale.
Computed tomography scans were reviewed to determine pattern of failure, local response, and disease progression.
Kaplan-Meier methodology and Cox regression models were used to evaluate survival and freedom from failure.
RESULTS: Thirty-two patients from the Phase I dose-escalation study had unresectable disease, three of whom had low-volume metastatic disease.
Of this group, 16 patients went on to receive additional therapy to complete a total of 4 cycles of chemotherapy and 54 Gy of concurrent radiation.
For this subset, 38% had at least a partial tumor response at a median of 3.2 months.
Median survival was 11.8 months (range, 4.4-26.3 months).
The 1-year freedom from local progression rate was 93.8% (95% confidence interval, 63.2-99.1).
CONCLUSIONS: Radiation therapy to 54 Gy with concurrent full-dose gemcitabine and oxaliplatin is well tolerated and results in favorable rates of local tumor response and 1-year freedom from local progression.
PMID: 22208613
Genomic Sequencing of Key Genes in Mouse Pancreatic Cancer Cells.
Pancreatic cancer is a multiple genetic disorder with many mutations identified during the progression.
Two mouse pancreatic cancer cell lines were established which showed different phenotype in vivo: a non-metastatic cell line, Panc02, and a highly metastatic cell line, Panc02-H7, a derivative of Panc02.
In order to investigate whether the genetic mutations of key genes in pancreatic cancer such as KRAS, TP53 (p53), CDKN2A (p16), SMAD4, ZIP4, and PDX-1 contribute to the phenotypic difference of these two mouse pancreatic cancer cells, we sequenced the exonic regions of these key genes in both cell lines and in the normal syngeneic mouse pancreas and compared them with the reference mouse genome sequence.
The exons of KRAS, SMAD4, CDKN2A (p16), TP53 (p53), ZIP4, and PDX-1 genes were amplified and the genotype of these genes was determined by Sanger sequencing.
The sequences were analyzed with Sequencher software.
A mutation in SMAD4 was identified in both cell lines.
This homozygote G to T mutation in the first position of codon 174 (GAA) generated a stop codon resulting in the translation of a truncated protein.
Further functional analysis indicates that different TGF-β/SMAD signaling pathways were involved in those two mouse cell lines, which may explain the phonotypic difference between the two cells.
A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in KRAS gene (TAT to TAC at codon 32) was also identified in the normal pancreas DNA of the syngenic mouse and in both derived tumoral Panc02 and Panc02-H7 cells.
No mutation or SNP was found in CDKN2A (p16), TP53 (p53), ZIP4, and PDX-1 genes in these two cell lines.
The absence of mutations in genes such as KRAS, TP53, and CDKN2A, which are considered as key genes in the development of human pancreatic cancer suggests that SMAD4 might play a central and decisive role in mouse pancreatic cancer.
These results also suggest that other mechanisms are involved in the substantial phenotypic difference between these two mouse pancreatic cancer cell lines.
Further studies are warranted to elucidate the molecular pathways that lead to the aggressive metastatic potential of Panc02-H7.
PMID: 22208494
Assessing treatment effect in pancreatic cancer.
Pancreatic cancer is one of the most deadly forms of cancer (43,140 new cases per year; 36,800 deaths), and most people with pancreatic cancer do not survive past 5 years.
New therapeutic regimens are constantly being evaluated in an attempt to reduce the rapid progression of this disease.
Although some patients receive neoadjuvant therapy in an attempt to make a nonresectable or borderline-resectable tumor resectable, more patients with resectable disease are being enrolled in clinical trials that provide neoadjuvant therapy.
This means more pancreatic resections must be evaluated for therapy effect.
Histologic grading schemes for the assessment of posttherapy response have been described, but difficulties associated with determining the histologic features of treatment effect in pancreatic cancer have not been addressed.
To critically review the diagnostic criteria for proposed grading schemes for pancreatic cancer treated with neoadjuvant chemoradiation therapy and to provide guidance to surgical pathologists who encounter treated pancreatic cancer resections.
Published peer-reviewed literature and the personal experience of the authors.
Assessment of treatment effect in pancreatic cancer is difficult.
Pathologists need to be aware that some histologic features of treatment effect overlap with histologic features seen in untreated pancreatic cancer, such as tumor cell anaplasia, necrosis, and fibrosis.
Careful assessment of pancreatic resections, including detailed gross examination and thorough histologic sampling, is important in accurately assessing treatment effect and improving patient outcomes.
PMID: 22207048
VEGF-A/VEGFR-2 Signaling Plays an Important Role for the Motility of Pancreas Cancer Cells.
BACKGROUND: Pancreatic cancer is one of the most lethal solid tumors.
Vascular endothelial growth factor receptors (VEGFRs) are expressed not only by endothelial cells but also by pancreatic cancer cells.
VEGFRs might play an important role for the development of pancreatic cancer cells.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of VEGF/VEGFR-2-targeted therapy in pancreatic carcinoma.
METHODS: Five pancreatic carcinoma cell lines were used.
The expression level of VEGFR-2 of cancer cells was examined by RT-PCR and Western blot.
The effects of VEGFs, bevacizumab as an anti-VEGF antibody, sunitinib as a tyrosine kinase inhibitor against VEGFRs, and VEGF-R2 siRNA on the motility activity of pancreatic cancer cells were examined by invasion assay and wound healing assay.
The effect of VEGF, bevacizumab, and sunitinib on the phosphorylation of VEGFR-2 and downstream effecter molecules, MAPK and PI3K, was examined by western blot.
RESULTS: Pancreatic cancer cell lines expressed VEGFR-2.
VEGF-A significantly increased the motility of pancreas cancer cells, which was inhibited by VEGFR-2 siRNA.
Conditioned medium from pancreas cancer cells significantly stimulated the motility of pancreas cancer cells.
VEGF/VEGFR inhibitors, bevacizumab and sunitinib, significantly decreased the motility of pancreas cancer cells.
VEGFR-2 phosphorylation level of pancreas cancer cells was increased by VEGF-A.
Bevacizumab and sunitinib decreased the level of VEGFR-2 phosphorylation, p-ERK, and p-Akt expression.
VEGF-A decreased zonula occludens (ZO-1) or ZO-2 expression in pancreas cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS: VEGF-A/VEGFR-2 signaling plays an important role in inducing invasion and migration of pancreatic cancer cells.
PMID: 22205974
CCL5 neutralization restricts cancer growth and potentiates the targeting of PDGFRβ in colorectal carcinoma.
Increased CCL5 levels are markers of an unfavourable outcome in patients with melanoma, breast, cervical, prostate, gastric or pancreatic cancer.
Here, we have assessed the role played by CCL5/CCR5 interactions in the development of colon cancer.
To do so, we have examined a number of human colorectal carcinoma clinical specimens and found CCL5 and its receptors over-expressed within primary as well as liver and pulmonary metastases of patients compared to healthy tissues.
In vitro, CCL5 increased the growth and migratory responses of colon cancer cells from both human and mouse origins.
In addition, systemic treatment of mice with CCL5-directed antibodies reduced the extent of development of subcutaneous colon tumors, of liver metastases and of peritoneal carcinosis.
Consistently, we found increased numbers of CD45-immunoreactive cells within the stroma of the remaining lesions as well as at the interface with the healthy tissue.
In contrast, selective targeting of CCR5 through administration of TAK-779, a CCR5 antagonist, only partially compromised colon cancer progression.
Furthermore, CCL5 neutralization rendered the tumors more sensitive to a PDGFRβ-directed strategy in mice, this combination regimen offering the greatest protection against liver metastases and suppressing macroscopic peritoneal carcinosis.
Collectively, our data demonstrate the involvement of CCL5 in the pathogenesis of colorectal carcinoma and point to its potential value as a therapeutic target.
PMID: 22205456
[Value of the laparoscopy combined with double-balloon enteroscopy in diagnosis and treatment of intestinal diseases].
To evaluate the value of laparoscopy combined with double-balloon enteroscopy (DBE) for the diagnosis and treatment of intestinal diseases.
Clinical data of 69 cases with suspected small bowel diseases undergoing laparoscopic and DBE for the diagnosis and treatment were retrospectively analyzed.
The lesions were found in 48 cases by laparoscopy.
DBE was required in the remaining 21 patients to identify the underlying condition.
All the operations were successfully completed using the laparoscopic approach, including totally laparoscopic bowel resection (n=11), and laparoscopic-assisted bowel resection (n=58).
There were no anastomotic leakage, postoperative bleeding, intestinal obstruction, or wound infection.
All the patients were discharged within 7 to 9 days after surgery.
Postoperative pathological examination showed vascular abnormally (n=10), gastrointestinal stromal tumor (n=20), intestinal adenocarcinoma (n=5), intestinal neurofibroma (n=2), diverticulum (n=5), intestinal mucosal ulceration (n=8), intestinal tuberculosis (n=3), postoperative pouch bleeding (n=1), intestinal polyp (n=6), Crohn's disease (n=5), Meckel diverticulum (n=2), metastatic kidney cancer (n=1), and metastatic lung cancer (n=1).
Length of follow up ranged from 3 months to 4 years, during which no re-bleeding occurred, 2 patients with gastrointestinal stromal tumor died of local recurrence and liver metastasis, 1 patient with adenocarcinoma died of local recurrence involving pancreatic head, duodenum, and mesenteric vessels, 2 patients with metastatic disease died of peritoneal recurrence and liver metastasis.
Laparoscopic combined with DBE has a high detection rate for small intestinal disease with accurate localization, less trauma, and quicker recovery.
PMID: 22204556
Partners in crime: the TGFβ and MAPK pathways in cancer progression.
ABSTRACT: The TGFβ and Ras-MAPK pathways play critical roles in cell development and cell cycle regulation, as well as in tumor formation and metastasis.
In the absence of cellular transformation, these pathways operate in opposition to one another, where TGFβ maintains an undifferentiated cell state and suppresses proliferation, while Ras-MAPK pathways promote proliferation, survival and differentiation.
However, in colorectal and pancreatic cancers, the opposing pathways' mechanisms are simultaneously activated in order to promote cancer progression and metastasis.
Here, we highlight the roles of the TGFβ and Ras-MAPK pathways in normal and malignant states, and provide an explanation for how the concomitant activation of these pathways drives tumor biology.
Finally, we survey potential therapeutic targets in these pathways.
PMID: 22204346
Polysaccharide-K (PSK) in Cancer - Old Story, New Possibilities?
Polysaccharide-K (PSK, Krestin) is one of the most commonly used medicinal mushroom extracts with a long history as an additive in cancer therapy in Asia, especially in Japan.
PSK has a documented anti-tumor activity both in vitro and in vitro, in various types of cancers, including colorectal, gastric, breast, liver, pancreatic, and lung cancer.
Despite PSK having been studied for about 40 years as an immune modulator and biological response modifier, the mechanisms of action by PSK have not yet been clearly and completely elucidated.
This review aims to provide an up-to-date account for the effects of PSK in cancer with the hope of thereby providing an increased understanding of the molecular mechanisms of PSK and also its potential as an additive in modern cancer therapy.
PMID: 22203845
α2 Integrin-Dependent Suppression of Pancreatic Adenocarcinoma Cell Invasion Involves Ectodomain Regulation of Kallikrein-Related Peptidase-5.
Previous reports demonstrate that the α2-integrin (α2) mediates pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cell interactions with collagens.
We found that while well-differentiated cells use α2 exclusively to adhere and migrate on collagenI, poorly differentiated PDAC cells demonstrate reduced reliance on, or complete loss of, α2.
Since well-differentiated PDAC lines exhibit reduced in vitro invasion and α2-blockade suppressed invasion of well-differentiated lines exclusively, we hypothesized that α2 may suppress the malignant phenotype in PDAC.
Accordingly, ectopic expression of α2 retarded in vitro invasion and maintenance on collagenI exacerbated this effect.
Affymetrix profiling revealed that kallikrein-related peptidase-5 (KLK5) was specifically upregulated by α2, and reduced α2 and KLK5 expression was observed in poorly differentiated PDAC cells in situ.
Accordingly, well-differentiated PDAC lines express KLK5, and KLK5 blockade increased the invasion of KLK5-positive lines.
The α2-cytoplasmic domain was dispensable for these effects, demonstrating that the α2-ectodomain and KLK5 coordinately regulate a less invasive phenotype in PDAC.
PMID: 22203731
Dual Combination Therapy Targeting DR5 and EMMPRIN in Pancreatic Adenocarcinoma.
The goal of the study was to assess the efficacy of combined extracellular matrix metalloprotease inducer (EMMPRIN)- and death receptor 5 (DR5)-targeted therapy for pancreatic adenocarcinoma in orthotopic mouse models with multimodal imaging.
Cytotoxicity of anti-EMMPRIN antibody and anti-DR5 antibody (TRA-8) in MIA PaCa-2 and PANC-1 cell lines was measured by ATPlite assay in vitro.
The distributions of Cy5.5-labeled TRA-8 and Cy3-labeled anti-EMMPRIN antibody in the 2 cell lines were analyzed by fluorescence imaging in vitro.
Groups 1 to 12 of severe combined immunodeficient mice bearing orthotopic MIA PaCa-2 (groups 1-8) or PANC-1 (groups 9-12) tumors were used for in vivo studies.
Dynamic contrast-enhanced-MRI was applied in group 1 (untreated) or group 2 (anti-EMMPRIN antibody).
The tumor uptake of Tc-99m-labeled TRA-8 was measured in group 3 (untreated) and group 4 (anti-EMMPRIN antibody).
Positron emission tomography/computed tomography imaging with (18)F-FDG was applied in groups 5 to 12.
Groups 5 to 8 (or groups 9 to 12) were untreated or treated with anti-EMMPRIN antibody, TRA-8, and combination, respectively.
TRA-8 showed high killing efficacy for both MIA PaCa-2 and PANC-1 cells in vitro, but additional anti-EMMPRIN treatment did not improve the cytotoxicity.
Cy5.5-TRA-8 formed cellular caps in both the cell lines, whereas the maximum signal intensity was correlated with TRA-8 cytotoxicity.
Anti-EMMPRIN therapy significantly enhanced the tumor delivery of the MR contrast agent, but not Tc-99m-TRA-8.
Tumor growth was significantly suppressed by the combination therapy, and the additive effect of the combination was shown in both MIA PaCa-2 and PANC-1 tumor models.
Mol Cancer Ther; 11(2); 405-15.
©2011 AACR.
PMID: 22203495
CA 19-9 in pancreatic cancer: retrospective evaluation of patients with suspicion of pancreatic cancer.
CA 19.9 serum levels were prospectively determined in 573 patients admitted to hospital for suspicion of pancreatic cancer.
The final diagnosis was 77 patients with no malignancy, 389 patients with pancreatic cancer, 37 neuroendocrine pancreatic cancer, 28 cholangiocarcinomas, 4 gallbladder cancer, 27 ampullary carcinomas, and 11 periampullary carcinomas.
CA 19.9 was determined using a commercial assay from Roche Diagnostics, and 37 U/ml was considered as the upper limit of normality.
Abnormal CA 19.9 serum levels were found in 27%, 81.5%, 85.7%, 59.3%, 63.6%, and 18.9% of patients with benign diseases, pancreatic cancer, cholangiocarcinomas, and ampullary, periampullary, or neuroendocrine tumors.
Significantly higher concentrations of CA 19.9 were found in patients with than in those without malignancy or with neuroendocrine tumors.
CA 19.9 serum levels were higher in pancreatic cancer or cholangiocarcinoma than in other malignancies (p < 0.0001).
CA 19.9 serum levels were also correlated with tumor stage, treatment (significantly lower concentrations in resectable tumors), and tumor location (the highest in those located in the body, the lowest in those in the tail or uncinate) and site of metastases (highest in liver metastases).
A trend to higher CA 19.9 serum concentrations was found in patients with jaundice, but only with statistical significance in the early stages.
Using 50 or 100 U/ml in patients with jaundice, CA 19.9 was useful as an aid in the diagnosis of pancreatic cancer (sensitivity 77.9%, specificity 95.9%) as well as tumor resectability in pancreatic cancer with different cutoffs according to tumor location and bilirubin serum levels with specificities ranging from 90% to 100%.
CA 19.9 is the tumor marker of choice in pancreatic adenocarcinomas, with a clear relationship with tumor location, stage, and resectability.
PMID: 22203481
Association between ATM polymorphisms and cancer risk: a meta-analysis.
To date, epidemiological studies have assessed the association between Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene polymorphisms and cancer risk, including lung cancer, breast cancer, glioma and pancreatic cancer.
However, the results of these studies remain controversial.
We aimed to examine the associations between two SNPs (rs664143 and rs664677) and cancer risk by conducting a meta-analysis of case-control studies.
A total of 12 publications were included in this meta-analysis, 8 for rs664143 and 7 for rs664677.
Overall, rs664143 heterozygote carriers turned out to be associated with cancer risk (OR = 1.18, 95% CI 1.02-1.36).
In the subgroup analysis by cancer type, we observed that the ATM rs664143 polymorphism was significantly associated with lung cancer risk (GA vs.
GG: OR = 1.48, 95% CI 1.18-1.85, AA vs.
GG: OR = 1.51, 95% CI 1.18-1.93) and rs664677 polymorphism was associated with decreased lung cancr risk and increased breast cancer risk (for lung cancer: TC vs.
TT: OR = 0.76, 95% CI 0.62-0.92, CC vs.
TT: OR = 0.80, 95% CI 0.64-0.99 and for breast cancer: TC vs.
TT: OR = 1.42, 95% CI 1.17-1.73, CC vs.
TT: OR = 1.51, 95% CI 1.21-1.87).
In the subgroup analysis by region, we also observed that individuals with ATM rs664143 GA or AA genotype had an obvious increased cancer risk among Asian people (GA vs.
GG: OR = 1.40, 95% CI 1.20-1.63, AA vs.
GG: OR = 1.37, 95% CI 1.16-1.62).
In conclusion, ATM rs664143 polymorphism was associated with cancer susceptibility.
ATM rs664143 polymorphism was significantly associated with lung cancer risk.
ATM rs664677 polymorphism was associated with decreased lung cancer risk as well as increased breast cancer risk.
PMID: 22203456
Proposed indications for limited resection of early ampulla of Vater carcinoma: clinico-histopathological criteria to confirm cure.
BACKGROUND: Limited resection is reserved for patients with high operative risk or benign adenomas.
We aimed to define indications for limited resection of early ampulla of Vater carcinoma with curative intent through detailed preoperative examinations and histopathological evaluations.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective cohort study of all consecutive Japanese patients who underwent resection for ampulla of Vater neoplasms at our hospital from 1986 to 2010.
RESULTS: A total of 75 patients were identified.
Moderately/poorly differentiated histology, lympho-vascular/perineural invasion, and duodenal/pancreatic invasion were significant risk factors for lymph node metastases.
Macroscopically, non-exposed protruded- or ulcerative-type disease did not correlate directly with lymph node metastases; however, these tumor types were associated with other invasive features.
In a subset of early carcinomas fulfilling the conditions of exposed protruded adenoma or papillary/well-differentiated adenocarcinoma determined by endoscopic biopsy, negative duodenal invasion determined by endoscopic ultrasonography, no tumor infiltration into the pancreatic duct determined by intraductal ultrasound, and diameter of the pancreatic duct ≤3 mm determined by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (N = 11), the incidence of lymph node metastasis and tumor infiltration into the pancreatic duct was 0%.
CONCLUSION: Strictly selected patients with early ampulla of Vater carcinomas may benefit from limited resection if the resected specimen is evaluated to confirm all histopathological criteria.
PMID: 22203455
Effects of antiviral therapy on long-term outcome after liver resection for hepatitis B virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma.
BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: We investigated the effects of nucleos(t)ide analogues (NAs) on long-term outcome in patients following curative treatment for hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
METHODS: This study involved 70 of the 76 patients who had undergone liver resection for HBV-related HCC in our department; 6 patients were excluded due to non-curative resection or advanced cancer.
The 70 patients were divided into three groups, as follows: 13 patients with high serum concentration of HBV DNA (≥4 log(10) copies/mL) and no antiviral therapy (high viral group); 46 patients who received antiviral therapy during the serial follow up (antiviral therapy group) because of high viral concentration (≥4 log(10) copies/mL); and 11 patients with low serum concentration of HBV DNA (<4 log(10) copies/mL) and no antiviral therapy (low viral group).
RESULTS: Tumor-free survival rate was significantly higher in the low viral group than in the high viral group (P = 0.0058).
Multivariate analysis revealed that a high serum concentration of HBV DNA (≥4 log(10) copies/mL) (risk ratio 6.717, 95% confidence interval 1.435-31.434, P = 0.0156) was an independent risk factor for a short tumor-free survival time.
Tumor-free survival rate was significantly higher in the antiviral therapy group than in the high viral group (P = 0.0478).
Multivariate analysis revealed that presence of multiple tumors (risk ratio 2.857, 95% confidence interval 1.403-5.816, P = 0.0038) was an independent risk factor for a short tumor-free survival time.
The cumulative survival rate was significantly higher in the antiviral therapy group than in the high viral group (P = 0.0025).
Multivariate analysis revealed that not undergoing antiviral therapy (risk ratio 0.121, 95% confidence interval 0.024-0.608, P = 0.0104) was an independent risk factor for a short survival time.
CONCLUSIONS: A high serum concentration of HBV DNA (≥4 log(10) copies/mL) was a strong risk factor for HCC recurrence after resection of HBV-related HCC.
Antiviral therapy with NAs improved the long-term outcome after resection of HBV-related HCC in patients with high serum concentrations of HBV DNA.
PMID: 22202412
[A case of intraductal mucinous neoplasms with the whole main pancreatic duct dilation treated via segment pancreatectomy].
The patient was a 77-year-old woman.
She was diagnosed as intraducal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN).
She refused an operation for 3 years.
After all, a nodule in the main pancreatic duct was pointed out, she agreed and was referred to us.
Her past history showed pacemaker implantation for third-degree atrioventricular block, and no impaired glucose tolerance.
Abdominal CT showed a dilated whole pancreatic duct and a multilocular cystic tumor.
Endoscopic retrograde pancreatography showed a marked dilation of the main pancreatic duct.
We diagnosed as main duct IPMN.
Intraoperative US showed no nodule in pancreatic duct, and there was no suspicious lesion of invasive cancer.
We performed segmental pancreatectomy between the left side of common bile duct and the pancreas tail.
The tumor was resected with clear margins.
Both cut-ends of the main pancreatic duct were anastomosed to a jejunal loop.
The postoperative course was excellent.
She was discharged on day 16.
The glycemic control was good, she needed no treatment for diabetes.
Total pancreatectomy has many problems such as insulin and pancreatic polypeptide deficiency, hypoglycemia, malabsorption, diarrhea and liver dysfunction.
We avoided total pancreatectomy so that her quality of life was maintained.
Still a careful follow -up is required.
PMID: 22202411
[A case report of port-site metastasis of pancreatic cancer after laparoscope assistted distal pancreatectomy].
Laparosopic port-site metastasis is rare, but a well recognized outcome following surgery in gastroenterological surgery for gastric cancer, colon cancer and gallbladder cancer with its etiology was not clearly understood.
We report a port-site metastasis of pancreatic cancer diagnosed by position emission tomography( PET).
A 49-year-old man was diagnosed as splenic tumor with pancreatic tail invasion due to malignant lymphoma, and received a laparoscope assisted distal pancreatectomy.
Unsuspected pancreatic cancer was discovered with histological result of moderate differentiated invasive ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas infiltrating spleen.
Systemic chemotherapy with 1,000 mg/m² of gemcitabine (GEM) was performed for six months.
Unfortunately, our patients relapsed one year after the surgery with multiple lesions in the peritoneum, abdominal wall, as well as a laparoscopic port-site metastasis.
He was started on 100 mg/body of S-1 daily, subsequently, combined chemotherapy with GEM( 80 mg/m²) and S-1( 80 mg/body) was also performed.
Furthermore, he underwent palliative radiation therapy( 40 Gy) to care the pain.
Fortunately, a long-term survival of 3 years was elicited by these systemic treatments and radiography.
Laparoscopic port-site metastases are associated with presence of advanced cancer.
Therefore, we should carefully precede a laparoscopic resection against pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22202410
[A safely resected case of hypervascular pancreatic giant tumor after preoperative arterial embolization].
A 73-year-old woman visited our hospital for a treatment of pancreatic tumor that increased steadily in size of 6 cm in diameter in 1999 to 13 cm in 2008, while remaining in asymptomatic condition throughout this follow-up time.
The tumor was big and flowed from many vessels such as portal and superior mesenteric veins and the celiac and superior mesenteric arteries.
These were critical for determining tumor respectability and the risk of massive intra-operative hemorrhage was felt to be considerable.
Therefore, preoperative embolization of the tumor-feeding arteries arising from the celiac axis (gastroduodenal, splenic and dorsal pancreatic arteries) was performed on the previous day of operation.
Tumor resection with pancreaticoduodenectomy and partial resection of portal vein and reconstruction were performed.
We got to SMA with the use of "paraduodenal mesenteric approach", we called, and we finished the operation without a blood transfusion.
The final pathology confirmed the diagnosis of serous microcystic adenoma.
PMID: 22202409
[Re-resection for local recurrence in the remnant pancreas after pancreaticoduodenectomy for pancreatic cancer- a case report].
A 70-year-old female suffered from jaundice was admitted to our hospital for a tumor in the pancreas head.
CA19-9 and DUPAN-2 levels were increased in laboratory test.
Enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a low density area of pancreas head.
Cytology of pancreatic juice was performed by ERCP, and malignant cells were detected.
Pancreaticoduodenectomy was performed under a diagnosis of pancreatic cancer (T3N1M0, stage III).
Despite of adjuvant chemotherapy (gemcitabine) after surgery, CT scan revealed a low density area in the cut end of remnant pancreas at 3 months, which was accompanied with elevation of and CA19-9 and DUPAN-2 levels.
We diagnosed as a recurrent pancreatic cancer of remnant pancreas without any other side of recurrence and re-resection was performed.
Because of chylous ascites and depression following a second surgery, postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy could not be started.
Re-recurrence was detected at 3 months after the second surgery, and she died 6 months after the surgery.
Remnant or repeated pancreatectomy for local recurrent pancreatic carcinomas is extremely rare with limited number of cases reported in the literature.
We report our experience, and discuss the significance of re-resection for recurrence of remnant pancreas.
PMID: 22202408
[A novel gemcitabine delivery system].
Indocyanine green (ICG) is specifically excreted through the biliary tracts.
The authors applied ICG as a carrier of gemcitabine (GEM) to devising a novel drug delivery system.
Our newly devised chitin flakes, ICG and GEM were mixed together.
Then physiological saline solution was added to the mixture to form the system.
The release profiles of GEM and ICG from the system were examined at various times in vitro.
Anticancer activities of the GEM and ICG delivered from the system were detected by MTT assay method using human pancreatic cancer cell lines.
The novel system was visco-elastic green sol at room temperature and changed to gel at body temperature.
Seventy to 80% of GEM was gradually delivered from the system in 24 hours, and 30 to 50% of ICG was slowly released over 24 hours.
The released GEM favorably demonstrated anticancer activities against the cancer cells, while the ICG released from the system showed no oncolytic activities.
These suggested that our devised system would be clinically useful as a novel tool in cancer chemotherapy.
PMID: 22202377
[A case report of stage IV inoperable gastric cancer demonstrating a cCR treated with S-1/Paclitaxe (l PTX) therapy].
We report a case of Stage IV inoperable gastric cancer demonstrating a cCR treated with S-1/PTX.
The patient was a 65-year-old female with advanced gastric cancer.
CT scan suggested an invasion of tumor into a pancreatic body, jejunum and transverse colon.
Staging laparoscopy showed it to be positive with peritoneal washing cytology and peritoneal dissemination.
The surgical findings were T4a (SE) N2M1H0P1CY1, Stage IV.
Chemotherapy was conducted with a combination of S-1/CDDP.
After 2 courses of this regimen, the endoscopy findings did not show an improvement, so we decided to change the chemotherapy to S-1/PTX as second-line treatment.
After 2 courses of this regimen, the endoscopy findings revealed a reduction of the primary tumor.
After 19 courses, histopathological examination of biopsy specimen showed Group 1.
Second-line chemotherapy was continued for 28 courses.
The patient has had no recurrence without chemotherapy and been alive for 91 months after diagnosis.
PMID: 22202292
[A pilot study of intraperitoneal gemcitabine for reduction of peritoneal dissemination in advanced pancreatic cancer].
We schemed intraperitoneal gemcitabine (ipGEM) for reduction of peritoneal dissemination to three patients with unresectable and one patient with recurrent pancreatic cancer, followed by intraperitoneal catheter and subcutaneous port placement.
Two locally advanced cases were performed for intra-operative radiotherapy, and one of 2 locally advanced cases was performed for gastrojejunostomy.
And another locally advanced case had ileostomy.
The recurrent case was resected for metastatic tumor of abdominal wall.
In one of locally advanced cases, we couldn't perform ipGEM for progression of disease.
In two remaining locally advanced cases, we could keep on doing ipGEM, and the patients did not experience with abdominal discomfort or hematological toxicity.
PMID: 22202286
[Pancreatic resection for metastatic tumors to the pancreas].
We report 3 cases of resectable pancreatic metastasis.
CASE 1: A 76-year-old woman was followed after nephrectomy for renal cell carcinoma for 13 years.
CT examination demonstrated a high vascular lesion in the pancreatic body and tail.
We conducted distal pancreatectomy and diagnosed with metastatic tumor from renal cell carcinoma.
She died of liver metastasis 8 years after pancreatic resection.
CASE 2: A 64-year-old man, who had undergone right lower lobectomy for lung cancer a year ago, was found to have a mass in the pancreatic tail.
We performed distal pancreatectomy and diagnosed with metastatic tumor from lung cancer.
He died of lung metastasis 12 months after pancreatic resection.
CASE 3: A 62- year-old woman, who had undergone left nephrectomy for renal cell carcinoma 3 years ago, was found to have a mass in the pancreatic body.
With a diagnosis of metastatic pancreatic tumor from renal cell carcinoma, distal pancreatectomy was done.
She died of liver and lung metastases 15 months after pancreatic resection.
Long-term survival can be achieved in patients undergoing a pancreatic standard resection including lymphadenectomy for isolated metastasis from nonpancreatic sites.
PMID: 22202274
[A case report of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma diagnosed as lung cancer with liver metastasis treated with radiofrequency ablation].
In December 2008, a 43-year-old male who had been pointed out a nodular shadow in the right upper field on a chest radiography was admitted to hospital.
A 35 mm mass infiltrating to superior vena cava in the right upper lobe of the lung, and 32 mm mass in the liver at S7 were detected by CT.
Pathological diagnosis of the liver tumor was adenocarcinoma.
Under the diagnosis of lung carcinoma and liver metastasis, systemic chemotherapy was started from January 2009.
Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) therapy was added for liver S7 mass in February, and radiation therapy was performed for lung mass in December.
The lung lesion has markedly reduced, but the liver lesion recurred in October 2009, which continued to grow up to 80 mm until August 2010.
He presented to our hospital with the diagnosis of liver metastasis of controlled primary lung cancer.
In October, we performed right hepatectomy with diaphragma and right lung resection.
The pathological diagnosis was intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.
Multiple recurrences in remnant liver, lung and peritoneal metastasis were detected in January 2011.
For intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, hepatectomy is the only established treatment, and RFA treatment remains controversial.
Clinical diagnosis of multiple cancers should be decided with caution.
PMID: 22202273
[A case of refractory pancreatic fistula following pancreaticoduodenectomy treated successfully by intestinal decompression catheter insertion to jejunum under local anesthesia].
The case was an 80-year-old woman with inferior bile duct cancer.
The patient had undergone subtotal stomach-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy with end-to-side pancreaticojejunostomy.
Postoperative pancreatic fistula was observed in a short period and was treated by somatostatin analog administration and abscess drainage.
Despite these conservative therapies, pancreatic fistula resulted in abdominal bleeding from the branch of dorsal pancreatic artery, which stopped by emergent transcatheter arterial embolization.
Because pancreatic fistula had become refractory, the intestinal decompression catheter insertion was performed under local anesthesia to the jejunum located directly below abdominal wall.
After this surgery, pancreatic fistula was resolved over a few weeks.
This technique could be safely performed and avoided the injury of drainage fistula, and was considered to be an option for treating refractory pancreatic fistula.
PMID: 22202271
[A case of primary malignant lymphoma of the spleen which was difficult to be diagnosed].
A 55-year-old woman who had a chief complaint of left abdominal and back pain.
She was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer associated with splenic metastasis (Stage IVb) by CT and MRI study and was treated with chemotherapy of gemcitabine (GEM).
Chemotherapy was discontinued due to adverse event (grade 3).
CT study at this point reveals the effectiveness of GEM.
The tumor was localized, and an operation was performed.
The tumor was diagnosed as primary malignant lymphoma (diffuse large B-cell lymphoma) of the spleen.
The splentic tumor is extremely rare, so a surgical treatment was indicated for making a correct diagnosis.
This was an interesting case of malignant lymphoma that GEM revealed a cytoreductive result.
PMID: 22202255
[Assessment of five-metallic stent placement cases for malignant duodenal stenosis].
We report five-metallic stent placement cases for malignant duodenal stenosis.
Two of them received a placement of Ultraflex by over-the-wire (OTW) procedure, and the other three received a placement of WallFlex by through-the-scope (TTS) procedure.
We assessed the baseline characteristic of the patient, procedural time and food intake after the stent placement for both OTW and TIS groups.
OTW GROUP CASE 1: A 93-year-old woman with cancer of the ampulla of Vater, 60 min.
in procedure time and low-residue diet after stent replacement.
OTW GROUP CASE 2: A 76-year-old man with pancreatic cancer, 90 min.
in procedure time and low-residue diet after stent replacement.
TTS GROUP CASE 1: A 56-year-old man with recurrent postoperative bile duct cancer and gallbladder cancer, 16 min.
in procedure time and full diet after stent replacement.
TTS group case 2: A 79-year-old woman with pancreatic cancer, 40 min.
in procedure time and liquids only after stent placement.
TTS GROUP CASE 3: A 64-year-old woman with pancreatic cancer, 17 min.
in procedure time and liquids only after stent placement.
In comparison with OTW, TTS placement was much easier and it took a shorter procedural time.
However, we consider that a selection of suitable stents and an assessment of the location for good food intake after stent placement are more important.
PMID: 22202254
[Novel treatment strategy using Trafermin® consisting of bFGF for intractable pancreatic fistula following gastrectomy for gastric cancer-a case report with literature reviews].
Despite recent perioperative technological advances in gastric cancer, intractable pancreatic fistula is still a major critical complication following gastrectomy and should be specifically targeted in the effort to improve postoperative outcomes.
We preliminary report here a successfully treated case with intractable pancreatic fistula using Trafermin® consisting of basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF).
A 67-year-old man underwent laparoscopic proximal gastrectomy with radical lymphadenectomy for early proximal gastric cancer (pT1bN0M0).
After surgery, pancreatic fistula was occurred.
Pancreatic fistula persisted for three months despite of surgical and several conservative treatments.
After obtaining informed consent, we started to inject 50 μg/day of Trafermin® through a drainage tube into the dehiscence of pancreas.
Consequently, pancreatic fistula was successfully closed within three weeks.
Our novel treatment technique is simple, rapid and not costly.
If informed consent was obtained from patients with low risk of recurrences, this technique should be recommended as one of the treatment choices for intractable pancreatic fistula following curative gastrectomy for gastric cancer.
PMID: 22202233
[The development of a novel cancer vaccine using Peptide vaccine for patients with advanced pancreatic cancer].
Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2) is an essential factor in tumor angiogenesis and the growth of pancreatic cancer.
In addition, it is overexpressed in tumor blood vessels, however, VEGFR2 is not expressed in normal vessels, which makes an attractive candidate as a molecular target for antiangiogenic cancer immunotherapy.
Furthermore, the tumor cell-indirect immunotherapy targeting VEGFR2 is expected to overcome tumor immune escape.
The phase I clinical trial using VEGFR2-169 peptide that successfully induced specific CTLs in cancer patients, combined with gemcitabine (GEM), was conducted for patients with advanced pancreatic cancer.
VEGFR2-169 was subcutaneously injected weekly in a dose-escalation manner( doses of 0.5, 1.0, 2.0 mg/body, 6 patients/1 cohort).
GEM was administered at a dose of 1,000 mg/m2 on days 1, 8 and 15 in a 28-day cycle.
No dose limiting toxicity was observed.
Specific CTLs reacting to VEGFR2-169 were induced in 11 (61%) of the 18 patients.
Our protocol was safe and well-tolerated.
VEGFR2-169 was immunogenic under the condition with GEM treatment.
From an immunological point of view, the optimal dose might be 2.0 mg/body.
A randomized phase II/III clinical trial started in January 2009 to demonstrate the clinical benefits of VEGFR2-169 for advanced pancreatic cancer patients.
PMID: 22201834
Hyperglycemia as a mechanism of pancreatic cancer metastasis.
As a vital step in the progression of cancer, metastasis poses the largest problem in cancer treatment and is the main cause of death of cancer patients.
In pancreatic cancer, almost 80% of patients have locally deteriorated or metastatic disease and thus are not appropriate for resection at the time of diagnosis.
Due to the high rate of incidence and mortality, it is crucial to study the molecular mechanisms of metastasis to clarify therapeutic targets to hinder the spread of cancer.
Diabetes mellitus has long been considered a potential risk factor for pancreatic cancer.
In this review, we comprehensively describe the role of hyperglycemia in governing critical steps of the metastatic process.
In particular, we focus on the hyperglycemia-dependent aspects of the Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) and vascular dysfunction.
Furthermore, we discuss how hyperglycemia-related production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) may play an important role in these two processes.
A deep understanding of metastasis mechanisms will identify novel targets for therapeutic intervention.
PMID: 22201186
Inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3 activity triggers an apoptotic response in pancreatic cancer cells through JNK-dependent mechanisms.
Recent evidences suggest that the activity of glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK3) contributes to the tumorigenic potential of pancreatic cancer cells through modulation of cell proliferation and survival.
However, further investigations are needed to identify GSK3-dependent mechanisms involved in the control of pancreatic cancer cell proliferation and survival.
This study was undertaken to provide further support for a role of GSK3 in pancreatic cancer cell growth as well as to identify new cellular and molecular mechanisms involved.
Herein, we demonstrate that prolonged inhibition of GSK3 triggers an apoptotic response only in human pancreatic cancer cells but not in human non-transformed pancreatic epithelial cells.
We show that prolonged inhibition of GSK3 activity increases Bim messenger RNA and protein expressions.
Moreover, we provide evidence that activation of the c-jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) pathway is necessary for the GSK3 inhibition-mediated increase in Bim expression and apoptotic response.
Finally, we demonstrate that concomitant inhibition of GSK3 potentiates the death ligand-induced apoptotic response in pancreatic cancer cells but not in non-transformed pancreatic epithelial cells and that this effect also requires JNK activity.
Considering that different approaches leading to stimulation of death receptor signaling are under clinical trials for treatment of unresectable or metastatic pancreatic cancer, inhibition of GSK3 could represent an attractive new avenue to improve their effectiveness.
PMID: 22200978
RNA interference against MDM2 suppresses tumor growth and metastasis in pancreatic carcinoma SW1990HM cells.
In our previous study, the mouse double minute 2 (MDM2) was identified as one of the leading genes that promote the metastasis of pancreatic cancer (PC).
However, the mechanism by which MDM2 promotes metastasis of PC is not understood.
In this study, we show that down-regulation of MDM2 through lentivirus-mediated RNA interference could also suppress in vitro proliferation and in vivo tumor growth, and led to an obvious inhibition of both in vitro invasion and in vivo live metastases of SW1990HM cells which had an over-expression of MDM2 and a higher metastatic potential.
Moreover, we also show that the down-regulation of MDM2 induced a significant decrease in MMP9, Ki-67 and increase in P53, E-Cadherin expression, and results in an altered expression of genes involved in metastasis, apoptosis, and cell proliferation.
Our results suggest that MDM2 plays an important role in metastasis as well as tumor growth of PC.
MDM2 could be a hopeful target for the control of PC.
PMID: 22200969
The effects of cyclooxygenase-2 gene silencing by siRNA on cell proliferation, cell apoptosis, cell cycle and tumorigenicity of Capan-2 human pancreatic cancer cells.
The prognosis of pancreatic cancer is still very poor.
No specific effective gene therapy for pancreatic cancer has been found.
As a key enzyme of the metabolic process of arachidonic acid, cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) has been found to be closely related to the tumorigenesis of epithelial cancers.
However, the antitumor effect of small interfering RNA (siRNA) targeting COX-2 in pancreatic cancer has not yet been verified.
Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate the effects of COX-2 gene silencing by siRNA on cell proliferation, cell apoptosis, cell cycle and tumorigenicity of pancreatic cancer cells.
COX-2 mRNA was detected by RT-PCR and real-time PCR.
COX-2 protein was detected by Western blotting.
The cell proliferation was measured by cell counting using microscopy.
The cell apoptosis and cell cycle were measured by flow cytometry.
The tumorigenicity of Capan-2 pancreatic cancer cells transfected with COX-2 siRNA was evaluated using a nude mouse xenograft model.
The expression of COX-2 mRNA as well as COX-2 protein were downregulated after COX-2 siRNA transfection.
COX-2 siRNA could inhibit the growth of Capan-2 cells significantly by decreasing the cell proliferation, increasing cell apoptosis and regulating cell cycle as well.
In vivo experiments demonstrated that the mean volume and weight of subcutaneous xenografts in nude mice derived from Capan-2 cells transfected with COX-2 siRNA were significantly decreased.
COX-2 siRNA could inhibit the growth of Capan-2 pancreatic cancer cells and also decrease the tumorigenicity of Capan-2 cells, implicating a new potential therapeutic target in pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22200913
Synergistic antitumor interactions between gemcitabine and clofarabine in human pancreatic cancer cell lines.
Pancreatic cancer is a highly malignant disease, with a 5-year survival rate of less than 4%.
Thus, new therapies for this deadly disease are urgently required.
In this study, we sought to investigate whether combination treatments with gemcitabine and clofarabine result in synergistic cytotoxic effects against human pancreatic cancer cells.
The type and extent of cytotoxic interactions between gemcitabine and clofarabine in three human pancreatic cancer cell lines were determined by MTT assays and standard isobologram analysis.
The effects of the two agents on cell cycle distribution and apoptosis were determined by flow cytometry.
Clofarabine significantly and synergistically enhanced gemcitabine cytotoxicities in all of the cell lines tested.
This was accompanied by a nearly complete S phase arrest and synergistic induction of apoptosis (cooperativity index = 0.67).
Combined treatment of gemcitabine and clofarabine resulted in synergistic cytotoxicities in vitro.
Our results strongly suggest potential clinical benefits for using this drug combination to treat pancreatic cancer patients.
PMID: 22200892
UVC irradiation suppresses platelet-derived growth factor-BB-induced migration in human pancreatic cancer cells.
We have recently reported that short wavelength ultraviolet-C (UVC) irradiation inhibits cell growth and induces apoptosis in human pancreatic cancer cells.
In this study, we investigated the effect of UVC on platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-BB-induced migration in pancreatic cancer cells, AsPC1 and BxPC3.
In cell migration assays using a Boyden chamber Transwell, PDGF-BB exerted a maximum effect on migration of these cells at a dose of 70 ng/ml after 36 h of treatment.
PDGF-BB also caused phosphorylation of p44/p42 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), stress-activated protein kinase/c-Jun-N-terminal kinase (SAPK/JNK) and Akt, but not of p38 MAPK in these cells.
Pretreatment of these cells with UVC at a dose over 10 J markedly suppressed PDGF-BB-induced migration.
Since UVC significantly inhibited PDGF-BB-induced phosphorylation of Akt, and subsequent glycogen synthase kinase (GSK) 3β, but not p44/p42 MAPK and SAPK/JNK, it is likely that UVC inhibits PDGF-BB-induced migration by suppressing the Akt-GSK3β pathway in pancreatic cancer cells.
Taken together with our previous findings, UVC could be a useful tool for the treatment of patients with pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22200743
A humanized anti-IGF-1R monoclonal antibody (R1507) and/or metformin enhance gemcitabine-induced apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells.
Pancreatic cancer is a disease with a dismal prognosis and treatment options are limited.
This study investigated the interaction of gemcitabine with R1507 and/or metformin and the induction of an inhibitor of apoptosis protein by this com-bination.
Pancreatic cancer cells were treated with gemcitabine, R1507 and metformin alone or in combination.
The effects of treatments were evaluated for cell proliferation, apoptosis, and the expression of genes related to inhibition of apoptosis and chemotherapy resistance.
Combination of gemcitabine with R1507 and/or metformin additively interacted with the inhibition of cell proliferation in human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cell lines, SUIT-2 and MIAPaCa-2 with differential gemcitabine resistance, and assessment of apoptosis demonstrated that drug associations increased the apoptotic index in both cell lines.
Treatment with gemcitabine induced the expression of survivin and XIAP in both cell lines, indicating the induction of chemoresistance.
In conclusion, these data demonstrate that the combination of gemcitabine with R1507 and/or metformin has an additive effect in pancreatic cancer cell lines with differential sensitivity to gemcitabine; however, gemcitabine may induce chemotherapy resistance.
PMID: 22200682
A study of the suppressive effect on human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell proliferation and angiogenesis by stable plasmid-based siRNA silencing of c-Src gene expression.
The non-receptor protein tyrosine kinase c-Src regulates diverse biological processes by associating with multiple signaling and structural molecules.
Overexpression of c-Src occurs in pancreatic cancer and can be predictive of poor prognosis.
The aim of this study was to investigate the inhibitory effects of plasmid-based siRNAs targeting the human c-Src gene on proliferation and angiogenesis in the human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell line Panc-1.
Three siRNAs targeting the c-Src gene were transfected into the Panc-1 pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell line mediated by Lipofectamine.
Transfection efficiency was assessed by flow cytometry.
Real-time quantitative PCR (RQ-PCR) was employed to detect the expression of c-Src mRNA, and the most effective siRNA was chosen to be cloned into a plasmid.
Two single-strand DNA templates were designed according to the most effective siRNA sequences.
The short hairpin RNA (shRNA) plasmid targeting c-Src with pGPU6/green fluorescent protein (GFP)/Neo vector psiRNA-c-Src was constructed.
Sequencing was performed to check whether the plasmid was constructed correctly.
Panc-1 cells were transfected with psiRNA-c-Src and the negative control plasmid (psiRNA-N), respectively.
Following selection with G418, the transfected monoclonal cells were chosen.
GFP was evaluated by flow cytometry and fluorescence microscopy to estimate transfection efficiency.
RQ-PCR and western blotting were used to detect c-Src silencing efficiency.
To verify the effects of gemcitabine chemoresistance of c-Src expression, MTT assay was performed.
ELISA was used to determine VEGF levels in culture supernatants.
In a nude mouse model, tumor growth was studied, c-Src, VEGF expression and microvessel density in tumor tissue were measured by immunohistochemistry.
The transfection efficiency of siRNA in the Panc-1 cell line was above 90%, the most effective siRNA could suppress expression of the c-Src gene with an inhibition efficiency of 86.1%.
Sequencing confirmed that the c-Src siRNA plasmid was successfully constructed.
MTT assay indicated that the effect of gemcitabine-induced cytotoxicity was markedly increased in the psiRNA-c-Src group (P<0.05).
Meanwhile, the expression of VEGF in vitro was reduced significantly (P<0.05) in the psiRNA-c-Src group.
In nude mice bearing tumors, c-Src, VEGF expression and MVD were decreased in tumors produced from psiRNA-c-Src transfected cells (P<0.05).
In summary, the siRNA expression constructs targeting c-Src could specifically suppress c-Src expression, inhibit VEGF expression, inhibit cell proliferation and enhance gemcitabine chemosensitivity in vitro.
C-Src gene silencingwas able to inhibit angiogenesis of tumors in vivo.
These findings demonstrate that the c-Src targeting gene silencing approach has the potential to serve as a novel tool for pancreatic carcinoma treatment.
PMID: 22200041
Amylase, lipase, and volume of drainage fluid in gastrectomy for the early detection of complications caused by pancreatic leakage.
Pancreatic leakage is a serious complication of gastrectomy due to stomach cancer.
Therefore, we analyzed amylase and lipase concentrations in blood and drainage fluid, and evaluated the volume of drainage fluid to discern their usefulness as markers for the early detection of serious pancreatic leakage requiring reoperation after gastrectomy.
From January 2001 to December 2007, we retrospectively analyzed data from 24,072 patient samples.
We divided patients into two groups; 1) complications with pancreatic leakage (CG), and 2) no complications associated with pancreatic leakage (NCG).
Values of amylase and lipase in the blood and drainage fluid, volume of the drainage fluid, and relationships among the volumes, amylase values, and lipase values in the drainage fluid were evaluated, respectively in the two groups.
The mean amylase values of CG were significantly higher than those of NCG in blood and drainage fluid (P < 0.05).
For lipase, statistically significant differences were observed in drainage fluid (P < 0.05).
The mean volume (standard deviation) of the drained fluid through the tube between CG (n = 22) and NCG (n = 236) on postoperative day 1 were 368.41 (266.25) and 299.26 (300.28), respectively.
There were no statistically significant differences between the groups (P = 0.298).
There was a correlation between the amylase and lipase values in the drainage fluid (r = 0.812, P = 0.000).
Among postoperative amylase and lipase values in blood and drainage fluid, and the volume of drainage fluid, the amylase in drainage fluid was better differentiated between CG and NCG than other markers.
The volume of the drainage fluid did not differ significantly between groups.
PMID: 22200040
Factors affecting long-term survival after surgical resection of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
Some patients who undergo surgical resection of pancreatic cancer survive longer than other patients.
The purpose of this study was to identify the factors that affect long-term survival after resection of histopathologically confirmed pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
A single-center, retrospective study was conducted among 164 patients who underwent surgical resection of pancreatic cancer, between May 1995 and December 2004.
The patient follow-up process was conducted via telephone survey and review of electronic medical records for at least 5 years or until death.
We compared patients with long-term (≥60 months, n = 19) and short-term survival (<60 months, n = 145).
Resection margin status, differentiation of the tumor, tumor stage, pre-operative serum level of albumin, total bilirubin and carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9 level are related with survival difference (all factors, P < 0.05).
Multivariate analysis revealed that a pre-operative serum total bilirubin level <7 mg/dL and a pre-operative serum CA19-9 level <37 U/mL is a statistically significant prognostic factor for long-term survival.
The preoperative serum total bilirubin and serum CA19-9 levels are associated with long-term survival after surgical resection of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22199998
Interaction between IGF-1 polymorphisms and overweight for the risk of pancreatic cancer in Japanese.
Although several reports have described a possible association between insulin-like growth factors-1 (IGF-1) and pancreatic cancer (PC) risk, this association has not been evaluated in the non-Caucasian population.
To assess the impact of IGF-1 polymorphisms on PC risk in Japanese, we conducted a case-control study which compared the frequency of ten single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and haplotypes of IGF-1.
SNPs were investigated using the TaqMan method in 176 patients with PC and 1402 control subjects.
Exposure to risk factors was assessed from the results of a self-administered questionnaire.
Associations and gene-environment interactions were examined using an unconditional logistic regression model.
We did not observe any significant main effect of IGF-1 loci, but did find interactions between rs5742714 and past and/or current body-mass index (BMI) status.
Among patients with BMI > 25 at age 20, an increased PC risk was observed with the addition of the minor allele for rs5742714 (trend P = 0.048) and rs6214 (P = 0.043).
Among patients with current BMI > 25, an increased or decreased PC risk was observed with the addition of the minor allele for rs5742714 (trend P = 0.046), rs4764887 (P = 0.031) and rs5742612 (P = 0.038).
Haplotype analysis of IGF-1 showed a significant association among patients who were either or both previously or currently overweight.
These findings suggest that IGF-1 polymorphisms may affect the development of PC in the Japanese population in combination with obesity.
Further studies to confirm these findings are warranted.
PMID: 22199336
Long-term survival following resection of brain metastases from pancreatic cancer.
Brain metastases originating from pancreatic cancer are associated with a dismal prognosis and, generally, therapeutic options remain palliative.
We present the cases of two patients that developed brain metastases after resection of a pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
Brain metastases were resected successfully and neither patients developed any further tumor recurrence.
These cases demonstrate that resection of brain metastatic lesions originating from pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is a reasonable therapeutic option with a chance for complete cure in some cases.
PMID: 22198808
Neuroendocrine pancreatic tumors: guidelines for management and update.
OPINION STATEMENT: Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PanNETs) are a diverse group of rare neoplasms.
Commonly referred to as islet cell tumors, PanNETs are classified as functional or nonfunctional depending on their production of specific pancreatic endocrine hormones (e.g.
insulin, gastrin, glucagon, and others) and association with the resultant clinical syndromes.
While most PanNETs are sporadic, syndromic patients, in particular those with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN-1) and von Hippel Lindau (VHL), are at increased risk of developing these tumors.
Recent investigations of patients with sporadic and syndromic PanNETs have elucidated critical pathways in tumor development, such as mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling and its downstream growth factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).
Prognosis ranges from favorable for localized, low-grade neoplasms to poor for advanced, high-grade tumors.
Regardless of the stage at presentation, surgery is the first-line therapy for patients with disease amenable to surgical resection.
We favor formal pancreatectomy with conventional lymph node sampling for the vast majority of patients, either through open or laparoscopic techniques.
Those with insulinomas, however, may be candidates for enucleation.
Cytoreductive surgery is also recommended for patients with locoregional recurrences or hepatic metastases.
Regional adjuvants such as radiofrequency ablation (RFA), transarterial chemoembolization (TACE), and others are often employed in an attempt to palliate symptoms and prolong survival.
Unfortunately, cytotoxic chemotherapy has been largely ineffective in treating patients with PanNETs.
The somatostatin analogue octreotide, however, has been effective in palliating symptoms and slowing the progression of disease.
Other promising systemic agents, including sunitinib and everolimus, have targeted critical PanNET signaling pathways.
In summary, surgery remains the principal therapeutic strategy for patients with PanNETs, but continued research may identify more robust systemic therapies for those with advanced disease.
PMID: 22198777
What an endoscopist should know about immunoglobulin-G4-associated disease of the pancreas and biliary tree.
Autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP) and IgG4-associated cholangitis (IAC) are the recently recognized pancreatobiliary manifestations of IgG4-associated systemic disease (ISD).
Clinically, ISD of the pancreas and/or biliary tree may mimic pancreatic cancer, sclerosing cholangitis, or cholangiocarcinoma.
Patients often present with abdominal pain, weight loss, jaundice, itch, and biochemical signs of pancreatitis and cholestasis.
Tomography may reveal enlargement of the pancreas or may mimic malignant pancreatic lesions, and cholangiopancreatography may disclose irregularities of the pancreatic duct and stenoses of the distal and/or proximal common bile duct and intrahepatic bile ductules.
Serum immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4) is elevated in most patients but, unlike tissue IgG4-loaded plasma cell infiltrates, is not diagnostic of the disease.
The application of consensus diagnostic criteria for laboratory investigations, imaging, and histologic findings can identify patients who qualify for corticosteroid treatment.
The excellent response to immunosuppressive therapy suggests an immune-mediated etiology of the disease, but the exact pathophysiological mechanisms are still under investigation.
Relapse may occur after tapering down of corticosteroids, which supports the rationale of maintenance immunosuppression after remission has been induced.
PMID: 22197238
A Four-Dimensional Computed Tomography Analysis of Multiorgan Abdominal Motion.
PURPOSE: To characterize and quantify multiorgan respiration-induced motion in the abdomen in liver and pancreatic cancer patients.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Four-dimensional computed tomography scans were acquired for 18 patients treated for abdominal tumors.
Contours of multiple abdominal organs were drawn by the radiation oncologist at one respiratory phase; these contours were propagated to other respiratory phases by deformable registration.
Three-dimensional organ models were generated from the resulting contours at each phase.
Motions of the bounding box and center of mass were extracted and analyzed for the clinical target volume and organs at risk.
RESULTS: On average, the center of mass motion for liver clinical target volumes was 9.7 mm (SD 5 mm) in the superior-inferior direction, with a range of 3 to 18 mm; for pancreatic tumors, the average was 5 mm (SD 1 mm) m with a range of 3 to 7 mm.
Abdominal organs move in unison, but with varying amplitudes.
Gating near exhale (T40-T60) reduces the range of motion by a factor of ∼10.
CONCLUSION: We have used deformable registration to calculate the trajectories of abdominal organs in four dimensions, based on center of mass and bounding box motion metrics.
Our results are compared with previously reported studies.
Possible reasons for differences are discussed.
PMID: 22197234
Intensity-Modulated Radiotherapy for Pancreatic Adenocarcinoma.
PURPOSE: To report the outcomes and toxicities in patients treated with intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) for pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Forty-seven patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma were treated with IMRT between 2003 and 2008.
Of these 47 patients, 29 were treated adjuvantly and 18 definitively.
All received concurrent 5-fluorouracil chemotherapy.
The treatment plans were optimized such that 95% of the planning target volume received the prescription dose.
The median delivered dose for the adjuvant and definitive patients was 50.4 and 54.0 Gy, respectively.
RESULTS: The median age at diagnosis was 63.9 years.
For adjuvant patients, the 1- and 2-year overall survival rate was 79% and 40%, respectively.
The 1- and 2-year recurrence-free survival rate was 58% and 17%, respectively.
The local-regional control rate at 1 and 2 years was 92% and 80%, respectively.
For definitive patients, the 1-year overall survival, recurrence-free survival, and local-regional control rate was 24%, 16%, and 64%, respectively.
Four patients developed Grade 3 or greater acute toxicity (9%) and four developed Grade 3 late toxicity (9%).
CONCLUSIONS: Survival for patients with pancreatic cancer remains poor.
A small percentage of adjuvant patients have durable disease control, and with improved therapies, this proportion will increase.
Systemic therapy offers the greatest opportunity.
The present results have demonstrated that IMRT is well tolerated.
Compared with those who received three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy in previously reported prospective clinical trials, patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma treated with IMRT in our series had improved acute toxicity.
PMID: 22197222
Rab25 and CLIC3 collaborate to promote integrin recycling from late endosomes/lysosomes and drive cancer progression.
Here we show that Rab25 permits the sorting of ligand-occupied, active-conformation α5β1 integrin to late endosomes/lysosomes.
Photoactivation and biochemical approaches show that lysosomally targeted integrins are not degraded but are retrogradely transported and recycled to the plasma membrane at the back of invading cells.
This requires CLIC3, a protein upregulated in Rab25-expressing cells and tumors, which colocalizes with active α5β1 in late endosomes/lysosomes.
CLIC3 is necessary for release of the cell rear during migration on 3D matrices and is required for invasion and maintenance of active Src signaling in organotypic microenvironments.
CLIC3 expression predicts lymph node metastasis and poor prognosis in operable cases of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC).
The identification of CLIC3 as a regulator of a recycling pathway and as an independent prognostic indicator in PDAC highlights the importance of active integrin trafficking as a potential drive to cancer progression in vivo.
PMID: 22196670
Endoscopic versus surgical treatment of downstream pancreatic duct stones in chronic pancreatitis.
Pancreatic duct stone is thought not only to be the cause of abdominal pain but also to be a risk factor for pancreatic cancer.
Several treatment options have been implemented in the treatment of pancreatic duct stones.
Stone location is a critical factor in selecting treatment.
We present the results of 27 endoscopic treatments and 35 surgical treatments performed in three hospitals at a single university between January 2000 and January 2005.
The results were compared retrospectively in terms of success rate of stone removal, length of hospital stay, complications, pain relief, and changes of pancreatic functions.
In our study, endoscopy resulted in a similar success rate of stone removal and short-term pain relief rate as the surgical approach and with a shorter length of hospital stay.
However, the surgical group had a more favorable long-term clinical result, as well as a lower number of hospital readmissions at the 5-year follow-up point.
Based on long-term results, surgical treatment is more effective than endoscopy.
PMID: 22194634
Serum MicroRNA Expression Profile as a Biomarker in the Diagnosis and Prognosis of Pancreatic Cancer.
Detection of pancreatic cancer (PaC), particularly at early stages, remains a great challenge owing to lack of specific biomarkers.
We sought to identify a PaC-specific serum microRNA (miRNA) expression profile and test its specificity and sensitivity as a biomarker in the diagnosis and prognosis of PaC.
We obtained serum samples from 197 PaC cases and 158 age- and sex-matched cancer-free controls.
We screened the differentially expressed serum miRNAs with Illumina sequencing by synthesis technology using pooled serum samples followed by RT-qPCR validation of a large number of samples arranged in multiple stages.
We used risk score analysis to evaluate the diagnostic value of the serum miRNA profiling system.
To assess the serum miRNA-based biomarker accuracy in predicting PaC, we performed additional double-blind testing in 77 PaC cases and 52 controls and diagnostic classification in 55 cases with clinically suspected PaC.
After the selection and validation process, 7 miRNAs displayed significantly different expression levels in PaC compared with controls.
This 7 miRNA-based biomarker had high sensitivity and specificity for distinguishing various stages of PaC from cancer-free controls and also accurately discriminated PaC patients from chronic pancreatitis (CP) patients.
Among the 7 miRNAs, miR-21 levels in serum were significantly associated with overall PaC survival.
The diagnostic accuracy rate of the 7-miRNA profile was 83.6% in correctly classifying 55 cases with clinically suspected PaC.
These data demonstrate that the 7 miRNA-based biomarker can serve as a novel noninvasive approach for PaC diagnosis and prognosis.
PMID: 22194529
Coffee, tea, and sugar-sweetened carbonated soft drink intake and pancreatic cancer risk: a pooled analysis of 14 cohort studies.
Coffee has been hypothesized to have pro- and anticarcinogenic properties, whereas tea may contain anticarcinogenic compounds.
Studies assessing coffee intake and pancreatic cancer risk have yielded mixed results, whereas findings for tea intake have mostly been null.
Sugar-sweetened carbonated soft drink (SSB) intake has been associated with higher circulating levels of insulin, which may promote carcinogenesis.
Few prospective studies have examined SSB intake and pancreatic cancer risk; results have been heterogeneous.
In this pooled analysis from 14 prospective cohort studies, 2,185 incident pancreatic cancer cases were identified among 853,894 individuals during follow-up.
Multivariate (MV) study-specific relative risks (RR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated using Cox proportional hazards models and then pooled using a random-effects model.
No statistically significant associations were observed between pancreatic cancer risk and intake of coffee (MVRR = 1.10; 95% CI, 0.81-1.48 comparing ≥900 to <0 g/d; 237g ≈ 8oz), tea (MVRR = 0.96; 95% CI, 0.78-1.16 comparing ≥400 to 0 g/d; 237g ≈ 8oz), or SSB (MVRR = 1.19; 95% CI, 0.98-1.46 comparing ≥250 to 0 g/d; 355g ≈ 12oz; P value, test for between-studies heterogeneity > 0.05).
These associations were consistent across levels of sex, smoking status, and body mass index.
When modeled as a continuous variable, a positive association was evident for SSB (MVRR = 1.06; 95% CI, 1.02-1.12).
Conclusion and Impact: Overall, no associations were observed for intakes of coffee or tea during adulthood and pancreatic cancer risk.
Although we were only able to examine modest intake of SSB, there was a suggestive, modest positive association for risk of pancreatic cancer for intakes of SSB.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev; 21(2); 305-18.
©2011 AACR.
PMID: 22194465
A Novel FoxM1-Caveolin Signaling Pathway Promotes Pancreatic Cancer Invasion and Metastasis.
Caveolin-1 (Cav-1), a principal structural component of caveolar membrane domains, contributes to cancer development but its precise functional roles and regulation remain unclear.
In this study, we determined the oncogenic function of Cav-1 in preclinical models of pancreatic cancer and in human tissue specimens.
Cav-1 expression levels correlated with metastatic potential and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in both mouse and human pancreatic cancer cells.
Elevated levels in cells promoted EMT, migration, invasion, and metastasis in animal models, whereas RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated knockdown inhibited these processes.
We determined that levels of Cav-1 and the Forkhead transcription factor FoxM1 correlated directly in pancreatic cancer cells and tumor tissues.
Enforced expression of FoxM1 increased Cav-1 levels, whereas RNAi-mediated knockdown of FoxM1 had the opposite effect.
FoxM1 directly bound to the promoter region of Cav-1 gene and positively transactivated its activity.
Collectively, our findings defined Cav-1 as an important downstream oncogenic target of FoxM1, suggesting that dysregulated signaling of this novel FoxM1-Cav-1 pathway promotes pancreatic cancer development and progression.
Cancer Res; 72(3); 655-65.
©2011 AACR.
PMID: 22194440
Expression and therapeutic relevance of heat shock protein 90 in pancreatic endocrine tumors.
Pancreatic endocrine tumors (PET) represent a heterogenous group of neoplasms.
Although surgical resection is considered a safe and effective treatment for many PET, therapeutic options for inoperable and progressive PET are limited.
The expression of heat shock protein (Hsp) 90 was investigated in 120 clinically and pathomorphologically well-characterized PET from 84 patients, using immunohistochemistry.
In addition, in 19 snap-frozen PET and 3 healthy pancreatic tissues, we performed immunoblot analyses, and in 15 snap-frozen PET and 3 healthy pancreatic tissues, we investigated the expression of Hsp90-isoforms by means of semiquantitative RT-PCR.
Functional tests were conducted using the human pancreas carcinoid cell line BON and the mouse insulinoma cell line β-TC-3.
Hsp90 was expressed in 95 % of the PET patients.
The transcript levels of the Hsp90-isoforms Hsp90α, Hsp90β, Glucose-related-protein 94, and TNF Receptor-Associated Protein 1 were significantly increased in PET compared with non-neoplastic pancreatic tissues.
The treatment of the cell lines BON and β-TC-3 with the Hsp90-inhibitors 17-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin and 17-dimethylaminoethylamino-17-demethoxy-geldanamycin resulted in significant, dose-dependent reduction of cell viability, cell cycle arrest, and increased apoptosis.
Furthermore, Hsp90-inhibition induced the degradation and inactivation of several oncogenetic Hsp90-client-proteins in a time- and dose-dependent manner.
Hsp90-inhibitors increased the therapeutic effects of doxorubicin and 5-fluorucacil in BON and β-TC-3 cells.
Hsp90 is expressed in the vast majority of PET and its inhibition reveals significant treatment effects in vitro.
Thus, Hsp90 qualifies as a promising new target.
PMID: 22194027
Stereotactic radiotherapy in the liver hilum. Basis for future studies.
A basis for future trials with stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) for tumors of the liver hilum should be established.
Thus, dosage concepts, planning processes, and dose constraints as well as technical innovations are summarized in this contribution.
On the background of our own data, the current literature was reviewed.
The use of SBRT in the most common tumors of the liver hilum (pancreatic cancer and Klatskin tumors) was investigated.
Dose constraints were calculated in 2 Gy standard fractionation doses.
A total of 8 pilot or phase I/II studies about SBRT in the liver hilum were identified.
In recent years, the SBRT technique has developed very quickly from classical stereotactic body frame radiotherapy to IGRT techniques including gating and tracking systems.
In the studies using classical body frame technique, patients experienced considerable toxicities (duodenal ulcer/perforation) as compared to tolerable side effects in IGRT studies (<10% grade 3 and 4 toxicities).
Dose constraints for duodenum, liver, kidneys, colon, and spinal cord were derived from the investigated studies.
Survival and local tumor control data are very heterogeneous: median survival in these patients with locally advanced pancreatic or Klatskin tumors ranges between 5 and 32 months.
Excellent local tumor control rates of about 80% over 24 months were achieved using SBRT.
Despite a few negative results, SBRT seems to be a promising technique in the treatment of tumors of the liver hilum.
Highest precision in diagnostics, positioning, and irradiation as well as strict dose constraints should be applied to keep target volumes as small as possible and side effects tolerable.
PMID: 22194024
Phase-specific cone beam computed tomography reduces reconstructed volume loss of moving phantom.
The accurate volumetric calculation of moving targets/organs is required to use cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) for replanning purposes.
This study was aimed to correct the reconstructed volume losses of moving phantoms by phase-specific CBCT.
Planning fan-beam CT (FBCT) of five hepatobiliary/gastrointestinal/pancreatic cancer patients were acquired under active breathing control and compared with free-breathing CBCT for kidney volumes.
Three different-sized ball phantoms were scanned by FBCT and CBCT.
Images were imported to a planning system to compare the reconstructed volumes.
The phantoms were moved longitudinally on an oscillator with different amplitudes/frequencies.
The phase-specific projections of CBCT for moving phantoms were selected for volume reconstruction.
The differences in reconstructed volumes of static small, medium, large phantoms between FBCT and CBCT were - 6.7%, - 2.3%, and - 2.0%, respectively.
With amplitudes of 7.5-20 mm and frequencies of 8-16 oscillations/min, volume losses on CBCT were comparable with FBCT in large moving phantoms (range 9.1-27.2%).
Amplitudes were more subject to volume losses than frequencies.
On phase-specific CBCT, volume losses were reduced to 2.3-6.5% by reconstruction using 2-3 projections at end/midoscillation phase.
Amplitude had more impact than frequency on volume losses of moving phantoms on CBCT.
Phase-specific CBCT reduced volume losses.
PMID: 22192922
Long-term results of resection of adenocarcinoma of the body and tail of the pancreas using radical antegrade modular pancreatosplenectomy procedure.
The radical antegrade modular pancreatosplenectomy (RAMPS) procedure is a modification of standard distal pancreatosplenectomy.
It was designed to provide the operative approach developed for cancers of the head of the pancreas to cancers of the body and tail of the pancreas, particularly with respect to the extent of node dissection and emphasis on obtaining microscopically negative tangential margins.
The purpose of this report is to provide long-term survival results.
Forty-seven patients had RAMPS between 1999 and 2008.
The decision to perform anterior vs posterior RAMPS was based on the position of the tumor as assessed by preoperative computed tomograms.
Patients were entered in a prospective database and followed at intervals.
Thirty-two patients had anterior RAMPS and 15 had posterior RAMPS.
Twenty-four patients had resection of 33 organs in addition to the left adrenal gland in the posterior RAMPS.
Specimens were inked in the operating room.
Mean tumor size was 4.4 cm.
Negative tangential margins were obtained in 89% of specimens.
Overall, the R0 rate was 81%.
Mean lymph node count was 18.
There were no 30-day or in-hospital mortalities.
Mean and median follow-up times of living patients were 44.4 and 26.4 months.
Median survival was 26 months and 5-year overall actuarial survival was 35.5%.
The actual survival of 23 patients whose surgery was performed more than 5 years before the time of analysis was 30.4%.
RAMPS is associated with high negative tangential margin rates and very satisfactory survival rates for this aggressive tumor.
PMID: 22192731
Gemcitabine and oxaliplatin with or without erlotinib in advanced biliary-tract cancer: a multicentre, open-label, randomised, phase 3 study.
Combination chemotherapy with gemcitabine and a platinum-based agent is regarded as a standard treatment for patients with advanced biliary-tract cancer.
Results of phase 2 trials of single-agent erlotinib in biliary-tract cancer and of gemcitabine plus erlotinib in pancreatic cancer have shown modest benefits.
Therefore, we aimed to investigate the efficacy of gemcitabine and oxaliplatin plus erlotinib versus chemotherapy alone for advanced biliary-tract cancer.
In this open label, randomised, phase 3 trial, we randomly assigned patients (in a 1:1 ratio) with metastatic biliary-tract cancer (cholangiocarcinoma, gallbladder cancer, or ampulla of Vater cancer) to receive either first-line treatment with chemotherapy alone (gemcitabine 1000 mg/m(2) on day 1 and oxaliplatin 100 mg/m(2) on day 2) or chemotherapy plus erlotinib (100 mg daily).
Treatment was repeated every 2 weeks until disease progression or unacceptable toxic effects.
Randomisation was done centrally (stratified by participating centre and presence of measurable lesion).
The primary endpoint was progression-free survival.
Analyses were by intention-to-treat.
This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01149122.
133 patients were randomly assigned to the chemotherapy alone group and 135 to the chemotherapy plus erlotinib group.
The groups were balanced except for a higher proportion of patients with cholangiocarcinoma in the group given erlotinib than in the chemotherapy alone group (96 [71%] patients vs 84 [63%]).
Median progression-free survival was 4·2 months (95% CI 2·7-5·7) in the chemotherapy alone group and 5·8 months (95% CI 4·6-7·0) in the chemotherapy plus erlotinib group (hazard ratio [HR] 0·80, 95% CI 0·61-1·03; p=0·087).
Significantly more patients had an objective response in the chemotherapy plus erlotinib group than in the chemotherapy alone group (40 patients vs 21 patients; p=0·005), but median overall survival was the same in both groups (9·5 months [95% CI 7·5-11·5] in the chemotherapy alone group and 9·5 months [7·6-11·4] in the chemotherapy plus erlotinib group; HR 0·93, 0·69-1·25; p=0·611).
All-cause deaths within 30 days of random assignment occurred in one (1%) of the patients in the chemotherapy alone group and in four (3%) of those in the chemotherapy plus erlotinib group.
The most common grade 3-4 adverse event was febrile neutropenia (eight [6%] patients in the chemotherapy alone group and six [4%] in the chemotherapy plus erlotinib group).
No patient died of treatment-related causes during the study.
Subgroup analyses by primary site of disease showed that for patients with cholangiocarcinoma, the addition of erlotinib to chemotherapy significantly prolonged median progression-free survival (5·9 months [95% CI 4·7-7·1] for chemotherapy plus erlotinib vs 3·0 months [1·1-4·9] for chemotherapy alone; HR 0·73, 95% CI 0·53-1·00; p=0·049).
Although no significant difference in progression-free survival was noted between groups, the addition of erlotinib to gemcitabine and oxaliplatin showed antitumour activity and might be a treatment option for patients with cholangiocarcinoma.
None.
PMID: 22191040
Development of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma associated with intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasia.
We retrospectively investigated the incidence of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma among patients with intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas.
Based on imaging in 195 such patients, we chose surgery as initial treatment for 54, and periodic evaluation over 6 to 192 months (mean, 52) for 141.
In 6 of the 141 patients observed for intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (4.2%), pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma developed.
Further, careful monitoring for cancer occurrence in the remnant pancreas proved essential in the surgical resection group; 2 of 26 patients (7.7%) subsequently developed pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma in the remnant pancreas, at 41 months and 137 months after surgery.
Serial observation of patients with intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms by contrast-enhanced computed tomography or magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography therefore is critical, whether or not surgical treatment initially was performed.
PMID: 22191002
Chaperon-like Activation of Serum-Inducible Tryptophanyl-tRNA Synthetase Phosphorylation through Refolding as a Tool for Analysis of Clinical Samples.
Tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase (TrpRS) expression alters in colorectal (CRC), pancreatic (PC), and cervical (CC) cancers.
Here, phosphorylation of unfolded TrpRS and its fragments is stimulated by human cancer sera (CS; n = 13) and serum of rabbit tumor induced by Rous sarcoma virus, unaffected by donor sera (NS; 11/15) and abolished by alkaline phosphatase.
At 20 years of follow-up, serum-inducible TrpRS phosphorylation found years before healthy donors (3/15) diagnosed with PC, CRC, or leukemia.
I have examined a specificity of serum-inducible TrpRS phosphorylation and found, surprisingly, that serine phosphorylation of unfolded TrpRS is stimulated by anti-TrpRS rabbit antisera but is unaffected by rabbit nonimmune sera and antisera to other antigens.
Anti-TrpRS immunoglobulin G (IgG) inhibits phosphorylation of full-length TrpRS and stimulates phosphorylation of its 20-kDa fragment.
Phosphorylation of this fragment is stimulated also by CS but not NS.
2-Mercaptoethanol and cyclic AMP exerted synergistic inhibitory effect on TrpRS phosphorylation.
Anti-TrpRS sera and casein act as chaperones increasing TrpRS phosphorylation through refolding.
Histone-specific protein kinase activity in CS (n = 44) and anti-TrpRS sera was lower than that in NS (n = 11), rabbit nonimmune sera and antisera to other antigens.
TrpRS inhibitors, tryptamine, and tryptophanol stimulate in vivo accumulation of enzymatically inactive, nonphosphorylated, aggregated and anti-TrpRS IgG refoldable TrpRS.
Phosphorylation of postsurgical tissues (n = 18) reveals TrpRS in ovarian cancer (OVC) and CC but not in normal placenta and liver.
In OVC, TrpRS phosphorylation increase correlates with elevated tryptophan-dependent ATP-inorganic pyrophosphate exchange.
Although not inducing cancer, TrpRS triggers signaling concomitant with cancer.
PMID: 22190866
Cyclin D1 inhibits whereas c-Myc enhances the cytotoxicity of cisplatin in mouse pancreatic cancer cells via regulation of several members of the NF-κB and Bcl-2 families.
Cisplatin (CDDP) is a drug used for treatment of many types of malignancy but pancreatic cancer is relatively resistant to it.
This study aims to determine whether and how cyclin D1 (D1) and c-Myc influence the response of pancreatic cancer cells to CDDP.
Ela-mycPT mouse pancreatic cancer cells were transfected with D1 or c-myc cDNA and treated with CDDP alone or together with NPCD, an inhibitor of cyclin dependent ckinase (CDK) 4 and 6.
Reverse transcription followed by polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and western blot assays were used to determine the mRNA and protein levels of interested genes.
Cell viability was determined using 3-(4, 5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay.
Treatment of Ela-mycPT1 cells with CDDP caused an increase in c-myc expression but a slightly latent decrease in D1 expression, whereas D1 and c-Myc proteins repressed each other.
D1 or c-Myc rendered Ela-mycPT1 cells resistant or sensitive, respectively, to CDDP.
D1 induced the expression of several members of the NF-κB family, including RelA, RelB, Nfκb1 and Nfκb2.
D1 also induced BIRC5 and several pro-survival members of the Bcl-2 gene family, including Bcl-2 , Mcl-1 and Bad while it decreased the level of the pro-apoptotic Noxa.
Inhibition of CDK4 or CDK6 kinase activity by NPCD did not affect these effects of D1.
In contrast, c-Myc in Ela-mycPT1 and Ela-mycPT4 cells has the opposite effects to D1 on the expression of most of these apoptosis regulating genes.
Our results suggest that induction of c-Myc and inhibition of D1 may be mechanisms for CDDP to elicit cytotoxicity.
On the other hand, D1 induces whereas c-Myc represses the expression of key NF-κB family members to induce and repress, respectively, the expression of BIRC5 and several Bcl-2 family members, in turn inhibiting or enhancing the response to CDDP.
PMID: 22190470
A frequent somatic mutation in CD274 3'-UTR leads to protein over-expression in gastric cancer by disrupting miR-570 binding.
Inhibitory costimulatory molecule CD274 expresses in various cancers and contributes to cancer immune evasion by inhibiting T cell activation and proliferation, yet the regulatory mechanisms for CD274 overexpression in cancers are poorly understood.
In this study, we discovered a novel mechanism of CD274 expression regulated by miR-570.
A guanine-to-cytosine mutation at the 3'-UTR of CD274 mRNA led to CD274 overexpression by disrupting the miR-570 binding.
The mutations were widely observed in cancers by sequencing of 276 gastrointestinal cancers (esophageal, gastric, colorectal, hepatocellular, and pancreatic cancers).
This mutation was significantly associated with CD274 overexpression in gastric cancer (P = 1.44×10(-10) ) and with the pathological features including differentiation grade, depth of tumor invasion, lymph node metastasis, and tumor-node-metastases (TNM) stage.
These findings suggest a novel regulatory mechanism for CD274 overexpression in gastric cancer mediated by miR-570 and a somatic mutation in CD274 3'-UTR, and provide a new insight to gastric carcinogenesis.
Hum Mutat 33:480-484, 2012.
© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22189301
The RET G691S polymorphism is a germline variant in desmoplastic malignant melanoma.
The RET protooncogene was originally identified in 1985.
It encodes for a receptor tyrosine kinase.
The RET receptor is activated by its ligand glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor.
A polymorphism, RETp (G691S), in the intracellular juxtamembrane domain of RET, which enhances signaling by glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor has been described and studied previously in pancreatic cancer, medullary thyroid cancer, the multiple endocrine neoplasia 2 syndromes, and recently in cutaneous malignant melanoma.
In particular, it has been shown that desmoplastic melanomas, which have neurotrophic features, have a high frequency of this polymorphism.
In previous studies, however, it was not clear whether this was a germline or somatic change.
Previous studies on pancreatic cancer indicated that both mechanisms may occur.
To clarify this further we examined peripheral blood cell DNA from 30 patients with desmoplastic melanomas and 30 patients with nondesmoplastic melanoma for the RETp.
In this study, a germline polymorphism was found in 30% of the patients with desmoplastic melanomas and 21% of the patients with nondesmoplastic melanoma.
These findings indicate that the RETp may be a genetic risk factor for the development of desmoplastic melanoma.
PMID: 22189235
[A long-term survivor who received S-1-based multidisciplinary therapy for unresectable advanced pancreatic cancer].
A 62-year-old woman with a diagnosis of pancreatic cancer with splenic invasion, liver metastasis, and peritoneal dissemination was scheduled to receive chemotherapy.
However, emergency surgery was performed because of an exacerbation of ileus.
Laparotomy revealed moderate ascites and innumerable nodular lesions on the mesenteric side of the small intestine and colon.
Peritoneal dissemination was associated with many sites of stenosis in the small intestine and colon.
Surgery was performed to resect cancer of the tail of the pancreas (the primary tumor) and to permit the oral intake of food.
The postoperative course was good, with no complications.
On the 19th hospital day, gemcitabine was started as first-line chemotherapy.
Tumor marker levels promptly decreased and remained within the normal range for 6 months.
The patient received 17 courses of chemotherapy.
Tumor marker levels increased subsequently, and chemotherapy was switched to S-1 as second-line treatment.
Twelve courses were delivered, and tumor marker levels decreased again.
Erlotinib was then added to S-1, and treatment was continued.
Tumor marker levels decreased after adding erlotinib, even when there was no further response to S-1 alone.
At present, the patient is receiving combined therapy with S-1 and irinotecan and has survived for 3 years and 1 month after surgery.
Our findings suggest that S-1-based chemotherapy for second-line and subsequent treatment contributed to long-term survival.
PMID: 22189026
Dosimetric comparison of volumetric modulated arc therapy and intensity-modulated radiation therapy for pancreatic malignancies.
Introduction: Volumetric-modulated arc therapy (VMAT) has been previously evaluated for several tumor sites and has been shown to provide significant dosimetric and delivery benefits when compared with intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT).
To date, there have been no published full reports on the benefits of VMAT use in pancreatic patients compared with IMRT.
Methods and materials: Ten patients with pancreatic malignancies treated with either IMRT or VMAT were retrospectively identified.
Both a double-arc VMAT and a 7-field IMRT plan were generated for each of the 10 patients using the same defined tumor volumes, organs at risk (OAR) volumes, dose, fractionation, and optimization constraints.
Results: The planning tumor volume (PTV) maximum dose (55.8 Gy vs.
54.4 Gy), PTV mean dose (53.9 Gy vs.
52.1 Gy), and conformality index (1.11 vs.
0.99) were statistically similar between the IMRT and VMAT plans, respectively.
The VMAT plans had a statistically significant reduction in monitor units compared with the IMRT plans (1109 vs.
498, p < 0.001).
In addition, the doses to the liver, small bowel, and spinal cord were comparable between the IMRT and VMAT plans.
However, the VMAT plans demonstrated a statistically significant reduction in the mean left kidney V(25) (9.4 Gy vs.
2.3 Gy, p = 0.018), mean right kidney V(15) (53.4 Gy vs.
45.9 Gy, p = 0.035), V(20) (32.2 Gy vs.
25.5 Gy, p = 0.016), and V(25) (21.7 Gy vs.
14.9 Gy, p = 0.001).
Conclusions: VMAT was investigated in patients with pancreatic malignancies and compared with the current standard of IMRT.
VMAT was found to have similar or improved dosimetric parameters for all endpoints considered.
Specifically, VMAT provided reduced monitor units and improved bilateral kidney normal tissue dose.
The clinical relevance of these benefits in the context of pancreatic cancer patients, however, is currently unclear and requires further investigation.
PMID: 22188961
[Pancreatic Cancer: The surgeons point of view].
Introduction: Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PA) is not only one of the most common gastrointestinal tumors, but also the most lethal.
Objective: Give a comprehensive and up-to-date panorama on pancreatic cancer with a surgical focus.
Methods: A critical search was performed in Medline focusing on recent relevant publications, renowned authors, high impact publications and a preference for surgical literature in English.
Results: In this article we review PA epidemiology, some aspects of molecular biology, clinical presentation, work-up, staging and current treatment options.
Conclusions: Patients affected must be studied appropriately and referred to specialized centers for surgical treatment, when indicated, in order to offer them the best chance for cure.
Breakthroughs in management will probably include prevention, early diagnosis and molecular therapy.
PMID: 22188952
[Epidemiology of bilio-pancreatic cancer in Specialty Hospital UMAE N°71 IMSS in Torreón, Coahuil].
Background: There is a worldwide increase in the incidente of cancer of the biliopancreatic ducts; early diagnosis is difficult and prognosis is poor.
Objective: To analyze the frequency of malignant biliary strictures diagnosed by Endoscopio Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) at the "Hospital de Especialidades No.
71 UMAE IMSS", Torreon, Coahuila, Mexico.
Methods: A 5-year retrospective study of consecutive patients referred for ERCP at our institution was performed.
Medical records from patients with malignant neoplasms were reviewed.
Demographic variables, post-ERCP and final diagnosis, based on cytological and endoscopic or surgical biopsies, imaging studies and clinical outcome were registered.
Results: The frequency of biliary-pancreatic neoplasm was 15.6% (301 cases in 1924 ERCP) determined by bile duct cancer (40.7%), pancreas (27.9%) and Vater´s ampulla (12.3%).
Brushing was performed for histopathological analysis in 86.7% of cases.
The cytology was positive in 91.2%, negative 8.8%, and it was no possible in 13.3% of cases.
Therapeutic endoscopy was performed in 273 patients with complications in 1.3% and no procedure-related mortality.
Patients with malignant strictures had a higher risk for unsuccessful ERCP (RR 3.01, 95% CI 1.77 - 5.11) and carrying out pre-cut sphincterotomy (RR 1.80, 95% CI 1.38 - 2.35).
Conclusion: In our center the incidence of biliary-pancreatic neoplasm was 15.6% among patients sent to ERCP and its presence increases the degree of difficulty in performing diagnostic and therapeutic endoscopic procedures.
PMID: 22188923
Role of Endoscopic Ultrasonography in Patients Suspected of Pancreatic Cancer with Negative Helical MDCT Scan.
Background: In some patients suspected of pancreatic cancer, no mass can be detected by multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) scan as the cause of biliary obstruction.
Methods: All patients suspected of pancreatic cancer between January 2007 and 2009 with a negative MDCT were identified from a database.
Results: MDCT was performed for suspected pancreatic cancer in 290 patients, and in 258 a pancreatic mass was found.
MDCT failed to establish a diagnosis in 32 patients (11%).
In 23 patients (74%) with complete endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS), the cause of the obstruction was correctly diagnosed.
A mass in the pancreatic head was found in 15 patients; 13 patients had a malignant tumor, and 2 patients a benign cause of obstruction.
Further, EUS diagnosed 3 patients with a superficial adenoma of the papilla and 8 patients with a benign cause of the obstruction.
In 5 patients EUS could not detect the cause of obstruction but finally a pancreatic malignancy was diagnosed.
The positive predictive value of EUS was 86% and the negative predictive value 63%.
Accuracy of MDCT and EUS decreased in the presence of pancreatitis or a biliary endoprosthesis.
Conclusion: In patients suspected of pancreatic cancer in whom MDCT fails to demonstrate the cause of obstructive jaundice, EUS identifies 74% of the underlying diseases correctly.
PMID: 22188918
Inoperable pancreatic adenocarcinoma rendered complete remission by high-intensity focused ultrasound concurrent with gemcitabine-capecitabine chemotherapy: case report and topic review.
PMID: 22188669
MicroRNAs Associated with Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase in Human Pancreatic Cancer.
Aberrant expression of microRNAs (miRNA) is associated with phenotypes of various cancers, including pancreatic cancer.
However, the mechanism of the aberrant expression is largely unknown.
Activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway plays a crucial role in gene expression related to the malignant phenotype of pancreatic cancer.
Hence, we studied the role of MAPK in the aberrant expression of miRNAs in pancreatic cancer cells.
The alterations in expression of 183 miRNAs induced by activation or inactivation of MAPK were assayed in cultured pancreatic cancer cells and HEK293 cells by means of the quantitative real-time PCR method.
We found that four miRNAs, namely, miR-7-3, miR-34a, miR-181d, and miR-193b, were preferentially associated with MAPK activity.
Among these miRNAs, miR-7-3 was upregulated by active MAPK, whereas the others were downregulated.
Promoter assays indicated that the promoter activities of the host genes of miR-7-3 and miR-34a were both downregulated by alteration in MAPK activity.
Exogenous overexpression of the MAPK-associated miRNAs had the effect of inhibition of the proliferation of cultured pancreatic cancer cells; miR-193b was found to exhibit the most remarkable inhibition.
A search for target genes of miR-193b led to identification of CCND1, NT5E, PLAU, STARD7, STMN1, and YWHAZ as the targets.
Translational suppression of these genes by miR-193b was confirmed by reporter assay.
These results indicate that activation of MAPK may play a significant role in aberrant expression of miRNAs and their associated phenotypes in pancreatic cancer.
Mol Cancer Res; 10(2); 259-69.
©2011 AACR.
PMID: 22188668
Pancreatic Cancer Cells and Normal Pancreatic Duct Epithelial Cells Express an Autocrine Catecholamine Loop that Is Activated by Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptors α3, α5, and α7.
Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer deaths in developed countries.
Smoking is an established risk factor for this malignancy but the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood.
Previous reports have provided evidence that nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR) and beta adrenergic receptors (β-AR) stimulate the growth and migration of pancreatic cancer cells.
However, a potential cooperation of these two receptor families in the regulation of pancreatic cancer has not been studied to date.
Using two pancreatic cancer cell lines and immortalized pancreatic duct epithelia in vitro, our current data show that all three cell lines synthesized and released the catecholamine neurotransmitters noradrenaline and adrenaline upon exposure to nicotine and that this activity was regulated by α3, α5, and α7-nAChRs.
In accordance with the established function of these catecholamines as β-AR agonists, nicotine-induced cell proliferation was blocked by the β-AR antagonist propranolol.
Nicotine-induced proliferation was also abolished by the α7-nAChR antagonist α-bungarotoxin, whereas catecholamine production in response to nicotine was blocked by gene knockdown of the α3, α5, and α7-nAChRs.
The nicotinic agonists acetylcholine, nicotine, and its nitrosated carcinogenic derivative NNK induced the phosphorylation of CREB, ERK, Src, and AKT and these responses were inhibited by propranolol.
Our findings identify this hitherto unknown autocrine catecholamine loop as an important regulatory cascade in pancreatic cancer that may prove a promising new target for cancer intervention.
Mol Cancer Res; 10(2); 239-49.
©2011 AACR.
PMID: 22188516
Silver nanoplate contrast agents for in vivo molecular photoacoustic imaging.
Silver nanoplates are introduced as a new photoacoustic contrast agent that can be easily functionalized for molecular photoacoustic imaging in vivo.
Methods are described for synthesis, functionalization, and stabilization of silver nanoplates using biocompatible ("green") reagents.
Directional antibody conjugation to the nanoplate surface is presented along with proof of molecular sensitivity in vitro with pancreatic cancer cells.
Cell viability tests show the antibody-conjugated silver nanoplates to be nontoxic at concentrations up to 1 mg/mL.
Furthermore, the silver nanoplates' potential for in vivo application as a molecularly sensitive photoacoustic contrast agent is demonstrated using an orthotopic mouse model of pancreatic cancer.
Results of these studies suggest that the synthesized silver nanoplates are well suited for a host of biomedical imaging and sensing applications.
PMID: 22187935
Biochemical role of the collagen-rich tumour microenvironment in pancreatic cancer progression.
PDAC (pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma) is among the most deadly of human malignances.
A hallmark of the disease is a pronounced collagen-rich fibrotic extracellular matrix known as the desmoplastic reaction.
Intriguingly, it is precisely these areas of fibrosis in which human PDAC tumours demonstrate increased expression of a key collagenase, MT1-MMP [membrane-type 1 MMP (matrix metalloproteinase); also known as MMP-14].
Furthermore, a cytokine known to mediate fibrosis in vivo, TGF-β1 (transforming growth factor-β1), is up-regulated in human PDAC tumours and can promote MT1-MMP expression.
In the present review, we examine the regulation of PDAC progression through the interplay between type I collagen (the most common extracellular matrix present in human PDAC tumours), MT1-MMP and TGF-β1.
Specifically, we examine the way in which signalling events through these pathways mediates invasion, regulates microRNAs and contributes to chemoresistance.
PMID: 22187714
ALDH as a tumor marker for pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22187705
Clinicopathological correlations of nestin expression in surgically resectable pancreatic cancer including an analysis of perineural invasion.
Nestin is considered to be a marker of stem/progenitor cells in different tissues.
Nestin expression was also described in various tumors.
In pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), its role in cancer cell migration, invasion, and metastases has been suggested.
The study aimed at examining the expression of nestin in PDAC, and to evaluate its clinicopathological correlations.
The expression of nestin was immunohistochemically examined in 117 PDAC resection specimens, analyzed, and correlated with clinico-pathological parameters including perineural invasion (PNI).
Analysis of nestin expression in nerve fibers in tissues of chronic pancreatitis (CP) was added.
Immunohistochemical analysis of nestin expression showed 79 nestin negative (67.5 %) and 38 nestin positive (32.5 %) PDACs.
No significant correlations of nestin expression in tumor cells with the analyzed clinicopathological parameters were demonstrated.
Tumor grade (p<0.001) and nodal status (p=0.009) proved to represent independent prognostic factors.
PNI was identified in 94 PDAC (80.3 %), and did not correlate with nestin expression.
Nestin immunostaining was displayed in nerve fibers of both CP and PDAC tissues.
An intimate link of nestin to a biological process of pancreatic cancer was confirmed.
The expression of nestin did not prove to be a valuable prognostic factor and an immunohistochemical assessment of nestin expression is not superior to conventional prognostic factors in PDAC.
A correlation between nestin expression in tumor cells and PNI was not confirmed and expression of nestin in nerve fibers of both PDAC and CP tissues seems to reflect the process of neural remodeling responsible for pancreatic neuropathy.
PMID: 22187539
Paclitaxel-based chemotherapy for advanced pancreatic cancer after gemcitabine-based therapy failure: a case series of 5 patients.
Gemcitabine (GEM) is a gold-standard chemotherapy agent for advanced pancreatic cancer.
Because of the malignant character of the disease, nearly all patients show disease progression despite treatment with GEM-based chemotherapy; therefore, second-line chemotherapy may be beneficial for these patients.
We report a retrospective analysis of 5 patients with advanced pancreatic cancer, treated with a paclitaxel-containing regimen as second-, third- or fourth-line chemotherapy after various therapies, such as a GEM-based regimen, S-1 regimen, and chemoradiation.
We retrospectively analyzed the efficacy and adverse events, and evaluated the paclitaxel-containing regimens.
A review of the literature is also discussed.
The median overall survival from the start of salvage therapy was 10.7 months.
The disease control rate of the paclitaxel-containing regimen according to RECIST criteria was 60%, including complete response in 0 patients, partial response in 3, and stable disease in 2.
Two patients had malignant ascites at the start of this salvage therapy, and in both of them the ascites and clinical complaints improved.
Grade 3 and 4 hematological adverse events were observed in 2 patients and 1 patient, respectively.
Salvage paclitaxel-based therapy could be beneficial to advanced pancreatic cancer patients who maintain good performance status after several chemotherapy failures.
PMID: 22187431
Inactivation of arf-bp1 Induces p53 Activation and Diabetic Phenotypes in Mice.
It is well accepted that the Mdm2 ubiquitin ligase acts as a major factor in controlling p53 stability and activity in vivo.
Although several E3 ligases have been reported to be involved in Mdm2-independent p53 degradation, the roles of these ligases in p53 regulation in vivo remain largely unknown.
To elucidate the physiological role of the ubiquitin ligase ARF-BP1, we generated arf-bp1 mutant mice.
We found that inactivation of arf-bp1 during embryonic development in mice resulted in p53 activation and embryonic lethality, but the mice with arf-bp1 deletion specifically in the pancreatic β-cells (arf-bp1(FL/Y)/RIP-cre) were viable and displayed no obvious abnormality after birth.
Interestingly, these mice showed dramatic loss of β-cells as mice aged, and >50% of these mice died of severe diabetic symptoms before reaching 1 year of age.
Notably, the diabetic phenotype of these mice was largely reversed by concomitant deletion of p53, and the life span of the mice was significantly extended (p53(LFL/FL)/arf-bp1(FL/Y)/RIP-cre).
These findings underscore an important role of ARF-BP1 in maintaining β-cell homeostasis in aging mice and reveal that the stability of p53 is critically regulated by ARF-BP1 in vivo.
PMID: 22187320
Risk of cancer other than breast or ovarian in individuals with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations.
The risks of cancers other than breast and ovarian amongst BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers are based on relatively few family based studies with the risk of specific cancers tested in population based samples of cancers from founder populations.
We assessed risks of "other cancers" in 268 BRCA1 families and 222 BRCA2 families using a person years at risk analysis from 1975 to 2005.
Cancer confirmations were overall higher than in previous family based studies at 64%.
There was no overall increase in risk for BRCA1 carriers although oesophagus had a significant increased RR of 2.9 (95% CI 1.1-6.0) and stomach at 2.4 (95% CI 1.2-4.3), these were based mainly on unconfirmed cases.
For BRCA2 increased risks for cancers of the pancreas (RR 4.1, 95% CI 1.9-7.8) and prostate (RR 6.3, 95% CI 4.3-9.0) and uveal melanoma (RR 99.4, 95% CI 11.1-359.8) were confirmed.
Possible new associations with oesophagus (RR 4.1, 95% CI 1.9-7.8) and stomach (RR 2.7, 95% CI 1.3-4.8) were detected but these findings should be treated with caution due to lower confirmation rates.
In contrast to previous research a higher risk of prostate cancer was found in males with mutations in the BRCA2 OCCR region.
The present study strengthens the known links between BRCA2 and pancreatic and prostate cancer, but throws further doubt onto any association with BRCA1.
New associations with upper gastro-intestinal malignancy need to be treated with caution and confirmed by large prospective studies.
PMID: 22187239
Comparison of efficacy of enucleation and pancreaticoduodenectomy for small (<3 cm) branch duct type intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm located at the head of pancreas and the uncinate process.
Accurate indications and the extent of surgery for branch duct intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) of the pancreas are still debatable.
In particular, small tumor is located at the head portion of pancreas presents a dilemma.
The purpose of this study is to compare the efficacy of enucleation (EN) with that of pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) in patients with small (2 cm<size<3 cm) branch duct IPMN located at the head of pancreas or uncinate process.
Among 155 patients who underwent pancreatic surgery due to pancreatic cystic tumors between January 2000 and December 2007 at Yonsei University Health System in Seoul, Korea, 14 patients with small (2 cm<size<3 cm) branch duct IPMN located at the head of pancreas or uncinate process were included in this study.
Ten patients underwent PD, and four patients underwent EN.
We compared short term surgical outcomes between the two groups.
Correlation of the variables was analyzed using Mann-Whitney test and Fisher's exact test (SPSS Window 12.0).
p-values less than 0.05 were considered significant.
The average age was 62.21 years (±6.71 years) and consisted of 8 men and 6 women.
The mean operation time and blood loss were significantly lower in EN group.
There were no significant differences in other surgical morbidities.
The result suggests that enucleation for small branch duct IPMN located at the head of pancreas or uncinate process is feasible and as safe as PD, despite a high rate of minor complications.
PMID: 22187203
A randomized phase II trial of intra-arterial chemotherapy using SM-11355 (Miriplatin) for hepatocellular carcinoma.
Background SM-11355 is a platinum complex developed to treat hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) via administration into the hepatic artery as a sustained-release suspension in iodized oil.
We conducted a multicenter phase II trial in patients with HCC to evaluate the efficacy and safety of SM-11355, using a Zinostatin stimalamer suspension in iodized oil as a reference.
Methods Patients with unresectable HCC were randomized 2:1 to receive administration of the SM-11355 or Zinostatin stimalamer suspension into the hepatic artery.
A second injection was given 4-12 weeks later.
Efficacy was evaluated by CT 3 months after treatment and categorized as therapeutic effect (TE) V to I, where TE V was defined as disappearance or 100% necrosis of all treated tumors.
Results A total of 122 patients were evaluated for efficacy and toxicity (SM-11355, n = 83; Zinostatin stimalamer, n = 39).
Baseline characteristics were similar in the two groups.
The TE V rates were 26.5% (22/83) and 17.9% (7/39) in the SM-11355 and Zinostatin stimalamer groups, respectively.
In the SM-11355 group,the most frequent drug-related adverse events (AEs) of ≥ grade 3 were elevated AST, elevated ALT, thrombocytopenia, and hyperbilirubinemia.
The AEs with the largest difference between the two groups (SM-11355 vs.
Zinostatin stimalamer) were hepatic vascular injury (0 vs.
48.4%) and eosinophilia (84.3 vs.
41.0%).
The 2-year and 3-year survival rates were 75.9% vs.
70.3% and 58.4% vs.
48.7%, respectively.
Conclusions The results suggest that SM-11355 in iodized oil has similar efficacy to Zinostatin stimalamer and that repeated dosing of SM-11355 is possible without hepatic vascular injury in cases of relapse.
PMID: 22187035
A pilot study to explore circulating tumour cells in pancreatic cancer as a novel biomarker.
Background:Obtaining tissue for pancreatic carcinoma diagnosis and biomarker assessment to aid drug development is challenging.
Circulating tumour cells (CTCs) may represent a potential biomarker to address these unmet needs.
We compared prospectively the utility of two platforms for CTC enumeration and characterisation in pancreatic cancer patients in a pilot exploratory study.Patients and methods:Blood samples were obtained prospectively from 54 consenting patients and analysed by CellSearch and isolation by size of epithelial tumour cells (ISET).
CellSearch exploits immunomagnetic capture of CTCs-expressing epithelial markers, whereas ISET is a marker independent, blood filtration device.
Circulating tumour cell expression of epithelial and mesenchymal markers was assessed to explore any discrepancy in CTC number between the two platforms.Results:ISET detected CTCs in more patients than CellSearch (93% vs 40%) and in higher numbers (median CTCs/7.5 ml, 9 (range 0-240) vs 0 (range 0-144)).
Heterogeneity observed for epithelial cell adhesion molecule, pan-cytokeratin (CK), E-Cadherin, Vimentin and CK 7 expression in CTCs may account for discrepancy in CTC number between platforms.Conclusion:ISET detects more CTCs than CellSearch and offers flexible CTC characterisation with potential to investigate CTC biology and develop biomarkers for pancreatic cancer patient management.
PMID: 22186617
Genomics and pharmacogenomics of pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
The last decade has brought significant advances in the development of molecularly targeted therapies for treatment of a variety of human malignancies.
In contrast to other solid tumors, however, the impact of novel therapeutic strategies on clinical outcomes in patients with pancreas adenocarcinoma (PAC) has been limited to date.
Gemcitabine was established as a standard of care for treatment of advanced PAC in 1997 based on an observed improvement in clinical benefit as adjudicated principally by pain scores and analgesic consumption, and demonstration of an overall survival (OS) benefit in a randomized comparison with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU).
Since then, multiple agents targeting oncogenic signaling pathways and mediators of angiogenesis have failed to improve outcomes in phase III clinical trials when compared with gemcitabine monotherapy.
An exception to this is the anti-epidermal growth factor receptor therapy erlotinib, which yielded a survival benefit in patients with advanced disease in combination with gemcitabine compared with gemcitabine alone, although this was a marginal incremental improvement for which the clinical significant has been heavily debated.
More recently, the most significant therapeutic advance in PAC has come from the combination of several cytotoxic agents; infusional 5-FU, irinotecan and oxaliplatin.
This combination chemotherapy regimen, known as FOLFIRINOX, improved survival in patients with an excellent functional status and stage IV disease by 4.3 months compared with gemcitabine alone.
This improvement in survival did come at the cost expectedly of a significant increase in toxicities, including gastrointestinal and hematologic particularly.
Other gemcitabine-based combination chemotherapy regimens including gemcitabine and platinum analogs and gemcitabine and capecitabine have consistently shown an increased response rate but no OS benefit in individual trials; albeit pooled and meta-analyses have indicated a survival benefit in good performance status patient for both these cytotoxic combinations.
Accordingly, the 5-year survival for patients with PAC remains <5%, with an annual disease-specific mortality which approaches the incidence.
The challenge remains therefore, to develop more effective systemic therapies against this challenging malignancy.
Recent progress toward understanding the genetic events in the development of PAC, in combination with advances in the field of pharmacogenomics offer hope that we may build on achievements to-date to develop more effective therapeutic strategies for PAC in years to come.
PMID: 22144254
A transcriptome analysis by lasso penalized Cox regression for pancreatic cancer survival.
Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer deaths in the United States with five-year survival rates less than 5% due to rare detection in early stages.
Identification of genes that are directly correlated to pancreatic cancer survival is crucial for pancreatic cancer diagnostics and treatment.
However, no existing GWAS or transcriptome studies are available for addressing this problem.
We apply lasso penalized Cox regression to a transcriptome study to identify genes that are directly related to pancreatic cancer survival.
This method is capable of handling the right censoring effect of survival times and the ultrahigh dimensionality of genetic data.
A cyclic coordinate descent algorithm is employed to rapidly select the most relevant genes and eliminate the irrelevant ones.
Twelve genes have been identified and verified to be directly correlated to pancreatic cancer survival time and can be used for the prediction of future patient's survival.
PMID: 22184298
Safety and effectiveness of splenic vein to inferior mesenteric vein anastomosis during pancreaticoduodenectomy: comment on "Splenic vein-inferior mesenteric vein anastomosis to lessen left-sided portal hypertension after pancreaticoduodenectomy with concomitant vascular resection".
PMID: 22184297
Splenic vein-inferior mesenteric vein anastomosis to lessen left-sided portal hypertension after pancreaticoduodenectomy with concomitant vascular resection.
A splenic vein (SV)-inferior mesenteric vein (IMV) anastomosis reduces congestion of the stomach and spleen after pancreaticoduodenectomy with resection of the SV-mesenteric vein confluence but carries a risk of left-sided venous hypertension.
Comparative retrospective study.
Department of Digestive Surgery and Transplantation, University of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.
From January 1, 2002, to February 28, 2010, 39 patients underwent pancreaticoduodenectomy with resection of the SV-mesenteric vein confluence for pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
All patients had a terminoterminal portal vein-superior mesenteric vein anastomosis.
The SV blood flow into the portal vein was preserved in 11 patients by reimplantation of the SV into the portal vein.
Sixteen patients underwent surgical reconstruction of the SV-IMV confluence by anastomosis (group 1), and in 12 patients the natural SV-IMV confluence was preserved (group 2).
Preoperative and postoperative spleen volume and platelet count.
Demographic characteristics, preoperative tumor staging, pathological outcome, and postoperative complications were comparable in both groups.
There was no difference in platelet count between groups 1 and 2 preoperatively (mean [SD], 293.13 [125.37] vs 241.09 [49.12] × 10(3)/μL [to convert to × 10(9)/L, multiply by 1.0], respectively; P = .21) or postoperatively (mean [SD], 231.75 [156.39] vs 164.31 [76.46] × 10(3)/μL, respectively; P = .32).
Likewise, no difference was found in the spleen volume preoperatively (mean [SD], 258.96 [179.23] vs 237.31 [122.46] mL, respectively; P = .76) and on postoperative day 15 (mean [SD], 279.08 [158.10] vs 299.12 [153.11] mL, respectively; P = .78).
Early assessment shows that SV-IMV anastomosis is as feasible and as safe as the preservation of a natural SV-IMV confluence in patients undergoing pancreaticoduodenectomy with vascular resection for pancreatic head adenocarcinoma.
PMID: 22184070
Pancreatic cancer risk and levels of trace elements.
Background and AimsKnowledge on the aetiology of exocrine pancreatic cancer (EPC) is scant.
The best established risk factor for EPC is tobacco smoking.
Among other carcinogens, tobacco contains cadmium, a metal previously associated with an increased risk of EPC.
This study evaluated the association between concentrations of trace elements in toenails and EPC risk.MethodsThe study included 118 EPC cases and 399 hospital controls from eastern Spain.
Levels of 12 trace elements were determined in toenail samples by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry.
OR and 95% CI, adjusted for potential confounders, were calculated using logistic regression.ResultsSignificantly increased risks of EPC were observed among subjects whose concentrations of cadmium (OR 3.58, 95% CI 1.86 to 6.88; p(trend)=5×10(-6)), arsenic (OR 2.02, 95% CI 1.08 to 3.78; p(trend)=0.009) and lead (OR 6.26, 95% CI 2.71 to 14.47; p(trend)=3×10(-5)) were in the highest quartile.
High concentrations of selenium (OR 0.05, 95% CI 0.02 to 0.15; p(trend)=8×10(-11)) and nickel (OR 0.27, 95% CI 0.12 to 0.59; p(trend)=2×10(-4)) were inversely associated with the risk of EPC.ConclusionNovel associations are reported of lead, nickel and selenium toenail concentrations with pancreas cancer risk.
Furthermore, the results confirm previous associations with cadmium and arsenic.
These novel findings, if replicated in independent studies, would point to an important role of trace elements in pancreatic carcinogenesis.
PMID: 22183861
Potential contribution of preoperative neoadjuvant concurrent chemoradiation therapy on margin-negative resection in borderline resectable pancreatic cancer.
Margin-negative pancreatectomy provides only chance to cure pancreatic cancer.
However, borderline resectable pancreatic cancer (BRPCa) has the risk of incomplete palliative resection.
We retrospectively reviewed 32 patients with BRPCa who underwent a pancreatectomy following preoperative chemoradiation therapy (CCRT (+)/Px group) and compared these patients with those with resectable pancreatic cancer (RPCa) who underwent pancreatectomy without preoperative CCRT (CCRT (-)/Px group, n = 104).
Eighteen patients (56.2%) showed more than 50% significant pathological response to CCRT.
The degree of pathological responses showed a positive relationship between final pT stage (p = 0.075).
More frequent vascular resection (p < 0.001), transfusion (p = 0.076), and longer operation time were observed in the CCRT(+)/Px group.
However, similar R0 resection rates (p = 0.272), lower pT stage (p < 0.001), smaller number of metastastic lymph nodes (p = 0.002), and lower incidence of lymph node metastasis (p = 0.032) were noted in the CCRT(+)/Px group.
The overall disease-specific survival were similar (median survival, 30.5 months (95% CI; 23.6-37.4) vs.
26.3 months (95% CI; 15.9-36.7), p = 0.709), and no statistical differences in cancer recurrence risks were noted between the two groups (p = 0.505).
Pancreatectomy following preoperative neoadjuvant CCRT can be a potential strategy for margin-negative resection in BRPCa patients.
PMID: 22183301
Gliclazide may have an antiapoptotic effect related to its antioxidant properties in human normal and cancer cells.
Experimental and clinical studies suggest that gliclazide may protect pancreatic β-cells from apoptosis induced by an oxidative stress.
However, the precise mechanism(s) of this action are not fully understood and requires further clarification.
Therefore, using human normal and cancer cells we examined whether the anti-apoptotic effects of this sulfonylurea is due to its free radical scavenger properties.
Hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) as a model trigger of oxidative stress was used to induce cell death.
Our experiments were performed on human normal cell line (human umbilical vein endothelial cell line, HUVEC-c) and human cancer cell lines (human mammary gland cell line, Hs578T; human pancreatic duct epithelioid carcinoma cell line, PANC-1).
To assess the effect of gliclazide the cells were pre-treated with the drug.
The 3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay was employed to measure the impact of gliclazide on cell viability.
Generation of reactive oxygen species, mitochondrial membrane potential (∆Ψ(m)), and intracellular Ca(2+) concentration [Ca(2+)] were monitored.
Furthermore, the morphological changes associated with apoptosis were determined using double staining with Hoechst 33258-propidium iodide (PI).
Gliclazide protects the tested cells from H(2)O(2)-induced cell death most likely throughout the inhibition of ROS production.
Moreover, the drug restored loss of ΔΨ(m) and diminished intracellular [Ca(2+)] evoked by H(2)O(2).
Double staining with Hoechst 33258-PI revealed that pre-treatment with gliclazide diminished the number of apoptotic cells.
Our findings indicate that gliclazide may protect both normal and cancer human cells against apoptosis induced by H(2)O(2).
It appears that the anti-apoptotic effect of the drug is most likely associated with reduction of oxidative stress.
PMID: 22183185
The molecular and cellular heterogeneity of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
Current standard therapies for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma have failed to attenuate the aggressiveness of this disease or confer notable improvements in survival.
Previous molecular research into pancreatic cancers, along with advances in sequencing technologies, have identified many altered genes in patients with pancreatic cancer and revealed the marked genetic heterogeneity of individual tumors.
Thus, the lack of success of conventional empiric therapy can be partly attributed to the underlying heterogeneity of pancreatic tumors.
The genetic alterations that have been detected in pancreatic cancer range from simple mutations at the level of base pairs to complex chromosomal structural changes and rearrangements.
The identification of molecular changes that are unique to an individual patient's tumors, and the subsequent development of strategies to target the tumors in a personalized approach to therapeutics, is a necessary advance to improve therapy for patients with this disease.
PMID: 22183126
Epidemiology: allergy history, IgE, and cancer.
Numerous epidemiological studies have investigated potential associations between allergy history and cancer risk with strong inverse associations reported in studies of pancreatic cancer, glioma, and childhood leukemia.
Recently, there has been a rapid expansion of the epidemiological literature both of studies evaluating self-reported allergy history in relation to cancer risk and of studies evaluating biological indicators of allergy history and immune function including levels of immunoglobulin (Ig) E.
However, there are several potential methodological limitations associated with prior studies, and further research is required to clarify associations observed.
This paper summarizes the recent epidemiological literature examining associations between allergy history and cancer risk.
From 2008, a total of 55 epidemiological studies were identified that examined some aspect of the association between allergy and cancer.
Although the majority of studies examined self-reported allergy history in relation to cancer risk, there were also studies examining allergy diagnoses or discharges as captured in existing administrative databases, levels of IgE, polymorphisms of allergy, inflammatory- or allergy-related cytokine genes, and concentrations of immune regulatory proteins.
The most frequently studied cancer sites included brain and lymphatic and hematopoietic cancers.
Potential methodological sources of bias are discussed as well as recommendations for future work.
PMID: 22182835
The Scandinavian multicenter hemodynamic evaluation of the SJM Regent aortic valve.
112 patients who received small and medium sized St.
Jude Regent heart valves (19-25 mm) at 7 Scandinavian centers were studied between January 2003 and February 2005 to obtain non-invasive data regarding the hemodynamic performance at rest and during Dobutamine stress echocardiography (DSE) testing one year after surgery.
46 woman and 66 men, aged 61.8 ± 9.7 (18-75) years, were operated on for aortic regurgitation (17), stenosis (65), or mixed dysfunction (30).
Valve sizes were 19 mm (6), 21 mm (33), 23 mm (41), 25 mm (30).
Two patients receiving size 27 valves were excluded from the hemodynamic evaluation.
Pledgets were used in 100 patients, everted mattress in 66 and simple interrupted sutures in 21.
Valve orientation varied and was dependent on the surgeons' choice.
34 patients (30.4%) underwent concomitant coronary artery surgery.
There were two early deaths (1.8%) and three late deaths, one because of pancreatic cancer.
Late events during follow-up were: non structural dysfunction (1), bleeding (2), thromboembolism (2).
At one year follow up 93% of the patients were in NYHA classes 1-2 versus 47.8% preoperatively.
Dobutamine stress echocardiography (DSE) was performed in a total of 66 and maximal peak stress was reached in 61 patients.
During DSE testing, the following statistically significant changes took place: Heart rate increased by 73.0%, cardiac output by 85.5%, left ventriclular ejection fraction by 19.6%, and maximal mean prosthetic transvalvular gradient by 133.8%, whereas the effective orifice area index did not change.
Left ventricular mass fell during one year from 215 ± 63 to 197 ± 62 g (p < 0.05).
The Dobutamine test induces a substantial stress, well suitable for echocardiographic assessment of prosthesis valve function and can be performed in the majority of the patients.
The changes in pressure gradients add to the hemodynamic characteristics of the various valve sizes.
In our patients the St.
Jude Regent valve performed satisfactory at rest and under pharmacological stress situation.
PMID: 22180716
Comparison of laparoscopic vs open liver lobectomy (segmentectomy) for hepatocellular carcinoma.
To investigate the effects of laparoscopic hepatectomy for the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
From 2006 to January 2011, laparoscopic hepatectomies were performed on 30 cases of HCC at Northern Jiangsu People's Hospital.
During this same time period, 30 patients elected to undergo conventional open hepatectomy over laparoscopic hepatectomy at the time of informed consent.
The degree of invasiveness and outcomes of laparoscopic hepatectomy compared to open hepatectomy for HCC were evaluated.
Both groups presented with similar blood loss amounts, operating times and complications.
Patients in the laparoscopic hepatectomy group started walking and eating significantly earlier than those in the open hepatectomy group, and these more rapid recoveries allowed for shorter hospitalizations.
There were no significant differences between procedures in survival rate.
Laparoscopic hepatectomy is beneficial for patient quality of life if the indications are appropriately based on preoperative liver function and the location and size of the HCC.
PMID: 22180307
Learning, techniques, and complications of endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)-guided sampling in gastroenterology: European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) Technical Guideline.
This article is the second of a two-part publication that expresses the current view of the European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) about endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)-guided sampling, including EUS-guided fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) and EUS-guided Trucut biopsy.
The first part (the Clinical Guideline) focused on the results obtained with EUS-guided sampling, and the role of this technique in patient management, and made recommendations on circumstances that warrant its use.
The current Technical Guideline discusses issues related to learning, techniques, and complications of EUS-guided sampling, and to processing of specimens.
Technical issues related to maximizing the diagnostic yield (e.g., rapid on-site cytopathological evaluation, needle diameter, microcore isolation for histopathological examination, and adequate number of needle passes) are discussed and recommendations are made for various settings, including solid and cystic pancreatic lesions, submucosal tumors, and lymph nodes.
The target readership for the Clinical Guideline mostly includes gastroenterologists, oncologists, internists, and surgeons while the Technical Guideline should be most useful to endoscopists who perform EUS-guided sampling.
A two-page executive summary of evidence statements and recommendations is provided.
PMID: 22180306
Frequent Mutation of Isocitrate Dehydrogenase (IDH)1 and IDH2 in Cholangiocarcinoma Identified Through Broad-Based Tumor Genotyping.
Cancers of origin in the gallbladder and bile ducts are rarely curable with current modalities of cancer treatment.
Our clinical application of broad-based mutational profiling for patients diagnosed with a gastrointestinal malignancy has led to the novel discovery of mutations in the gene encoding isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) in tumors from a subset of patients with cholangiocarcinoma.
A total of 287 tumors from gastrointestinal cancer patients (biliary tract, colorectal, gastroesophageal, liver, pancreatic, and small intestine carcinoma) were tested during routine clinical evaluation for 130 site-specific mutations within 15 cancer genes.
Mutations were identified within a number of genes, including KRAS (35%), TP53 (22%), PIK3CA (10%), BRAF (7%), APC (6%), NRAS (3%), AKT1 (1%), CTNNB1 (1%), and PTEN (1%).
Although mutations in the metabolic enzyme IDH1 were rare in the other common gastrointestinal malignancies in this series (2%), they were found in three tumors (25%) of an initial series of 12 biliary tract carcinomas.
To better define IDH1 and IDH2 mutational status, an additional 75 gallbladder and bile duct cancers were examined.
Combining these cohorts of biliary cancers, mutations in IDH1 and IDH2 were found only in cholangiocarcinomas of intrahepatic origin (nine of 40, 23%) and in none of the 22 extrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas and none of the 25 gallbladder carcinomas.
In an analysis of frozen tissue specimens, IDH1 mutation was associated with highly elevated tissue levels of the enzymatic product 2-hydroxyglutarate.
Thus, IDH1 mutation is a molecular feature of cholangiocarcinomas of intrahepatic origin.
These findings define a specific metabolic abnormality in this largely incurable type of gastrointestinal cancer and present a potentially new target for therapy.
PMID: 22180261
Switching the Targeting Pathways of a Therapeutic Antibody by Nanodesign.
Gold nanoparticles can be used as a scaffold to elucidate the mechanism of endocytosis of cetuximab and its nanoconjugates, as well as the switching of endocytic pathways (caveolar versus pinocytotic) in pancreatic cancer cells, as demonstrated by P.
Mukherjee and co-workers in their Communication (DOI: 10.1002/anie.201105432).
Tailoring the mechanism of endocytosis may be useful for targeting specific intracellular pathways to minimize the side effects of pharmaceutical compounds.
PMID: 22180096
Histologic tumor involvement of superior mesenteric vein/portal vein predicts poor prognosis in patients with stage II pancreatic adenocarcinoma treated with neoadjuvant chemoradiation.
BACKGROUND: Studies have shown that superior mesenteric vein (SMV)/portal vein (PV) resection with pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) is safe and feasible for patient with pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAC).
However, the prognostic significance of tumor involvement of the resected vein in patients who received neoadjuvant therapy is unclear.
METHODS: The authors evaluated 225 consecutive patients with stage II PAC who received neoadjuvant therapy and PD with or without SMV/PV resection.
The resected SMV/PV was entirely submitted for histologic assessment and reviewed in all cases.
Tumor involvement of the SMV/PV was correlated with clinicopathologic features and survival.
RESULTS: Among the 225 patients, SMV/PV resection was performed in 85 patients.
Histologic tumor involvement of the resected SMV/PV was identified in 57 patients.
Histologic tumor involvement of the SMV/PV was associated with larger tumor size, higher rates of positive margin, and local/distant recurrence.
By multivariate analysis, tumor involvement of the SMV/PV was an independent predictor of both disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS).
However, addition of venous resection to PD itself had no impact on either DFS or OS compared with those with PD alone.
CONCLUSIONS: Histologic tumor involvement of the SMV/PV is an independent predictor of both DFS and OS in patients with stage II PAC treated with neoadjuvant therapy and PD.
Complete histologic evaluation of the resected SMV/PV is important for the prognosis in patients with PAC who received neoadjuvant therapy and PD.
Cancer 2012;.
© 2011 American Cancer Society.
PMID: 22179508
Overview of the investigation and management of cystic neoplasms of the pancreas.
Background: Cystic neoplasms of the pancreas contribute to 10-20% of pancreatic tumours.
Malignant cystic tumours of the pancreas behave similar to adenocarcinomas and thus warrant aggressive management.
However, certain benign cystic neoplasms do not require operative intervention.
It is, therefore, important to differentiate benign lesions from malignant lesions and from those with malignant potential.
Aims: To provide an overview of the role of radiological investigations in the management of cystic neoplasms of the pancreas, with emphasis on the characteristic features of aggressive tumours.
The role of different imaging modalities is discussed, and an investigative algorithm suggested.
Methods: A literature review was carried out on Medline, Cochrane library, and PubMed using the MeSH terms 'pancreas' and 'cysts' to source relevant papers.
Search criteria were limited to English literature, meta-analyses, systematic reviews, prospective and retrospective case series, published during or after 1998.
Discussion: Each pancreatic cystic lesion has characteristic radiological findings.
However, the diagnostic accuracy of individual imaging techniques is still limited.
A combination of imaging modalities is essential for preoperative diagnosis.
CT complemented by endoscopic ultrasound and cyst fluid analysis appears to be the most promising investigation in diagnosing cystic neoplasms.
Follow-up with serial imaging is useful for lesions of uncertain aetiology.
PMID: 22179506
Efficacy and Safety of Standardized Allergen-Removed Rhus verniciflua Stokes Extract in Patients with Advanced or Metastatic Pancreatic Cancer: A Korean Single-Center Experience.
Background: Pancreatic cancer has the worst prognosis because of poor response to conventional therapy.
We investigated the clinical feasibility of the standardized allergen-removed Rhus verniciflua Stokes (aRVS) extract as a potential therapeutic agent for advanced or metastatic pancreatic cancer.
Patients and Methods: From July 2006 to June 2010, patients with advanced or metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma were checked in our institution.
After applying inclusion/exclusion criteria, 42 patients were eligible for the final analysis.
Overall survival, clinical benefit and adverse events of these patients treated with aRVS in the aftercare period were determined.
Results: In May 2011, 39 patients had died and the remaining 3 patients were alive with evidence of disease.
The mean RVS administration period was 3.86 months (95% confidence interval 2.52-5.20).
The median overall survival for the entire population was 7.87 months (95% confidence interval 5.14-10.59), and the 1-year survival rate was 26.2%, which is compatible with external controls.
Using univariate and multivariate analyses, aRVS treatment including performance status and prognostic index significantly affected overall survival.
A clinical benefit response was also shown by aRVS treatment which was not dependent on concurrent chemotherapy.
Adverse reactions to aRVS treatment were mostly mild and self-limiting.
Conclusions: The standardized aRVS extract might be beneficial for patients with advanced or metastatic pancreatic cancer since it positively affected overall survival and clinical symptoms without significant adverse effects.
PMID: 22178657
Pancreatic cancer: Promise for personalised medicine?
Pancreatic cancer has an infaust prognosis and is the fourth commonest cause of cancer related death in men.
Design of rational treatment has been hampered by lack of insight into the pathogenesis of the disease.
Recently more insight has been gained into a number of crucial aspects of pancreatic carcinogenesis, in particular the cell types that can give rise to oncological transformation in the pancreas, different modes of interaction between transformed pancreatic cells and the stroma that fosters further disease progression, the need of the pancreatic tumour cells to overcome the pressure of immune surveillance and the various changes in intercellular biochemistry that tumour cells employ to both sustain chemoresistance and metastasis.
Although still largely incomplete, this new knowledge opens novel avenues on more successful treatment of the disease through personalised medicine.
PMID: 22178561
Glycans as cancer biomarkers.
BACKGROUND: Non-invasive biomarkers, such as those from serum, are ideal for disease prognosis, staging and monitoring.
In the past decade, our understanding of the importance of glycosylation changes with disease has evolved.
SCOPE OF REVIEW: We describe potential biomarkers derived from serum glycoproteins for liver, pancreatic, prostate, ovarian, breast, lung and stomach cancers.
Methods for glycan analysis have progressed and newly developed high-throughput platform technologies have enabled the analysis of large cohorts of samples in an efficient manner.
We also describe this evolution and trends to follow in the future.
MAJOR CONCLUSIONS: Many convincing examples of aberrant glycans associated with cancer have come about from glycosylation analyses.
Most studies have been carried out to identify changes in serum glycan profiles or through the isolation and identification of glycoproteins that contain these irregular glycan structures.
In a majority of cancers the fucosylation and sialylation expression are found to be significantly modified.
Therefore, these aberrations in glycan structures can be utilized as targets to improve existing cancer biomarkers.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: The ability to distinguish differences in the glycosylation of proteins between cancer and control patients emphasizes glycobiology as a promising field for potential biomarker identification.
Furthermore, the high-throughput and reproducible nature of the chromatography platform have highlighted extensive applications in biomarker discovery and allowed integration of glycomics with other -omics fields, such as proteomics and genomics, making systems glycobiology a reality.
This article is part of a Special Issue entitled Glycoproteomics.
PMID: 22175891
Tumour growth is more dispersed in pancreatic head cancers than in rectal cancer: implications for resection margin assessment.
The UK definition of microscopic resection margin involvement (R1) in pancreatic head cancer, based on tumour lying <1 mm from the margin, has been adopted from rectal cancer, but has never been validated.
The aim of this study was to assess the adequacy of the R1 definition for pancreatic head cancers by comparing the growth patterns of rectal (RC), pancreatic (PC), ampullary (AC) and distal bile duct (DBC) adenocarcinomas.
Distances between tumour cells and tumour cell density in the tumour centre and periphery were quantified by Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) analysis in 10 cases of the four cancer groups.
In RC, the MST distance was similar throughout the entire width of the tumour, whereas in PC, DBC and AC it was significantly larger at the periphery than at the tumour centre (P ≤ 0.003).
While results were similar for PC and DBC, however, distances at the centre and periphery of both cancers were larger compared to AC (P ≤ 0.046).
Tumour cell density dropped at the periphery of PC to 31% of that at the centre, compared to 83% in RC (P < 0.0002).
Tumour growth in pancreatic head cancers is more dispersed than in RC, particularly in the tumour periphery.
Revision of the R1 definition for pancreatic head cancer may therefore need to be considered.
PMID: 22174607
Distribution and clinical significance of th17 cells in the tumor microenvironment and peripheral blood of pancreatic cancer patients.
This study was designed to investigate the distribution of Th17 cells in the tumor microenvironment and peripheral blood of pancreatic cancer patients, its clinical significance, and the expression profile of Th17 cell-associated cytokines.
The percentage of Th17 cells detected by flow cytometry analysis (FACS) was significantly higher in 46 pancreatic tumor tissues (5.28 ± 1.65%) compared with corresponding adjacent normal tissues (2.57 ± 0.83%) (P = 0.031).
In addition, the percentage of Th17 cells was significantly higher in stage III-IV tumors than stage I-II tumors (P = 0.039).
The percentage of Th17 cells in peripheral blood of 20 pancreatic cancer patients (3.99 ± 1.15%) was significantly higher than 15 healthy volunteers (1.98 ± 0.57%) (P = 0.027).
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed to detect IL-17(+) cells in 46 pancreatic tumor tissues, as well as expression of CD34 in 24 tumor tissues.
IL-17 was shown to mainly locate in cytoplasm, and the frequency of IL-17(+) cells in tumor tissues (39/46) was higher than control (29/46).
The presence of IL-17(+) cells in tumor tissues was associated with tumor, node, and metastasis (TNM) stage, and lymph node metastasis (P = 0.012 and P = 0.009) but not with patient sex, age, tumor size, and histological grade (P > 0.05).
Interestingly, distribution of Th17 cells in tumor tissues was positively correlated with microvessel density (MVD) (r = 0.86, P = 0.018).
Furthermore, the median survival time of patients with high and low level of IL-17(+) cells frequency was 14.5 and 18.5 months respectively (P = 0.023).
The serum levels of Th17 cell-associated cytokines, IL-17 and IL-23 in 20 pancreatic patients detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) were 69.2 ± 28.5 pg/mL and 266.5 ± 98.1 pg/mL, respectively, which were significantly higher than 15 healthy volunteers (P = 0.015 and P = 0.02).
Moreover, levels of IL-17 and IL-23 were significantly higher in stage III-IV tumors than stage I-II tumors (P = 0.04 and P = 0.036).
This study suggests that increase in Th17 cells frequency and its related cytokines levels in pancreatic tumor tissues may indicate involvement in the invasion and metastasis of pancreatic cancer, which may thereby affect patient prognosis.
Therefore, Th17 cells and related cytokines may be served as important immune indicators for predicting the prognosis of pancreatic cancer patients.
PMID: 22174369
Mitochondrial DNA sequence variation and risk of pancreatic cancer.
Although the mitochondrial genome exhibits high mutation rates, common mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) variation has not been consistently associated with pancreatic cancer.
Here, we comprehensively examined mitochondrial genomic variation by sequencing the mtDNA of participants (cases = 286, controls = 283) in a San Francisco Bay Area pancreatic cancer case-control study.
Five common variants were associated with pancreatic cancer at nominal statistical significance (P < 0.05) with the strongest finding for mt5460g in the ND2 gene [OR = 3.9; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.5-10; P = 0.004] which encodes an A331T substitution.
Haplogroup K was nominally associated with reduced pancreatic cancer risk (OR = 0.32; 95% CI, 0.13-0.76; P = 0.01) when compared with the most common haplogroup, H.
A total of 19 haplogroup-specific rare variants yielded nominal statistically significant associations (P < 0.05) with pancreatic cancer risk, with the majority observed in genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation.
Weighted-sum statistics were used to identify an aggregate effect of variants in the 22 mitochondrial tRNAs on pancreatic cancer risk (P = 0.02).
While the burden of singleton variants in the HV2 and 12S RNA regions was three times higher among European haplogroup N cases than controls, the prevalence of singleton variants in ND4 and ND5 was two to three times higher among African haplogroup L cases than in controls.
Together, the results of this study provide evidence that aggregated common and rare variants and the accumulation of singleton variants are important contributors to pancreatic cancer risk.
Cancer Res; 72(3); 686-95.
©2011 AACR.
PMID: 22173551
Pharmacokinetically Stabilized Cystine Knot Peptides That Bind Alpha-v-Beta-6 Integrin with Single-Digit Nanomolar Affinities for Detection of Pancreatic Cancer.
Detection of pancreatic cancer remains a high priority and effective diagnostic tools are needed for clinical applications.
Many cancer cells overexpress integrin α(v)β(6), a cell surface receptor being evaluated as a novel clinical biomarker.
To validate this molecular target, several highly stable cystine knot peptides were engineered by directed evolution to bind specifically and with high affinity (3-6 nmol/L) to integrin α(v)β(6).
The binders do not cross-react with related integrin α(v)β(5), integrin α(5)β(1), or tumor-angiogenesis-associated integrin, α(v)β(3).
Positron emission tomography showed that these disulfide-stabilized peptides rapidly accumulate at tumors expressing integrin α(v)β(6).
Clinically relevant tumor-to-muscle ratios of 7.7 ± 2.4 to 11.3 ± 3.0 were achieved within 1 hour after radiotracer injection.
Minimization of off-target dosing was achieved by reformatting α(v)β(6)-binding activities across various natural and pharmacokinetically stabilized cystine knot scaffolds with different amino acid content.
We show that the primary sequence of a peptide scaffold directs its pharmacokinetics.
Scaffolds with high arginine or glutamic acid content suffered high renal retention of more than 75% injected dose per gram (%ID/g).
Substitution of these amino acids with renally cleared amino acids, notably serine, led to significant decreases in renal accumulation of less than 20%ID/g 1 hour postinjection (P < 0.05, n = 3).
We have engineered highly stable cystine knot peptides with potent and specific integrin α(v)β(6)-binding activities for cancer detection.
Pharmacokinetic engineering of scaffold primary sequence led to significant decreases in off-target radiotracer accumulation.
Optimization of binding affinity, specificity, stability, and pharmacokinetics will facilitate translation of cystine knots for cancer molecular imaging.
Clin Cancer Res; 18(3); 839-49.
©2011 AACR.
PMID: 22173550
Genome-wide CpG island profiling of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas.
Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN) are precursors to infiltrating pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas.
Widespread epigenetic alterations are characteristic of many cancers, yet few studies have systematically analyzed epigenetic alterations of neoplastic precursors.
Our goal was to conduct genome-wide CpG island methylation profiling to identify aberrantly methylated loci in IPMNs.
We compared the CpG island methylation profiles of six IPMNs to normal primary pancreatic duct samples using methylation CpG island amplification (MCA) and Agilent CpG island microarray (MCAM) analysis.
When selected 13 genes identified as differentially methylated by MCAM for methylation-specific PCR (MSP) analysis in an independent set of IPMNs and normal pancreas samples and conducted expression analysis of selected genes.
We identified 2,259 loci as differentially methylated in at least one of six IPMNs including 245 genes hypermethylated in IPMNs with high-grade dysplasia compared with normal pancreatic duct samples.
Eleven of 13 genes evaluated by MSP were more commonly methylated in 61 IPMNs than in 43 normal pancreas samples.
Several genes (BNIP3, PTCHD2, SOX17, NXPH1, EBF3) were significantly more likely to be methylated in IPMNs with high-grade than with low-grade dysplasia.
One gene, SOX17, showed loss of protein expression by immunohistochemistry in 22% (19 of 88) of IPMNs.
The most specific marker, BNIP3, was not methylated in any IPMNs with low-grade dysplasia or in normal pancreas samples.
IPMNs undergo extensive aberrant CpG island hypermethylation.
The detection of genes selectively methylated in high-grade IPMNs such as BNIP3 may have use in the clinical evaluation of IPMNs.
Clin Cancer Res; 18(3); 700-12.
©2011 AACR.
PMID: 22173495
Re-expression of cell adhesion molecule inhibits growth and induces apoptosis of human pancreatic cancer cell line PANC-1.
This study examined the expression of cell adhesion molecule 1 (CADM1) in pancreatic cancer and the possible mechanism.
The expression of CADM1 was detected by immunohistochemistry in tissues of pancreatic cancer, pancreatitis, and normal pancreas.
The plasmid pcDNA3.1-Hygro(+)/CADM1 was transfected into PANC-1 cells (a pancreatic cancer cell line).
The expression of CADM1 in the transfected cells was determined by RT-PCR and Western blotting.
Cell growth was measured by the MTT method and cell apoptosis by flow cytometry.
The results showed that CADM1 was weakly expressed in tissues of pancreatic cancer in contrast to its high expression in normal pancreatic and pancreatitis tissues.
The expression level of CADM in pancreatic caner was intensely correlated with the differentiation degree, lymph node metastasis and TNM stages.
The growth of CADM1-transfected PANC-1 cells was significantly suppressed in vitro by a G1 cell cycle arrest and apoptosis occurrence.
It was concluded that re-expression of CADM1 inhibits the growth of pancreatic cancer cells and induces their apoptosis in vitro.
As a tumor suppressor gene, CADM1 plays an important role in the occurrence, progression and metastasis of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22173493
Side population cells in human gallbladder cancer cell line GBC-SD regulated by TGF-β-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition.
Mounting evidence has shown that side population (SP) cells are enriched for cancer stem cells (CSCs) responsible for cancer malignancy.
In this study, SP technology was used to isolate a small subpopulation of SP cells in human gallbladder cancer cell line GBC-SD, and SP cells which had superior potential for proliferation in vitro and tumorigenesis in vivo were identified.
Importantly, the abundance of GBC-SD SP cells was increased by a transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β)-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and this effect was accompanied with a strong up-regulation of ABCG2 mRNA expression, and a decreased sensitivity to mitoxantrone.
SP cells were restored upon the removal of TGF-β and the reversion of the cells to an epithelial phenotype, and smad3-specific siRNA reduced SP abundance in response to TGF-β.
In conclusion, TGF-β-induced EMT by smad-dependent signaling pathway promotes cancer development and anti-cancer drug resistant phenotype by augmenting the abundance of GBC-SD SP cells, and a better understanding of mechanisms involved in TGF-β-induced EMT may provide a novel strategy for preventing cancer progression.
PMID: 22173120
Well-differentiated pancreatic neuroendocrine carcinoma in tuberous sclerosis--case report and review of the literature.
Neuroendocrine tumors of the pancreas are rare in children.
They usually occur in the setting of genetic syndromes such as multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1, von Hippel-Lindau disease, and neurofibromatosis 1.
These tumors have also been reported in the tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), but the incidence is low in comparison with other syndromes.
Only 9 cases have been described to date, and it is not yet well understood if any connection exists between TSC and pancreatic endocrine tumors.
TSC is characterized by mutations in TSC1 and TSC2 genes, which activate the AKT-mTOR oncogenic cascade.
Recent molecular studies in pancreatic endocrine tumors showed activation of the same pathway, which points toward a common molecular pathway between these two entities.
We present a case of well-differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma of the pancreas in a child with TSC and discuss the genetic aspects of this disease.
PMID: 22172900
Prognostic Factors for Survival and Resection in Patients with Initial Nonresectable Locally Advanced Pancreatic Cancer Treated with Chemoradiotherapy.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Controversies regarding the optimal therapy for patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer (LAPC) exist.
Although the prognosis as a whole remains dismal, subgroups are known to benefit from intensive therapy, including chemoradiotherapy (CRT).
We describe the results in 178 patients treated from 2001 to 2010 and have developed a prognostic model for both survival and the possibility of a subsequent resection in these patients.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: From 2001 until 2010, 178 consecutive patients with LAPC were treated and included in the present study, with CRT consisting of 50 Gy in 27 fractions combined with tegafur-uracil(UFT)/folinic acid(FA).
RESULTS: The median survival from diagnosis was 11.5 months.
Adverse events of Grade 3 or above were seen in 36% of the patients.
Ninety-three percent of the patients completed all fractions.
A Cox regression model for survival demonstrated resection (hazard ratio [HR] 0.12; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.1-0.3) and pre-CRT gemcitabine-based therapy (HR 0.57; 95% CI, 0.4-0.9) as being associated with a favorable outcome, increasing gross tumor volume (HR 1.14; 95% CI, 1.0-1.3) was associated with shorter survival.
A logistic regression model showed Stage III disease (odds ratio [OR] 0.16; 95% CI, 0.0-1.1) and abnormal hemoglobin (OR 0.26; 95% CI, 0.0-1.2) as being associated with lower odds of resection.
CONCLUSION: This study confirms the favorable prognosis for patients receiving gemcitabine therapy before CRT and the poor prognosis associated with increasing tumor volume.
In addition, CRT in patients with abnormal hemoglobin and Stage III disease rarely induced tumor shrinkage allowing subsequent resection.
PMID: 22172501
Lipophilic phosphonium-lanthanide compounds with magnetic, luminescent, and tumor targeting properties.
Multifunctional phosphonium-lanthanide compounds that simultaneously possess paramagnetism, luminescence, and tumor mitochondrial targeting properties were prepared by use of a facile method.
These compounds were fully characterized by use of (1)H, (13)C, (31)P NMR, FT-IR, and elemental analyses.
The thermal properties of these compounds including melting points and decomposition temperatures were investigated using DSC and TGA analyses.
In addition, the paramagnetism, luminescence, and tumor targeting properties of these multifunctional compounds were confirmed by respective use of SQUID, fluorescence, and cell cytotoxicity studies.
All compounds exhibited paramagnetism at room temperature, which could provide target delivery of these compounds to parts of the body containing tumor cells using a strong external magnetic field.
In addition, these compounds display two major characteristic emissions originating from Dy(3+), which can be utilized for imaging tumor cells.
The IC(50) values of these compounds measured against normal breast cell line (Hs578Bst) are significantly greater than those measured against the corresponding carcinoma breast cell line (Hs578T), clearly indicating the selective tumor targeting properties of these compounds.
Confocal fluorescence microscopy studies were used to confirm the yellowish-green fluorescence corresponding to the emission of dysprosium thiocyanate anion within cancer cells upon exposure of cancer cell lines such as human pancreatic carcinoma cell line (MIAPaCa-2) and human breast carcinoma (MDA-MB-231) to a solution of these phosphonium-dysprosium compounds.
PMID: 22171596
Carbon-ion radiation enhances migration ability and invasiveness of the pancreatic cancer cell, PANC-1, in vitro.
Pancreatic cancer is an aggressive disease that responds poorly to conventional photon radiotherapy.
Carbon-ion (C-ion) radiation has advantages compared with conventional radiotherapy, because it enables more accurate dose distribution and more efficient tumor cell killing.
To elucidate the effects of local radiotherapy on the characteristics of metastatic tumors, it is necessary to understand the nature of motility in irradiated tumor cells; this will, in turn, facilitate the development of effective strategies to counter tumor cell motility, which can be used in combination with radiotherapy.
The aim of the present study was to examine the invasiveness of pancreatic cancer cells exposed to C-ion irradiation.
We found that C-ion irradiation suppressed the migration of MIAPaCa-2, BxPC-3 and AsPC-1; diminished the invasiveness of MIAPaCa-2; and tended to reduce the invasion of BxPC-3 and AsPC-1.
However, C-ion irradiation increased the invasiveness of PANC-1 through the activation of plasmin and urokinase-type plasiminogen activator.
Administration of serine protease inhibitor (SerPI) alone failed to reduce C-ion-induced PANC-1 invasiveness, whereas the combination of SerPI and Rho-associated coiled-coil forming protein kinase (ROCK) inhibitor suppressed it.
Furthermore, PANC-1 showed mesenchymal-amoeboid transition when we treated with SerPI alone.
In conclusion, C-ion irradiation is effective in suppressing the invasive potential of several pancreatic tumor cell lines, but not PANC-1; this is the first study showing that C-ion irradiation induces the invasive potential of a tumor cell line.
Further in vivo studies are required to examine the therapeutic effectiveness of radiotherapy combined with inhibitors of both mesenchymal and amoeboid modes of tumor cell motility.
(Cancer Sci, doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2011.02190.x, 2012).
PMID: 22171148
Superiority of metastatic lymph node ratio to the 7th edition UICC N staging in gastric cancer.
To compare and evaluate the appropriate prognostic indicators of lymph node basic staging in gastric cancer patients who underwent radical resection.
A total of 1042 gastric cancer patients who underwent radical resection and D2 lymphadenectomy were staged using the 6th and 7th edition International Union Against Cancer (UICC) N staging methods and the metastatic lymph node ratio (MLNR) staging.
Homogeneity, discriminatory ability, and gradient monotonicity of the various staging methods were compared using linear trend χ(2), likelihood ratio χ(2) statistics, and Akaike information criterion (AIC) calculations.
The area under the curve (AUC) was calculated to compare the predictive ability of the aforementioned three staging methods.
Optimal cut-points of the MLNR were calculated as MLNR0 (0), MLNR1 (0.01-0.30), MLNR2 (0.31-0.50), and MLNR3 (0.51-1.00).
In univariate, multivariate, and stratified analyses, MLNR staging was superior to the 6th and 7th edition UICC N staging methods.
MLNR staging had a higher AUC, higher linear trend and likelihood ratio χ(2) scores and lower AIC values than the other two staging methods.
MLNR staging predicts survival after gastric cancer more precisely than the 6th and 7th edition UICC N classifications and should be considered as an alternative to current pathological N staging.
PMID: 22171124
Proteome-based biomarkers in pancreatic cancer.
Pancreatic cancer, as a highly malignant cancer and the fourth cause of cancer-related death in world, is characterized by dismal prognosis, due to rapid disease progression, highly invasive tumour phenotype, and resistance to chemotherapy.
Despite significant advances in treatment of the disease during the past decade, the survival rate is little improved.
A contributory factor to the poor outcome is the lack of appropriate sensitive and specific biomarkers for early diagnosis.
Furthermore, biomarkers for targeting, directing and assessing therapeutic intervention, as well as for detection of residual or recurrent cancer are also needed.
Thus, the identification of adequate biomarkers in pancreatic cancer is of extreme importance.
Recently, accompanying the development of proteomic technology and devices, more and more potential biomarkers have appeared and are being reported.
In this review, we provide an overview of the role of proteome-based biomarkers in pancreatic cancer, including tissue, serum, juice, urine and cell lines.
We also discuss the possible mechanism and prospects in the future.
That information hopefully might be helpful for further research in the field.
PMID: 22170435
Analysis of the expression of angiotensin II type 1 receptor and VEGF in endometrial adenocarcinoma with different clinicopathological characteristics.
In Poland, endometrial carcinoma takes second place after breast cancer among all cancers in women and is considered the most common genital cancer.
It has been repeatedly reported that angiotensin is involved in the development and invasion of some cancers including breast, ovarian, and pancreatic ones.
It is suggested that angiotensin two and its receptors are actively involved in tumour biology in endometrial adenocarcinoma.
In the present study, we identify a possible relationship between the expression of AT1-R, AT2-R, ERα, and VEGF and clinicopathological characteristics of primary endometrial adenocarcinoma.
We determined the above components both at the mRNA (real-time RT-PCR) and protein levels (Western Blot assay).
Our results indicate that in patients with grade G3 adenocarcinoma, the expression of AT1-R significantly decreased in comparison with G1 patients (p = 0.034), but the level of ERα was the highest in G2 and the lowest in G3.
Moreover, the level of VEGF mRNA significantly increased between G2 and G3 (p = 0.034).
We also noted a significant correlation between the expression of AT1-R and AT2-R in FIGO stage 1 (R (s) = 0.9636; p = 0.0001) and that of AT2-R and VEGF (R (s) = 0.5377; p = 0.005).
In grade G1 and G2 carcinoma, a significant correlation was also found between the expression of AT1-R and AT2-R (R (s) = 0.9924; p = 0.0001; R (s) = 0.8717, p = 0.0005, respectively), but in grade G1, a negative correlation was observed between AT1-R and VEGF (R (s) = -0.8945, p = 0.0005).
Further studies are required to clarify the biological function of the angiotensin receptor in regulating VEGF expression in endometrial carcinoma.
PMID: 22170433
The dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor NVP-BGT226 induces cell cycle arrest and regulates Survivin gene expression in human pancreatic cancer cell lines.
The phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) pathway is one of the most commonly activated signaling pathways in pancreatic cancer and is a target of interest for new therapeutic approaches.
NVP-BGT226 is a novel dual class PI3K/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor that has entered Phase I/II clinical trials.
We analyzed the effect of NVP-BGT226 (10-100 nM) on the pancreatic cell lines Panc-1, BxPc-3, AsPC-1 and MiaPaCa-2 in regard to cell viability, induction of apoptosis, cell cycle, and expression of the antiapoptotic genes Survivin, MCL-1, BCL-2 and BCL-xL.
Cell viability decreased within 24-72 h after exposure to about 50% compared to untreated control cells in a concentration- but not time-dependent manner.
Cell cycle analysis revealed that NVP-BGT226 induced predominantly G0/G1 cell cycle arrest.
Additionally, real-time RT-PCR and Western blot analysis showed a remarkable decrease of Survivin expression.
Originally designed as a dual inhibitor, there was only a significant inhibition of p-mTOR.
In summary, the dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor NVP-BGT226 induces G0/G1 arrest and acts, at least, partially via downregulation of Survivin.
PMID: 22170414
Targeting the hedgehog signaling pathway with interacting peptides to Patched-1.
BACKGROUND: The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is aberrantly activated in many cancers.
Overproduction of sonic hedgehog (Shh), a ligand in the Hh pathway, increases Hh signaling activity by inhibiting Patched-1 (Ptch1), a suppressive receptor in the Hh pathway.
The purpose of this study was to establish a novel strategy for treating pancreatic cancer and other Hh-dependent cancers through control of the tumor-suppressive function of Ptch1.
METHODS: We synthesized seven interacting peptides to the amino-acid sequence of the Ptch1 docking site for Shh.
Human pancreatic cancer cell lines (AsPC-1, SUIT2) were cultured in the presence or absence of the peptides.
Cell proliferation was assessed by cell counting and by the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay.
The activity of the Hh pathway was estimated by real-time polymerase chain reaction of the target gene product Gli1.
To confirm their anti-tumor activity in vivo, the effect of the peptides in a mouse model of pancreatic cancer was determined.
Finally, the Hh signaling activity of the xenograft was examined.
RESULTS: Three of the interacting peptides to Ptch1 suppressed the proliferation of the two pancreatic cancer cell lines and decreased the expression of Gli1, both in vitro and in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that interacting peptides to Ptch1 may be a new tool for controlling the Hh-dependent growth of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22170348
Invited commentary: the incidentally discovered solid pancreatic mass: imaging and clinical observations.
PMID: 22170321
(18)F-radiolabeled analogs of exendin-4 for PET imaging of GLP-1 in insulinoma.
Glucagon-like peptide type 1 (GLP-1) is an incretin peptide that augments glucose-stimulated insulin release following oral consumption of nutrients.
Its message is transmitted via a G protein-coupled receptor called GLP-1R, which is colocalized with pancreatic β-cells.
The GLP-1 system is responsible for enhancing insulin release, inhibiting glucagon production, inhibiting hepatic gluconeogenesis, inhibiting gastric mobility, and suppression of appetite.
The abundance of GLP-1R in pancreatic β-cells in insulinoma, a cancer of the pancreas, and the activity of GLP-1 in the cardiovascular system have made GLP-1R a target for molecular imaging.
We prepared (18)F radioligands for GLP-1R by the reaction of [(18)F]FBEM, a maleimide prosthetic group, with [Cys(0)] and [Cys(40)] analogs of exendin-4.
The binding affinity, cellular uptake and internalization, in vitro stability, and uptake and specificity of uptake of the resulting compounds were determined in an INS-1 xenograft model in nude mice.
The [(18)F]FBEM-[Cys(x)]-exendin-4 analogs were obtained in good yield (34.3 ± 3.4%, n = 11), based on the starting compound [(18)F]FBEM), and had a specific activity of 45.51 ± 16.28 GBq/μmol (1.23 ± 0.44 Ci/μmol, n = 7) at the end of synthesis.
The C-terminal isomer, [(18)F]FBEM-[Cys(40)]-exendin-4, had higher affinity for INS-1 tumor cells (IC(50) 1.11 ± 0.057 nM) and higher tumor uptake (25.25 ± 3.39 %ID/g at 1 h) than the N-terminal isomer, [(18)F]FBEM-[Cys(0)]-exendin-4 (IC(50) 2.99 ± 0.06 nM, uptake 7.20 ± 1.26 %ID/g at 1 h).
Uptake of both isomers into INS-1 tumor, pancreas, stomach, and lung could be blocked by preinjection of nonradiolabeled [Cys(x)]-exendin-4 (p < 0.05).
[(18)F]FBEM-[Cys(40)]-exendin-4 and [(18)F]FBEM-[Cys(0)]-exendin-4 have high affinity for GLP-1R and display similar in vitro cell internalization.
The higher uptake into INS-1 xenograft tumors exhibited by [(18)F]FBEM-[Cys(40)]-exendin-4 suggests that this compound would be the better tracer for imaging GLP-1R.
PMID: 22168771
Multicellular tumor spheroid formation in duplex microcapsules for analysis of chemosensitivity.
Multicellular tumor spheroids (MTS) are gaining increased recognition as valuable tools and key elements in anticancer drug discovery and tumor therapy test programs.
However, the lack of reproducible and uniform MTS sizes is a major problem for pharmaceutical assays.
Here, we show the usefulness of duplex microcapsules with a Ca-alginate gel membrane as a platform for producing MTS with a highly homogeneous size distribution.
HeLa cells were enclosed with 86.9% viability within the microcapsules.
The enclosed cells grew and formed MTS with the same size as the cavity of the microcapsules by arresting their growth with the microcapsule membrane.
The cells in the resultant MTS had a higher proportion in G(0) /G(1) phase (71.2%) than 2-D cultured cells in the stationary phase (64.3%) or those in MTS formed on a non-adherent surface (65.3%) (P < 0.01).
Furthermore, the cells in MTS formed within microcapsules showed higher tolerance to mitomycin C (1-1000 nM) and gemcitabine (4.5-4500 nM) than 2-D cultured cells (P < 0.01).
In addition, the expression of MDR1, MCT1, HIF-1α, and GRP78 mRNA was 2.9-, 3.2-, 3.8-, and 5.5-fold higher, respectively, than those in 2-D cultured cells (P < 0.04).
Cryopreserved encapsulated cells in the microcapsules showed 80.5% viability and formed MTS with a comparable tolerance of 100 and 1000 nM mitomycin C to those that were not cryopreserved (P > 0.09).
These findings suggest the duplex microcapsule may be a promising tool for producing MTS for pharmaceutical applications.
(Cancer Sci, doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2011.02187.x, 2012).
PMID: 22168338
Antibody targeting of Cathepsin S induces antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity.
ABSTRACT:.
Proteolytic enzymes have been implicated in driving tumor progression by means of their cancer cell microenvironment activity where they promote proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, migration, and invasion.
Therapeutic strategies have focused on attenuating their activity using small molecule inhibitors, but the association of proteases with the cell surface during cancer progression opens up the possibility of targeting these using antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC).
Cathepsin S is a lysosomal cysteine protease that promotes the growth and invasion of tumour and endothelial cells during cancer progression.
Our analysis of colorectal cancer patient biopsies shows that cathepsin S associates with the cell membrane indicating a potential for ADCC targeting.
Here we report the cell surface characterization of cathepsin S and the development of a humanized antibody (Fsn0503h) with immune effector function and a stable in vivo half-life of 274 hours.
Cathepsin S is expressed on the surface of tumor cells representative of colorectal and pancreatic cancer (23%-79% positive expression).
Furthermore the binding of Fsn0503h to surface associated cathepsin S results in natural killer (NK) cell targeted tumor killing.
In a colorectal cancer model Fsn0503h elicits a 22% cytotoxic effect.
This data highlights the potential to target cell surface associated enzymes, such as cathepsin S, as therapeutic targets using antibodies capable of elicitingADCC in tumor cells.
PMID: 22167663
Plasma Concentrations of Angiogenesis-related Molecules in Patients with Pancreatic Cancer.
Anti-angiogenic agents are now being clinically evaluated for the treatment of pancreatic cancer and a detailed investigation of the angiogenic profile of pancreatic cancer is needed.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the plasma concentrations of angiogenesis-related molecules in patients with pancreatic cancer, compared with those with other diseases.
Plasma samples obtained from 45 patients with pancreatic cancer were analyzed and compared with those from 9 patients with pancreatitis, 16 patients with benign hepatobiliary diseases and 58 patients with colorectal cancers.
The plasma levels of angiogenesis-related molecules including angiopoietin-2, follistatin, granulocyte-colony stimulating factor, hepatocyte growth factor, interleukin-8, leptin, platelet-derived growth factor beta polypeptide, platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 and vascular endothelial growth factor were determined using an antibody suspension bead arrays system.
The plasma levels of all the angiogenesis-related molecules were not increased in patients with pancreatic cancer, compared with those with pancreatitis and benign hepatobiliary diseases, whereas the levels of those with colorectal cancer were markedly increased.
The plasma interleukin-8 concentration was significantly elevated in patients with distant metastases and was associated with a poor treatment outcome of chemotherapy in patients with pancreatic cancer.
The plasma levels of angiogenesis-related molecules were not elevated in patients with pancreatic cancer, compared with those with benign diseases or colorectal cancer.
The plasma interleukin-8 level may be a novel biomarker for the response to chemotherapy in patients with pancreatic cancer and warrants further prospective study.
PMID: 22167000
Clinicopathological characteristics and molecular analyses of multifocal intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas.
To examine the clinicopathologic features and clonal relationship of multifocal intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs) of the pancreas.
Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms are increasingly diagnosed cystic precursor lesions of pancreatic cancer.
Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms can be multifocal and a potential cause of recurrence after partial pancreatectomy.
Thirty four patients with histologically documented multifocal IPMNs were collected and their clinicopathologic features catalogued.
In addition, thirty multifocal IPMNs arising in 13 patients from 3 hospitals were subjected to laser microdissection followed by KRAS pyrosequencing and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) analysis on chromosomes 6q and 17p.
Finally, we sought to assess the clonal relationships among multifocal IPMNs.
We identified 34 patients with histologically documented multifocal IPMNs.
Synchronous IPMNs were present in 29 patients (85%), whereas 5 (15%) developed clinically significant metachronous IPMNs.
Six patients (18%) had a history of familial pancreatic cancer.
A majority of multifocal IPMNs (86% synchronous, 100% metachronous) were composed of branch duct lesions, and typically demonstrated a gastric-foveolar subtype epithelium with low or intermediate grades of dysplasia.
Three synchronous IPMNs (10%) had an associated invasive cancer.
Molecular analysis of multiple IPMNs from 13 patients demonstrated nonoverlapping KRAS gene mutations in 8 patients (62%) and discordant LOH profiles in 7 patients (54%); independent genetic alterations were established in 9 of the 13 patients (69%).
The majority of multifocal IPMNs arise independently and exhibit a gastric-foveolar subtype, with low to intermediate dysplasia.
These findings underscore the importance of life-long follow-up after resection for an IPMN.
PMID: 22166947
Routine testing for PALB2 mutations in familial pancreatic cancer families and breast cancer families with pancreatic cancer is not indicated.
PALB2-mutation carriers not only have an increased risk for breast cancer (BC) but also for pancreatic cancer (PC).
Thus far, PALB2 mutations have been mainly found in PC patients from families affected by both PC and BC.
As it is well known that the prevalence of gene mutations varies between different populations, we studied the prevalence of PALB2 mutations in a Dutch cohort of non-BRCA1/2 familial PC (FPC) families and in non-BRCA1/2 familial BC (FBC) families with at least one PC case.
Mutation analysis included direct sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) and was performed in a total of 64 patients from 56 distinct families (28 FPC families, 28 FBC families).
In total, 31 patients (48%) originated from FPC families; 24 were FPC patients (77%), 6 had a personal history of BC (19%) and 1 was a suspected carrier (3.2%).
The remaining 33 patients (52%) were all female BC patients of whom 31 (94%) had a family history of PC and 2 (6.1%) had a personal history of PC.
In none of these 64 patients a PALB2 mutation was found.
Therefore, PALB2 does not have a major causal role in familial clustering of PC and BC in non-BRCA1/2 families in the Dutch population.European Journal of Human Genetics advance online publication, 14 December 2011; doi:10.1038/ejhg.2011.226.
PMID: 22166822
[Small renal cell carcinoma with pancreas metastasis: a case report].
A 53-year-old-man was treated in the Department of Surgery for a pancreatic tumor because asymptomatic, nodular masses, 4 cm-in diameter were discovered in the tail of the pancreas on computed tomography (CT).
The pancreatic masses were metastases of renal cell carcinoma on pathological examination.
Contrast-enhanced CT and abdominal magnetic resonance imaging showed a small, 1.3 cmdiameter mass in the right kidney.
The size of the renal tumor was small, but it appeared to have high malignancy because of spread to the pancreas.
We chose radical nephrectomy in consideration of intrarenal spread of carcinoma.
The resected specimen was diagnosed pathologically as clear cell carcinoma, G2＞ G1, pT1apN0M0, exp, INFα, v (-), ly (-).
At follow-up one year after surgery, there was no evidence of recurrence.
PMID: 22166499
Chemical pathology of homocysteine. V. Thioretinamide, thioretinaco, and cystathionine synthase function in degenerative diseases.
Hyperhomocysteinemia was first associated with degenerative disease by observation of accelerated arteriosclerosis in children with inherited disorders of cystathionine synthase, methionine synthase, and methylene tetrohydrofolate reductase.
The metabolic blockade of sulfate synthesis from homocysteine thiolactone in malignant cells is ascribed to a deficiency of a chemopreventive derivative of homocysteine thiolactone that occurs in normal cells.
Its chemical structure was elucidated by the organic synthesis of thioretinamide from retinoic acid and homocysteine thiolactone.
Oxidation of the sulfur atom of homocysteine is inhibited in scorbutic guinea pigs, demonstrating ascorbate function in sulfate synthesis from homocysteine.
Studies of homocysteine metabolism in protein energy malnutrition led to the conclusion that the biosynthesis of thioretinamide from the retinol of transthyretin is catalyzed by dehydroascorbate and superoxide generated from the heme oxygenase group of cystathionine synthase.
Newly synthesized thioretinamide is complexed with cobalamin to form thioretinaco, which is activated by ozone and oxygen to function as the active site of oxidative phosphorylation.
In accordance with the trophoblastic theory of cancer, pancreatic enzymes are believed to be oncolytic because they hydrolyze the homocysteinylated proteins, nucleic acids and glycosaminoglycans of malignant tissues.
The clonal selection of malignant cells that are deficient in the heme oxygenase function of cystathionine synthase produces cells dependent upon glycolysis for ATP synthesis, since they are deficient in synthesis of thioretinamide, thioretinaco and thioretinaco ozonide.
The vulnerable plaque of arteriosclerosis originates from complexes of microbes with homocysteinylated lipoproteins, obstructing vasa vasorum narrowed by endothelial dysfunction, causing arterial ischemia, and intimal micro-abscesses.
Degenerative diseases may be ameliorated by a proposed therapeutic protocol of thioretinamide with pancreatic enzymes.
PMID: 22166235
Targeted silencing of TRPM7 ion channel induces replicative senescence and produces enhanced cytotoxicity with gemcitabine in pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
The transient receptor potential TRPM7 ion channel is required for cellular proliferation in pancreatic epithelia and adenocarcinoma.
To elucidate the mechanism that mediates the function of TRPM7, we examined its role in survival of pancreatic cancer cells.
RNA interference-mediated silencing of TRPM7 did not induce apoptotic cell death.
TRPM7-deficient cells underwent replicative senescence with up-regulation of p16(CDKN2A) and WRN mRNA.
The combination of anti-TRPM7 siRNA and gemcitabine produced enhanced cytotoxicity as compared to gemcitabine alone.
Thus, TRPM7 is required for preventing senescence, and modulation of TRPM7 expression may help improve treatment response of pancreatic cancer by combining with apoptosis-inducing agents.
PMID: 22166190
Wholegrain cereals and bread: a duet of the Mediterranean diet for the prevention of chronic diseases.
The promotion of healthy lifestyles is one of the major goals of governments and international agencies all over the world.
Wholegrain cereals are rich in nutrients and many phytochemical compounds, with recognised benefits for health, including dietary fibre, a number of phenolic compounds, lignans, vitamins and minerals and other bioactive components.
The aim of the present work is to review the fundamental studies that support the consumption of wholegrain cereals and bread to prevent chronic diseases.
Descriptive review considering human studies.
Subjects included in randomised intervention trials and cohort studies from different countries published up to 2010.
Several studies show consistently that subjects who ingest three or more portions of foods per day based on wholegrain cereals have a 20-30 % lower risk of CVD than subjects who ingest low quantities of cereals.
This level of protection is not observed with the ingestion of refined cereals, these being even higher than with the intake of fruit and vegetables.
Likewise, high intake of wholegrain cereals and their products, such as whole-wheat bread, is associated with a 20-30 % reduction in the risk of type 2 diabetes.
Finally, protection against the risk of colorectal cancer and polyps, other cancers of the digestive tract, cancers related to hormones and pancreatic cancer has been associated with the regular consumption of wholegrain cereals and derived products.
The regular intake of wholegrain cereals can contribute to reduction of risk factors related to non-communicable chronic diseases.
PMID: 22165963
Knockdown of insulin-like growth factor I receptor inhibits the growth and enhances chemo-sensitivity of liver cancer cells.
Liver cancer is one of the most common malignant cancers worldwide.
Systemic chemotherapy remains the major treatment option, but with severe adverse effects.
Combinations of systemic with targeted treatments may provide effective therapeutics.
The objectives of this study were to demonstrate if insulin-like growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR) might serve as a functional target for liver cancer treatment and to investigate the chemo-sensitizing activity of IGF-IR downregulation.
IGF-IR knockdown was achieved by stable transfection of liver cancer cells with IGF-IR small interfering RNA (siRNA).
IGF-IR knockdown resulted in reduced growth, clonogenic survival, adhesion and migration of liver cancer cells, and increased sensitivities of liver cancer cells to apoptosis-inducing agents and chemotherapeutic drugs in vitro.
In the animal studies, both IGF-IR knockdown and adriamycin (ADM) treatment significantly reduced the growth of liver tumors.
IGF-IR knockdown enhanced the effect of ADM on tumor growth by further reducing tumor angiogenesis and inducing tumor cell apoptosis.
The final tumor sizes in the IGFIR-siRNA, ADM-treated EGFP, and ADM-treated IGFIR-siRNA groups were significantly reduced by 52.5%, 33.8%, and 86.3%, respectively, compared with that in the EGFP control, suggesting that the ADM and the IGF-IR knockdown inhibit the growth of liver tumors in a synergistic manner.
These results support that IGF-IR may serve as a functional molecular target for liver cancer treatment, and that the combination of systemic chemotherapy with targeted IGF-IR suppression may provide an effective treatment strategy for liver cancer.
PMID: 22165691
[Chronic pancreatitis in 2011].
The incidence of chronic pancreatitis grows slowly but steadily.
At present, alcohol is the most frequent risk factor, although the new forms of so called non-alcoholic chronic pancreatitis, such as genetically induced pancreatitis and its autoimmune variety, are carefully watched.
Alcohol consumption continues to be most closely associated with the disease, though it is no more than a risk factor and other aspects, e.g., genetic predisposition, are prerequisite to the disease development.
Imaging methods play a fundamental role in diagnosing the disease; non-invasive magnetic resonance and CT, invasive but safe endosonography, and diagnostically rarely used ECRP that, because of its invasive nature, is currently predominantly used for therapeutic purposes.
Genetic markers are also exploited, including CFTR mutation, SPINK 1 and PRRS 1 gene, immunoglobulin G4 in the autoimmune form of the disease as well as, alternatively, pancreatic biopsy.
Disease symptoms, i.e., pancreatic malabsorption (enzymes with high lipase content) and pancreatic pain are treated conservatively, with paracetamol as the first line therapy for pain followed, if necessary, by so called synaptic analgesics.
Alternatively, endoscopic techniques (drainage) or surgery (drainage and resection) are applied.
Hereditary and non-hereditary chronic pancreatitis is among the risk factors for pancreatic cancer and thus patients with these diseases should be closely followed up.
PMID: 22164219
Aberrant Hedgehog ligands induce progressive pancreatic fibrosis by paracrine activation of myofibroblasts and ductular cells in transgenic zebrafish.
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is frequently up-regulated in fibrogenic pancreatic diseases including chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer.
Although recent series suggest exclusive paracrine activation of stromal cells by Hh ligands from epithelial components, debates still exist on how Hh signaling works in pathologic conditions.
To explore how Hh signaling affects the pancreas, we investigated transgenic phenotypes in zebrafish that over-express either Indian Hh or Sonic Hh along with green fluorescence protein (GFP) to enable real-time observation, or GFP alone as control, at the ptf1a domain.
Transgenic embryos and zebrafish were serially followed for transgenic phenotypes, and investigated using quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), in situ hybridization, and immunohistochemistry.
Over-expression of Ihh or Shh reveals virtually identical phenotypes.
Hh induces morphologic changes in a developing pancreas without derangement in acinar differentiation.
In older zebrafish, Hh induces progressive pancreatic fibrosis intermingled with proliferating ductular structures, which is accompanied by the destruction of the acinar structures.
Both myofibroblasts and ductular are activated and proliferated by paracrine Hh signaling, showing restricted expression of Hh downstream components including Patched1 (Ptc1), Smoothened (Smo), and Gli1/2 in those Hh-responsive cells.
Hh ligands induce matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), especially MMP9 in all Hh-responsive cells, and transform growth factor-ß1 (TGFß1) only in ductular cells.
Aberrant Hh over-expression, however, does not induce pancreatic tumors.
On treatment with inhibitors, embryonic phenotypes are reversed by either cyclopamine or Hedgehog Primary Inhibitor-4 (HPI-4).
Pancreatic fibrosis is only prevented by HPI-4.
Our study provides strong evidence of Hh signaling which induces pancreatic fibrosis through paracrine activation of Hh-responsive cells in vivo.
Induction of MMPs and TGFß1 by Hh signaling expands on the current understanding of how Hh signaling affects fibrosis and tumorigenesis.
These transgenic models will be a valuable platform in exploring the mechanism of fibrogenic pancreatic diseases which are induced by Hh signaling activation.
PMID: 22163260
Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasia (IPMN) of the pancreas: its diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis.
The many varieties of cystic pancreatic tumor, and especially intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasia (IPMN), have attracted increased attention recently.
Their incidence may be rising, and their histopathological evaluation and classification have become more precise than before.
We discuss the current diagnostic evaluation of IPMN, along with treatment and prognostication, on the basis of the current international guideline as well as pertinent literature retrieved by a selective PubMed search.
The preoperative diagnostic evaluation of IPMN is often problematic.
In particular, it may not be possible to differentiate main-duct disease from branch-duct disease (MD-IPMN vs.
BD-IPMN) before surgery--a distinction with implications for prognosis and treatment, as MD-IPMN is more often malignant.
An IPMN adenoma can develop into invasive pancreatic cancer.
Because firm diagnostic criteria are still lacking, it is recommended that all MD-IPMN lesions and all large BD-IPMN lesions should be resected.
Partial pancreatectomy with clean margins is the treatment of choice.
As IPMN seems to be a slow-growing precursor of pancreatic cancer, it is possible that its early detection and surgical treatment can lead to a cure.
No conclusion about the efficacy of surveillance and follow-up programs can be drawn from the available evidence.
A better understanding of the natural course of IPMN and the biology of pancreatic cancer is needed to enable further improvements in diagnosis and treatment.
PMID: 22162753
Investigations on the usefulness of CEACAMs as potential imaging targets for molecular imaging purposes.
Members of the carcinoembryonic antigen cell adhesion molecules (CEACAMs) family are the prototype of tumour markers.
Classically they are used as serum markers, however, CEACAMs could serve as targets for molecular imaging as well.In order to test the anti CEACAM monoclonal antibody T84.1 for imaging purposes, CEACAM expression was analysed using this antibody.
Twelve human cancer cell lines from different entities were screened for their CEACAM expression using qPCR, Western Blot and FACS analysis.
In addition, CEACAM expression was analyzed in primary tumour xenografts of these cells.
Nine of 12 tumour cell lines expressed CEACAM mRNA and protein when grown in vitro.
Pancreatic and colon cancer cell lines showed the highest expression levels with good correlation of mRNA and protein level.
However, when grown in vivo, the CEACAM expression was generally downregulated except for the melanoma cell lines.
As the CEACAM expression showed pronounced expression in FemX-1 primary tumours, this model system was used for further experiments.
As the accessibility of the antibody after i.v.
application is critical for its use in molecular imaging, the binding of the T84.1 monoclonal antibody was assessed after i.v.
injection into SCID mice harbouring a FemX-1 primary tumour.
When applied i.v., the CEACAM specific T84.1 antibody bound to tumour cells in the vicinity of blood vessels.
This binding pattern was particularly pronounced in the periphery of the tumour xenograft, however, some antibody binding was also observed in the central areas of the tumour around blood vessels.
Still, a general penetration of the tumour by i.v.
application of the anti CEACAM antibody could not be achieved despite homogenous CEACAM expression of all melanoma cells when analysed in tissue sections.
This lack of penetration is probably due to the increased interstitial fluid pressure in tumours caused by the absence of functional lymphatic vessels.
PMID: 22162652
Coupling technique of random amplified polymorphic DNA and nanoelectrochemical sensor for mapping pancreatic cancer genetic fingerprint.
To review the feasibility of coupling the techniques of random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) with carbon nanotube-based modified electrode for guanine/deoxyguanine triphosphate (dGTP) electrochemical sensing for mapping of the pancreatic cancer genetic fingerprint and screening of genetic alterations.
We developed a new method to study the electrochemical behavior of dGTP utilizing carbon multiwalled nanotube (MWNT)-modified glassy carbon electrodes (GCEs).
RAPD was applied for amplification of DNA samples from healthy controls and patients with pancreatic cancer under the same conditions to determine the different surplus quantity of dGTP in the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), thereby determining the difference/quantity of PCR products or template strands.
Using this method we generated a genetic fingerprint map of pancreatic cancer through the combination of electrochemical sensors and gel electrophoresis to screen for genetic alterations.
Cloning and sequencing were then performed to verify these gene alterations.
dGTP showed favorable electrochemical behavior on the MWNTs/GCE.
The results indicated that the electrical signal and dGTP had a satisfactory linear relationship with the dGTP concentration within the conventional PCR concentration range.
The MWNTs/GCE could distinguish between different products of RAPD.
This experiment successfully identified a new pancreatic cancer-associated mutant gene fragment, consisting of a cyclin-dependent kinase 4 gene 3' terminal mutation.
The coupling of RAPD and nanoelectrochemical sensors was successfully applied to the screening of genetic alterations in pancreatic cancer and for mapping of DNA fingerprints.
PMID: 22162268
Synthesis and evaluation of a fluorescent non-peptidic cholecystokinin-B/gastrin receptor specific antagonist for cancer cell imaging.
Fluorescent labeling has enabled a better understanding of the relationships between receptor location, function, and life cycle.
Each of these perspectives contributes new insights into drug action, particularly for G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs).
The aim of this study was to develop a fluorescein derivative, FLUO-QUIN-a novel antagonist of the cholecystokinin-B/gastrin receptor.
A radioligand-binding experiment revealed an IC(50) of 4.79 nm, and the antagonist inhibited gastric acid secretion in an isolated lumen-perfused mouse stomach assay (up to 51 % at 100 nm).
The fluorescence properties altered upon binding to the receptor, and the fluorophore was quenched to a greater extent when free than in the bound form.
FLUO-QUIN specifically bound to human pancreatic carcinoma cells, MiaPaca-2, which are known to express the receptor, as evidenced by rapid clustering followed by time-dependent receptor internalization.
This proves the stability of FLUO-QUIN and its ability to penetrate vesicular membranes and reach various cell targets.
Hence it might be used as an agent for the detection of CCK-B-receptor-positive tumors by fluorescence imaging.
PMID: 22162237
Pancreatic cancer risk: associations with meat-derived carcinogen intake in the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial (PLCO) cohort.
Epidemiological studies report positive associations between high-temperature cooked meat intake and pancreatic cancer.
We assessed associations between dietary intake of heterocyclic amines (HCAs) and benzo(a)pyrene (BaP)-mutagens formed in meat cooked at high temperatures-and incident exocrine pancreatic cancer in a prospective cohort.
The 62 581 subjects randomized to screening in the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian Screening Trial (PLCO) who completed an initial dietary survey that assessed meat intake, cooking methods, and doneness preferences defined the cohort.
Subjects were surveyed annually for incident cancers through 2007.
A National Cancer Institute research database (CHARRED) was used to estimate HCA and BaP intake and a Mutagenic Activity Index (MAI) from survey data.
Proportional hazard ratios (HRs) for risk of pancreatic cancer were estimated from multi-variate Cox regression models by quintile of intake, with the lowest quintile as the referent.
During follow-up (median: 10 yr), 248 cases of exocrine pancreatic cancer were confirmed.
Preferences for well and very well done meat were generally associated with increased risks.
Significant elevations in pancreatic cancer risk were found in upper quintiles of MAI, and individual mutagens 2-amino-3,4,8-trimethylimidazo[4,5-f]quinoxaline (DiMeIQx) and 2-amino-3,8-dimethylimidazo[4,5-f]quinoxaline (MeIQx).
Compared to the lowest quintile of MAI, the third and fifth quintiles brought HRs of 1.86 (1.22, 2.85) and 1.87 (1.16, 3.02), respectively.
These three exposures exhibited significant (P-trend: 0.01-0.03) positive trends in risk as their levels increased.
Consuming well-done meat cooked at high temperatures, which contains high mutagen levels, appears to confer increased risk of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22162236
Is dietary fat, vitamin D, or folate associated with pancreatic cancer?
Although potentially modifiable risk factors for pancreatic cancer include smoking, obesity, and diabetes, less is known about the extent to which diet affects cancer risk.
Recent studies have demonstrated some consistency for dietary fat being associated with elevated pancreatic cancer risk, particularly from animal sources.
However, less is known about which fatty acids pose the greatest risk.
Vitamin D, due to its endogenous production following UV-B exposure, is a unique risk factor in that researchers have created several methods to assess its exposure in humans.
Studies that measured vitamin D exposure differently have shown inconsistent results.
Dietary studies suggest protective associations, whereas studies of circulating 25-hydroxyvitamin D status show null or positive associations with low or very high concentrations, respectively.
Several, but not all epidemiologic studies provide evidence of an inverse relationship between total and/or dietary folate and risk of pancreatic cancer.
Protective associations for circulating folate are more often observed among populations with inadequate status.
This article reviews the current epidemiological and experimental evidence investigating the relationship of dietary fat, vitamin D, and folate with pancreatic cancer.
Additionally the mechanisms by which these risk factors may contribute to cancer, the methodological challenges involved with assessing risk, and other obstacles encountered when ascertaining the magnitude and direction of these three exposures are discussed.
PMID: 22162235
Pancreatic cancer: Helicobacter pylori colonization, N-nitrosamine exposures, and ABO blood group.
Thirty years of research with animal models has shown that pancreatic adenocarcinoma is induced by N-nitrosamine carcinogens, which damage DNA through adduct formation.
Human risk factors for pancreatic cancer include gastric colonization by Helicobacter pylori, as well as dietary intake of those same N-nitrosamines or of nitrite which forms those N-nitrosamines in the stomach, and cigarette smoking which also contains those N-nitrosamines.
Physiologic actions of H.
pylori colonization enhance the carcinogenic effect of N-nitrosamines delivered by smoking or dietary sources.
This effect is modulated by host inflammatory response to the organism, by various virulence and other properties of the Helicobacter itself, and by host-organism interactions.
A recent genome-wide association study identified SNPs within the ABO 9q34 locus as statistically significantly associated with risk of pancreatic cancer.
A number of recent and older studies going back 40 yr also support the ABO association.
ABO-product antigens are expressed on gastrointestinal epithelium on which H.
pylori binds, and ABO genotype is known to be associated with risks of duodenal and gastric ulcer and with risk of gastric cancer, conditions definitively related to Helicobacter colonization.
We suspect that ABO genotype/phenotype status influences the behavior of H.
pylori which in turn affects gastric and pancreatic secretory function, and these ultimately influence the pancreatic carcinogenicity of dietary- and smoking-related N-nitrosamine exposures, and thus risk of pancreatic cancer.
Our study results on the interaction of ABO and H.
pylori significantly confirm this hypothesis and together with other existing studies strongly implicate this organism in the disease etiology.
PMID: 22162234
Occupational risk factors and pancreatic cancer: a review of recent findings.
Several occupational exposures have been linked to excess risk of pancreatic cancer; however, most associations are not well established.
The objective of this review article is to report on the more recently published studies (1998-2010), and provide a summary of the most consistently reported occupational risk factors for pancreatic cancer, including exposure to chlorinated hydrocarbon compounds, pesticides, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), metals, nitrosamines, radiation, various airborne particles, and employment in sedentary occupations.
We conclude that the strongest and most consistent findings linking occupational exposures with pancreatic cancer risk to date are for chlorinated hydrocarbons and PAHs.
PMID: 22162233
Selected medical conditions and risk of pancreatic cancer.
We review the current evidence for associations of several medical conditions with risk of pancreatic cancer, including allergies, pancreatitis, gall bladder disease, cholecystectomy, ulcers, gastrectomy, appendectomy, and tonsillectomy.
There are consistent findings of reduced risk associated with presence of self-reported allergies, particularly hay fever but not asthma; data on other allergies are limited and inconclusive.
Several studies provide evidence that patients with pancreatic cancer are more likely than comparison groups to report pancreatitis.
Those studies that investigated the time between onset of pancreatitis and diagnosis of pancreatic cancer found that risk estimates declined with longer periods of time; however, increased risks were noted for long-term pancreatitis, indicating that this condition is both a risk factor and a sign of early disease.
Increased risk was reported in association with cholelithiasis, but the few studies that considered time before diagnosis of cancer did not find increased risk for cholelithiasis diagnosed in the more distant past.
There is weak evidence that cholecystectomy 2 or more years before cancer diagnosis is related to risk, but this is based on only a few studies.
There is no consistent association between ulcers and risk, while gastrectomy may increase risk.
Overall, study of these conditions, particularly those that are rare, presents methodologic challenges.
Time between diagnoses is likely to be important but is not considered in most studies.
Lack of adequate control in several studies for risk factors such as smoking and heavy alcohol use also makes it difficult to draw firm conclusions about these results.
PMID: 22162232
Diabetes and pancreatic cancer.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus is likely the third modifiable risk factor for pancreatic cancer after cigarette smoking and obesity.
Epidemiological investigations have found that long-term type 2 diabetes mellitus is associated with a 1.5-fold to 2.0-fold increase in the risk of pancreatic cancer.
A causal relationship between diabetes and pancreatic cancer is also supported by findings from prediagnostic evaluations of glucose and insulin levels in prospective studies.
Insulin resistance and associated hyperglycemia, hyperinsulinemia, and inflammation have been suggested to be the underlying mechanisms contributing to development of diabetes-associated pancreatic cancer.
Signaling pathways that regulate the metabolic process also play important roles in cell proliferation and tumor growth.
Use of the antidiabetic drug metformin has been associated with reduced risk of pancreatic cancer in diabetics and recognized as an antitumor agent with the potential to prevent and treat this cancer.
On the other hand, new-onset diabetes may indicate subclinical pancreatic cancer, and patients with new-onset diabetes may constitute a population in whom pancreatic cancer can be detected early.
Biomarkers that help define high-risk individuals for clinical screening for pancreatic cancer are urgently needed.
Why pancreatic cancer causes diabetes and how diabetes affects the clinical outcome of pancreatic cancer have yet to be fully determined.
Improved understanding of the pathological mechanisms shared by diabetes and pancreatic cancer would be the key to the development of novel preventive and therapeutic strategies for this cancer.
PMID: 22162231
Obesity and pancreatic cancer: overview of epidemiologic evidence and biologic mechanisms.
In the United States, pancreatic cancer is characterized by a low 5-yr survival rate of approximately 6%, fewer than 10% of patients diagnosed with localized disease and thus candidates for "curative" surgical resection, increasing incidence and few established risk factors.
Similar statistics are observed for other industrialized nations.
With new evidence to suggest that pancreatic cancer develops over a number of years, markers that can better identify high risk patients and are applicable to earlier diagnosis hold promise for improving these dire statistics.
Obesity is one of the few modifiable risk factors that has been associated with increased risk of pancreatic cancer and also is related to increased risk of diabetes, a condition that in turn has been associated with pancreatic cancer development.
Given recent data that nearly 70% of United States adults are overweight or obese, a clarification of the complex association between obesity and pancreatic cancer may disclose targets for prevention and intervention to decrease incidence and improve prognosis of this highly fatal disease.
An overview of the current epidemiology and hypothesized biological mechanisms involved in the obesity-pancreatic cancer association are presented.
PMID: 22162230
Epidemiology and potential mechanisms of tobacco smoking and heavy alcohol consumption in pancreatic cancer.
Tobacco smoking represents an important known cause of ductal pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
Recent data from pooled analyses in consortia involving multiple case-control and cohort studies suggest that heavy (but not moderate or light) alcohol consumption also may increase pancreatic cancer risk.
Animal and human evidence indicate that tobacco carcinogens and metabolites may act in concert and have both genetic and epigenetic effects at early and later stages in pancreatic tumorigenesis.
One of the more important tobacco-related carcinogens, NNK, probably acts via multiple pathways.
Heavy alcohol consumption may increase pancreatic cancer risk by potentiating the effects of other risk factors such as tobacco smoking, poor nutrition, and inflammatory pathways related to chronic pancreatitis, but also may have independent genetic and epigenetic effects.
Animal and human studies of tobacco- and alcohol-related pancreatic carcinogenesis suggest multi-modal, overlapping mechanistic pathways.
Tobacco smoking and heavy alcohol consumption are preventable exposures, and their avoidance would substantially decrease the burden of pancreatic cancer worldwide.
PMID: 22162229
Aberrant signaling pathways in pancreatic cancer: a two compartment view.
Pancreatic cancer is a devastating disease with historically limited success in treatment and a poor prognosis.
Pancreatic cancer appears to have a progressive pathway of development, initiating from well-described pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia lesions and concluding with invasive carcinoma.
These early lesions have been shown to harbor-specific alterations in signaling pathways that remain throughout this tumorigenesis process.
Meanwhile, new alterations occur during this process of disease progression to have a cumulative effect.
This series of events not only impacts the epithelial cells comprising the tumor, but they may also affect the surrounding stromal cells.
The result is the formation of complex signaling networks of communication between the tumor epithelial cell and the stromal cell compartments to promote a permissive and cooperative environment.
This article highlights some of the most common pathway aberrations involved with this disease, and how these may subsequently affect one or both cellular compartments.
Consequently, furthering our understanding of these pathways in terms of their function on the tumoral epithelial and stromal compartments may prove to be crucial to the development of targeted and more successful therapies in the future.
PMID: 22162228
Genetic susceptibility to pancreatic cancer.
Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer death in both men and women in the United States.
However, it has the poorest prognosis of any major tumor type, with a 5-yr survival rate of approximately 5%.
Cigarette smoking, increased body mass index, heavy alcohol consumption, and a diagnosis of diabetes mellitus have all been demonstrated to increase risk of pancreatic cancer.
A family history of pancreatic cancer has also been associated with increased risk suggesting inherited genetic factors also play an important role, with approximately 5-10% of pancreatic cancer patients reporting family history of pancreatic cancer.
While the genetic basis for the majority of the familial clustering of pancreatic cancer remains unclear, several important pancreatic cancer genes have been identified.
These consist of high penetrance genes including BRCA2 or PALB2, to more common genetic variation associated with a modest increase risk of pancreatic cancer such as genetic variation at the ABO blood group locus.
Recent advances in genotyping and genetic sequencing have accelerated the rate at which novel pancreatic cancer susceptibility genes have been identified with several genes identified within the past few years.
This review addresses our current understanding of the familial aggregation of pancreatic cancer, established pancreatic cancer susceptablity genes and how this knowledge informs risk assessment and screening for high-risk families.
PMID: 22162227
Pancreatic cancer: overview of descriptive epidemiology.
Pancreatic cancer mortality rates have been increasing in high-income countries between the 1950s and the 1980s, and have leveled off or declined thereafter, particularly in men.
To provide a global overview of recent pancreatic cancer mortality, we analyzed official death of the world certification data derived from the World Health Organization for 35 European countries and 19 other countries over the period 1980-2007.
In 2007, the highest mortality rates from pancreatic cancer were in the Baltic countries, and some central/eastern and northern European countries (over 9.5/100 000 men and 6/100 000 women), whereas the lowest ones were in Latin America and Hong Kong (below 5/100 000 men and 3/100 000 women).
Japan, the USA, Russia and the European Union (EU), as well as the largest countries in the EU, had rates around 7-9/100 000 men and 5-6/100 000 women.
In the early 2000s, rates have been approximately stable in many European countries, as in the USA, Japan, and Australia.
In Nordic countries and the UK, where declines in rates have been observed between the 1980s and the 1990s, mortality from pancreatic cancer has tended to rise over most recent calendar years.
Some persisting rises were still found in men from a few countries of southern and central/eastern Europe (with low rates in the past), as well as in the EU overall, and in women from European and Asian countries.
Recent trends were generally more favorable in young adults (30-49 yr), suggesting that overall trends are likely to improve in the near future.
PMID: 22162226
Carcinogenesis of pancreatic cancer: challenges, collaborations, progress.
PMID: 22162139
The monocarboxylate transporter family--role and regulation.
Monocarboxylate transporter (MCT) isoforms 1-4 catalyze the proton-linked transport of monocarboxylates such as L-lactate across the plasma membrane, whereas MCT8 and MCT10 are thyroid hormone and aromatic amino acid transporters, respectively.
The importance of MCTs is becoming increasingly evident as their extensive physiological and pathological roles are revealed.
MCTs 1-4 play essential metabolic roles in most tissues with their distinct properties, expression profile, and subcellular localization matching the particular metabolic needs of a tissue.
Important metabolic roles include energy metabolism in the brain, skeletal muscle, heart, tumor cells, and T-lymphocyte activation, gluconeogenesis in the liver and kidney, spermatogenesis, bowel metabolism of short-chain fatty acids, and drug transport.
MCT8 is essential for thyroid hormone transport across the blood-brain barrier.
Genetic perturbation of MCT function may be involved in disease states such as pancreatic β-cell malfunction (inappropriate MCT1 expression), chronic fatigue syndromes (impairment of muscle MCT function), and psychomotor retardation (MCT8 mutation).
MCT expression can be regulated at both the transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels.
Of particular importance is the upregulation of muscle MCT1 expression in response to training and MCT4 expression in response to hypoxia.
The latter is mediated by hypoxia inducible factor 1α and often observed in tumor cells that rely almost entirely on glycolysis for their energy provision.
The recent discovery of potent and specific MCT1 inhibitors that prevent proliferation of T-lymphocytes confirms that MCTs may be promising pharmacological targets including for cancer chemotherapy.
PMID: 22160930
Constitutive K-RasG12D Activation of ERK2 Specifically Regulates 3D Invasion of Human Pancreatic Cancer Cells via MMP-1.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDAC) are highly invasive and metastatic neoplasms commonly unresponsive to current drug therapy.
Overwhelmingly, PDAC harbors early constitutive, oncogenic mutations in K-Ras(G12D) that exist prior to invasion.
Histologic and genetic analyses of human PDAC biopsies also exhibit increased expression of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2 and proinvasive matrix metalloproteinases (MMP), indicators of poor prognosis.
However, the distinct molecular mechanisms necessary for K-Ras/ERK1/2 signaling and its influence on MMP-directed stromal invasion in primary human pancreatic ductal epithelial cells (PDEC) have yet to be elucidated in three-dimensions.
Expression of oncogenic K-Ras(G12D) alone in genetically defined PDECs reveals increased invadopodia and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition markers, but only when cultured in a three-dimensional model incorporating a basement membrane analog.
Activation of ERK2, but not ERK1, also occurs only in K-Ras(G12D)-mutated PDECs cultured in three-dimensions and is a necessary intracellular signaling event for invasion based upon pharmacologic and short hairpin RNA (shRNA) inhibition.
Increased active invasion of K-Ras(G12D) PDECs through the basement membrane model is associated with a specific microarray gene expression signature and induction of MMP endopeptidases.
Specifically, MMP-1 RNA, its secreted protein, and its proteolytic cleavage activity are amplified in K-Ras(G12D) PDECs when assayed by real-time quantitative PCR, ELISA, and fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET).
Importantly, shRNA silencing of MMP-1 mimics ERK2 inhibition and disrupts active, vertical PDEC invasion.
ERK2 isoform and MMP-1 targeting are shown to be viable strategies to attenuate invasion of K-Ras(G12D)-mutated human pancreatic cancer cells in a three-dimensional tumor microenvironment.
Mol Cancer Res; 10(2); 183-96.
©2011 AACR.
PMID: 22160782
Pancreatic Neoplasms in Pregnancy: Diagnosis, Complications, and Management.
BACKGROUND: Neoplasms of the pancreas during pregnancy are rare, with less than 25 cases of benign and malignant tumors reported in the literature.
METHODS: We present three unique cases of pancreatic tumors occurring during pregnancy-one mucinous cystic neoplasm and two adenocarcinomas.
We review the literature regarding pancreatic neoplasms during pregnancy and discuss the diagnosis, complications, and management of these tumors.
RESULTS: Magnetic resonance imaging and ultrasound are the imaging modalities of choice in pregnancy.
In patients with benign or premalignant tumors, surgical resection may be postponed until the second trimester.
In symptomatic patients, or if there is a concern for intrauterine growth restriction, urgent surgical intervention should be performed.
With malignant tumors, the benefit of delaying surgery must be balanced with the risk of maternal disease progression.
Termination of the pregnancy should be discussed when a malignant tumor is diagnosed during the first trimester.
Pancreatic tumors diagnosed during the third trimester may be resected after delivery.
If malignant, early delivery of the fetus and subsequent maternal operation can be considered at appropriate fetal maturity.
CONCLUSION: When these tumors occur during pregnancy, they present a diagnostic and treatment dilemma, with variation in treatment based on gestational age and patient preference.
PMID: 22160780
Neo-adjuvant Chemoradiation Therapy Using S-1 Followed by Surgical Resection in Patients with Pancreatic Cancer.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to compare short-term surgical results in pancreatic cancer patients who underwent surgical resection after neo-adjuvant chemoradiation therapy (NACRT) using S-1.
METHODS: The study population comprised 77 patients with pancreatic cancer between 2006 and 2010.
Out of 34 patients who underwent staging laparoscopy between 2008 and 2010, 31 patients without occult distant organ metastasis underwent chemoradiation and of whom 30 underwent pancreatectomy (NACRT group).
Of the other 43 patients, 36 underwent surgical resection in 2006-2008, followed by adjuvant therapy (adjuvant group).
The primary endpoint was frequency of pathological curative resection (R0).
RESULTS: The new regimen of NACRT was feasible and safe.
Twenty-eight of 30 (93%) patients in the NACRT group had R0 resection, which was significantly higher than in the adjuvant group (21 of 36 patients, 58%, p = 0.005).
The number and extent of metastatic lymph nodes in the NACRT group (1 (0-25), N0/1; 18 of 38) was significantly lower than in the adjuvant group (2 (0-19), N0/1; 23 of 30), p = 0.0363).
The frequency of intractable ascites in the NACRT group (eight of 30) was significantly higher than in the adjuvant group (two of 36, p = 0.035).
CONCLUSION: Neo-adjuvant chemoradiation therapy using S-1 followed by pancreatectomy can improve the rate of pathologically curative resection and reduces the number and extent of lymph node metastasis.
PMID: 22160590
Protein kinase Cα inhibitor enhances the sensitivity of human pancreatic cancer HPAC cells to Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin via claudin-4.
Protein kinase C (PKC) is overexpressed in cancer, including pancreatic cancer, compared with normal tissue.
Moreover, PKCα is considered one of the biomarkers for the diagnosis of cancers.
In several human cancers, the claudin tight junction molecules are abnormally regulated and are thus promising molecular targets for diagnosis and therapy with Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin (CPE).
In order to investigate the changes of tight junction functions of claudins via PKCα activation in pancreatic cancer cells, the well-differentiated human pancreatic cancer cell line HPAC, with its highly expressed tight junction molecules and well-developed barrier function, was treated with the PKC activator 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA).
Treatment with TPA modified the activity of phosphoPKCα and caused an increase of the Snail family members Snail, Slug and Smad-interacting protein 1 and a decrease of E-cadherin.
In HPAC cells treated with TPA, downregulation of claudin-1 and mislocalization of claudin-4 and occludin around the nuclei were observed, together with a decrease in the numbers of tight junction strands and an increase in phosphorylation of claudin-4.
The barrier function and the cytotoxicity of CPE were significantly decreased on TPA treatment.
All such changes after TPA treatment were prevented by inhibitors of panPKC and PKCα.
These findings suggest that, in human pancreatic cancer cells, PKCα activation downregulates tight junction functions as a barrier and as a receptor of CPE via the modification of claudin-1 and -4 during epithelial to mesenchymal transition-like changes.
PKCα inhibitors might represent potential therapeutic agents against human pancreatic cancer cells by use of CPE cytotoxicity via claudin-4.
PMID: 22160355
Liver-specific contrast agent-enhanced magnetic resonance and ¹⁸F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography findings of hepatocellular adenoma: report of a case.
We report a case of hepatocellular adenoma, focusing on the findings of liver-specific contrast agent-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and ¹⁸F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET).
The patient was a 37-year-old woman, referred to us after contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed a homogeneous, poorly enhanced liver tumor, 2.8 cm in diameter.
Magnetic resonance imaging showed a liver mass with significant fatty change.
The tumor increased in size to 3.3 cm over 9 months of follow-up.
Gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriamine penta-acetic acid-enhanced MRI revealed spotty enhancement in the hypointense tumor in the hepatobiliary phase.
Subsequent FDG-PET showed increased uptake of FDG (maximum standardized uptake value 5.0), which suggested the possibility of malignancy.
The patient underwent partial hepatectomy, and histological examination of the resected specimen revealed a tumor composed of hepatocyte-like cells with minimal cellular atypia and significant diffuse fatty change.
Based on these findings, we diagnosed hepatocellular adenoma.
PMID: 22159556
Emodin reverses gemcitabine resistance in pancreatic cancer cells via the mitochondrial apoptosis pathway in vitro.
Gemcitabine resistance is a common problem of pancreatic cancer chemotherapy, and how to reverse it plays an important role in the treatment of pancreatic cancer.
This study investigated the effect of emodin on the gemcitabine-resistant pancreatic cancer cell line SW1990/Gem, and explored the potential mechanism of its action.
SW1990/Gem was obtained by culture of the pancreatic cancer cell line SW1990 in vitro by intermittently increasing the concentration of gemcitabine in the culture medium for 10 months, observing the morphology using inverted microscopy.
SW1990/Gem cells were pretreated with emodin (10 µM) for different periods followed by treatment with gemcitabine (20 µM) for 48 h; cell proliferation was tested by MTT assay.
SW1990/Gem cells were treated by emodin with different concentrations for 48 h, cell apoptosis was detected by flow cytometry (FCM).
The expression of gene and protein, such as MDR-1 (P-gp), NF-κB, Bcl-2, Bax, cytochrome-C (cytosol), caspase-9 and -3 were measured by RT-PCR and Western blotting.
The function of P-gp in SW1990/Gem cells was checked by FCM.
The results showed that the SW1990/Gem cells changed greatly in morphology and the resistance index was 48.63.
Emodin promoted cell apoptosis of the gemcitabine-resistant cell line SW1990/Gem in a dose-dependent manner.
Emodin enhanced the SW1990/Gem cell sensitivity to gemcitabine in a time-dependent manner.
Emodin monotherapy or combination with gemcitabine both decreased the gene and protein expression levels of MDR-1 (P-gp), NF-κB and Bcl-2 and inhibited the function of P-gp, but increased the expression levels of Bax, cytochrome-C (cytosol), caspase-9 and -3, and promoted cell apoptosis.
This demonstrated that emodin had a reversing effect on the gemcitabine-resistant cell line SW1990/Gem, possibly via decreasing the function of P-gp and activating the mitochondrial apoptosis pathway in vitro.
PMID: 22159447
Matrine inhibits proliferation and induces apoptosis of the androgen‑independent prostate cancer cell line PC-3.
Current strategies to treat androgen-independent prostate cancer are associated with a number of challenges and are not yet curative.
Matrine is a naturally occurring alkaloid extracted from the Chinese herb Sophora flavescens.
Matrine has shown anti-proliferative properties in a number of types of cancer, including breast, gastric, lung and pancreatic tumors.
Matrine was also found to promote apoptosis and inhibit invasion of cancer cells.
We evaluated the antitumor effects of matrine on androgen-independent PC-3 prostate cancer cells.
The effects of matrine on cell cycle progression and apoptosis of PC-3 cells were tested.
Matrine-treated PC-3 cells underwent G0/G1 cell cycle arrest.
There was a significant reduction in the number of S phase and G2/M phase cells in the treated group when compared to untreated cells.
Flow cytometry, as well as Annexin-V/PI staining, showed a significant, dose-dependent increase in the number of early, as well as late, stage apoptotic cells in matrine-treated cells compared to untreated cells.
There was also an increase in the number of necrotic cells in the matrine-treated group when compared to untreated cells.
Matrine treatment resulted in increased levels of caspase-3 and Bax and decreased levels of Bcl-2.
Our data suggest that matrine inhibits the proliferation of androgen-independent prostate cancer cells by causing G0/G1 cell cycle arrest and promoting apoptosis.
Matrine‑induced apoptosis was mediated by downregulation of Bcl-2/Bax ratios and upregulation of caspase-3 levels.
Based on our data, we suggest that matrine may be a novel addition to the current arsenal of strategies used to treat androgen-independent prostate cancer.
PMID: 22159401
Keratinocyte growth factor induces matrix metalloproteinase-9 expression and correlates with venous invasion in pancreatic cancer.
Keratinocyte growth factor (KGF), also known as fibroblast growth factor-7, and KGF receptor (KGFR) play important roles in the growth of epithelial cells and are overexpressed in a variety of malignant epithelial tumors, including pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC).
We previously reported that co-expression of KGF and KGFR in PDAC is associated with venous invasion, enhanced vascular endothelial growth factor A expression and poor prognosis.
Matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) is known to participate in the degradation of type IV collagen, which is a primary component of extracellular matrices in the vascular basement membrane.
In the present study, we examined the expression and roles of KGF, KGFR and MMP-9 in human PDAC cell lines and tissues.
Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis demonstrated the expression of MMP-9 mRNA in all eight PDAC cell lines.
KGF, KGFR and MMP-9 were, respectively, expressed in 27 (43%), 23 (37%) and 35 (56%) of 63 patients.
Each expression of KGF, KGFR or MMP-9 correlated positively with venous invasion.
Furthermore, expression of KGF or MMP-9 correlated positively with liver metastasis.
KGF-positive cases exhibited shorter survival than KGF-negative cases, while KGFR and MMP-9 expression were unrelated to prognosis.
Administration of recombinant human KGF increased MMP-9 expression in PDAC cells, while transient transfection with short hairpin RNAs targeting KGF transcripts reduced MMP-9 expression in PDAC cells.
Moreover, recombinant human KGF significantly enhanced migration and invasion of PDAC cells.
These findings suggest that KGF and KGFR promote venous invasion via MMP-9 in PDAC, and closely correlate with liver metastasis.
The KGF/KGFR pathway may be a critical therapeutic target for PDAC metastasis.
PMID: 22159329
Marine fungal metabolite 1386A alters the microRNA profile in MCF-7 breast cancer cells.
Marine fungal metabolite 1386A is a newly identified small molecular compound extracted from the mangrove fungus 1386A in the South China Sea.
Preliminary experiments have demonstrated its amazing cytotoxity to cancer cells, while the mechanism remains poorly understood.
microRNAs (miRNAs) are a newly identified class of small regulatory RNAs which play an important role in gene regulation at the post-transcriptional level.
They usually function as oncogenes or tumor suppressors and are related to drug sensitivity and resistance.
We aimed to test the hypothesis that the potential antineoplastic compound, 1386A, alters the miRNA profile in MCF-7 and whether its unknown mechanism may be predicted by analysis of the altered miRNA profile.
Cell proliferation was analyzed by MTT assay.
The alteration of the miRNA expression profile of MCF-7 cells was investigated using advanced microarray technology.
Silico analysis using TargetScan was used to predict the putative targeted transcripts encoding the dysregulated miRNAs.
1386A inhibited MCF-7 cell proliferation in a time- and dose-dependent manner (the IC50 value at 48 h was 17.1 µmol/l).
1386A (17.1 µmol/l) significantly altered the global miRNA expression profile of the MCF-7 cells at 48 h.
Forty-five miRNAs were differentially expressed in MCF-7 cells.
Target prediction suggested that these miRNAs potentially target many oncogenes and tumor-suppressor genes associated with cancer development, progression and metastasis.
The promising antineoplastic compound marine fungal metabolite 1386A alters the miRNA profiles of MCF-7 breast cancer cells.
Analyzing the alteration of the miRNA profile caused by this potential antineoplastic compound may help to predict the unknown mechanism of 1386A.
PMID: 22159228
Effects of S-adenosylmethionine and methylthioadenosine on inflammation-induced colon cancer in mice.
Chronic inflammation is an underlying risk factor for colon cancer.
Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) plays a critical role in the development of inflammation-induced colon cancer in a mouse model.
S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe) and its metabolite methylthioadenosine (MTA) can inhibit lipopolysaccharide-induced TNF-α expression in macrophages.
The aim of this work was to examine whether SAMe and MTA are effective in preventing inflammation-induced colon cancer and if so identify signaling pathways affected.
Balb/c mice were treated with azoxymethane (AOM) and dextran sulfate sodium to induce colon cancer.
Two days after AOM treatment, mice were divided into three groups: vehicle control, SAMe or MTA.
Tumor load, histology, immunohistochemistry, gene and protein expression were determined.
SAMe and MTA treatment reduced tumor load by ∼40%.
Both treatments raised SAMe and MTA levels but MTA also raised S-adenosylhomocysteine levels.
MTA treatment prevented the induction of many genes known to play pathogenetic roles in this model except for TNF-α and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS).
SAMe also had no effect on TNF-α or iNOS and was less inhibitory than MTA on the other genes.
In vivo, both treatments induced apoptosis but inhibited proliferation, β-catenin, nuclear factor kappa B activation and interleukin (IL) 6 signaling.
Effect of SAMe and MTA on IL-6 signaling was examined using Colo 205 colon cancer cells.
In these cells, SAMe and MTA inhibited IL-6-induced IL-10 expression.
MTA also inhibited IL-10 transcription and signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 activation.
In conclusion, SAMe and MTA reduced inflammation-induced colon cancer and inhibited several pathways important in colon carcinogenesis.
PMID: 22159147
Mucin 16 is a functional selectin ligand on pancreatic cancer cells.
Selectins promote metastasis by mediating specific interactions between selectin ligands on tumor cells and selectin-expressing host cells in the microvasculature.
Using affinity chromatography in conjunction with tandem mass spectrometry and bioinformatics tools, we identified mucin 16 (MUC16) as a novel selectin ligand expressed by metastatic pancreatic cancer cells.
While up-regulated in many pancreatic cancers, the biological function of sialofucosylated MUC16 has yet to be fully elucidated.
To address this, we employed blot rolling and cell-free flow-based adhesion assays using MUC16 immunopurified from pancreatic cancer cells and found that it efficiently binds E- and L- but not P-selectin.
The selectin-binding determinants are sialofucosylated structures displayed on O- and N-linked glycans.
Silencing MUC16 expression by RNAi markedly reduces pancreatic cancer cell binding to E- and L-selectin under flow.
These findings provide a novel integrated perspective on the enhanced metastatic potential associated with MUC16 overexpression and the role of selectins in metastasis.-Chen, S.-H., Dallas, M.
R., Balzer, E.
M., Konstantopoulos, K.
Mucin 16 is a functional selectin ligand on pancreatic cancer cells.
PMID: 22158988
Whole-exome sequencing of neoplastic cysts of the pancreas reveals recurrent mutations in components of ubiquitin-dependent pathways.
More than 2% of adults harbor a pancreatic cyst, a subset of which progresses to invasive lesions with lethal consequences.
To assess the genomic landscapes of neoplastic cysts of the pancreas, we determined the exomic sequences of DNA from the neoplastic epithelium of eight surgically resected cysts of each of the major neoplastic cyst types: serous cystadenomas (SCAs), intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs), mucinous cystic neoplasms (MCNs), and solid pseudopapillary neoplasms (SPNs).
SPNs are low-grade malignancies, and IPMNs and MCNs, but not SCAs, have the capacity to progress to cancer.
We found that SCAs, IPMNs, MCNs, and SPNs contained 10 ± 4.6, 27 ± 12, 16 ± 7.6, and 2.9 ± 2.1 somatic mutations per tumor, respectively.
Among the mutations identified, E3 ubiquitin ligase components were of particular note.
Four of the eight SCAs contained mutations of the von Hippel-Lindau gene (VHL), a key component of the VHL ubiquitin ligase complex that has previously been associated with renal cell carcinomas, SCAs, and other neoplasms.
Six of the eight IPMNs and three of the eight MCNs harbored mutations of RNF43, a gene coding for a protein with intrinsic E3 ubiquitin ligase activity that has not previously been found to be genetically altered in any human cancer.
The preponderance of inactivating mutations in RNF43 unequivocally establish it as a suppressor of both IPMNs and MCNs.
SPNs contained remarkably few genetic alterations but always contained mutations of CTNNB1, previously demonstrated to inhibit degradation of the encoded protein (β-catenin) by E3 ubiquitin ligases.
These results highlight the essential role of ubiquitin ligases in these neoplasms and have important implications for the diagnosis and treatment of patients with cystic tumors.
PMID: 22158540
Genome-wide association study identifies five loci associated with susceptibility to pancreatic cancer in Chinese populations.
Pancreatic cancer has the lowest survival rate among human cancers, and there are no effective markers for its screening and early diagnosis.
To identify genetic susceptibility markers for this cancer, we carried out a genome-wide association study on 981 individuals with pancreatic cancer (cases) and 1,991 cancer-free controls of Chinese descent using 666,141 autosomal SNPs.
Promising associations were replicated in an additional 2,603 pancreatic cancer cases and 2,877 controls recruited from 25 hospitals in 16 provinces or cities in China.
We identified five new susceptibility loci at chromosomes 21q21.3, 5p13.1, 21q22.3, 22q13.32 and 10q26.11 (P = 2.24 × 10(-13) to P = 4.18 × 10(-10)) in addition to 13q22.1 previously reported in populations of European ancestry.
These results advance our understanding of the development of pancreatic cancer and highlight potential targets for the prevention or treatment of this cancer.
PMID: 22158074
Serum HSP70: A Novel Biomarker for Early Detection of Pancreatic Cancer.
OBJECTIVES: Heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) is overexpressed in human pancreatic cancer cell lines.
To determine if serum HSP70 levels are elevated in patients with pancreatic cancer and can function as a biomarker for early detection of pancreatic cancer.
METHODS: Study subjects were divided into 3 groups: histologically proven pancreatic cancer (PC; n = 23), chronic pancreatitis (CP; n = 12), and matched normal control subjects (C; n = 10).
Serum HSP70 levels were determined using a novel immunoelectrophoresis method developed and validated by the authors.
Significance of difference between the groups was analyzed with analysis of variance (ANOVA).
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was performed to discriminate patients with pancreatic cancer from normal controls.
RESULTS: The mean ± SE serum HSP70 levels in the PC, CP, and C groups were 1.68 ± 0.083 ng/mL, 0.40 ± 0.057 ng/mL, and 0.04 ng/mL, respectively.
Serum HSP70 levels in the PC group were significantly higher compared with either the CP or C groups (P < 0.01).
The sensitivity and specificity of elevated serum HSP70 in the PC group was 74% and 90%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Serum HSP70 levels are significantly increased in patients with pancreatic cancer and may be useful as an additional biomarker for the detection of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22158072
Circulating CD4+CD25+ Regulatory T Cells in Patients With Pancreatic Cancer.
OBJECTIVES: Regulatory T cells (Treg) can inhibit immune responses mediated by T cells.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the prevalence of Treg in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients with pancreatic cancers in relation to their clinical outcomes.
METHODS: Among a total of 100 patients with ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas, 40 underwent pancreatectomy and 60 had unresectable disease.
Their peripheral blood mononuclear cells were evaluated to determine the proportion of CD4CD25 (FoxP3) T cells, as a percentage of the total CD4 cells, by flow cytometric analysis.
RESULTS: The percentage of Treg in the patients with pancreatic cancer was significantly lower than that in the healthy volunteers (P = 0.048), and the patients who underwent surgical resection had lower Treg levels than those with unresectable disease (P = 0.040).
Patients in the resected group with a higher percentage of Treg survived longer (P = 0.021).
Treg in patients who remained disease free at postoperative 12 months significantly decreased compared to that of the postoperative period (P = 0.009).
CONCLUSION: A relative increase in Treg may be related to immunosuppression and tumor progression in patients with pancreatic cancer.
The immunological monitoring of Treg may be useful to predict the prognosis for patients with pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22158071
Inhibition of Glycogen Phosphorylation Induces Changes in Cellular Proteome and Signaling Pathways in MIA Pancreatic Cancer Cells.
OBJECTIVES: Novel quantitative proteomic approaches were used to study the effects of inhibition of glycogen phosphorylase on proteome and signaling pathways in MIA PaCa-2 pancreatic cancer cells.
METHODS: We performed quantitative proteomic analysis in MIA PaCa-2 cancer cells treated with a stratified dose of CP-320626 (5-chloro-1H-indole-2-carboxylic acid [1-(4-fuorobenzyl)-2-(4-hydroxypiperidin-1-yl)-2 oxoethyl] amide) (25, 50, and 100 μM).
The effect of metabolic inhibition on cellular protein turnover dynamics was also studied using the modified SILAC (stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture) method.
RESULTS: A total of 22 protein spots and 4 phosphoprotein spots were quantitatively analyzed.
We found that dynamic expression of total proteins and phosphoproteins was significantly changed in MIA PaCa-2 cells treated with an incremental dose of CP-320626.
Functional analyses suggested that most of the proteins differentially expressed were in the pathways of mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase and tumor necrosis factor α/nuclear factor κB.
CONCLUSIONS: Signaling pathways and metabolic pathways share many common cofactors and substrates forming an extended metabolic network.
The restriction of substrate through 1 pathway such as inhibition of glycogen phosphorylation induces pervasive metabolomic and proteomic changes manifested in protein synthesis, breakdown, and posttranslational modification of signaling molecules.
Our results suggest that quantitative proteomic is an important approach to understand the interaction between metabolism and signaling pathways.
PMID: 22158070
Detection of Baicalin Metabolites Baicalein and Oroxylin-A in Mouse Pancreas and Pancreatic Xenografts.
OBJECTIVES: Scutellaria baicalensis has been a subject of research interest due to its potential multiple therapeutic benefits.
This study was to examine the distribution of baicalein, wogonin, oroxylin A and their glucuronide/sulfate-conjugated metabolites in plasma, colon, small intestine, lung, liver, pancreas, kidney, and prostate tissues and in pancreatic tumor in a xenograft animal model.
In addition, we examined metabolic stability of baicalin in these tissues.
METHODS: A mouse xenograft model was prepared by injection of 3 × 10 human pancreatic cancer MiaPaCa-2 cells subcutaneously into nude mice.
Mice were randomly allocated to control diet (AIN-76A) and 1% S.
baicalensis diet (n = 8 per group) for 13 weeks.
Levels of baicalein, wogonin, oroxylin A, and their conjugates in mouse tissues were measured by high-pressure liquid chromatography after enzymatic hydrolysis and then extraction.
RESULTS: A substantial amount of baicalin (34%-63%) was methylated to oroxylin A and its conjugates in various organs during absorption.
Whereas plasma contained predominantly conjugates of baicalein, wogonin, and oroxylin A, both aglycones and conjugates were found in all other tissues investigated and in tumor.
CONCLUSIONS: Substantial accumulation of bioactive metabolites are found in target tissues, suggesting strong potential for S.
baicalensis use as a preventive or adjuvant supplement for pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22158068
Pancreatoduodenectomy Following Neoadjuvant Chemoradiation Therapy in Uncinate Process Pancreatic Cancer.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to delineate surgical outcomes of pancreatoduodenectomy following neoadjuvant concurrent chemoradiation therapy (CCRT) in uncinate process pancreatic cancer (UPC).
METHODS: We reviewed 97 patients with resected usual pancreatic head cancer (PHC) and UPC and analyzed clinicopathologic characteristics and survival outcomes of PHC and UPC with a review of the reported literature regarding UPC.
RESULTS: Twenty-five patients (27.8%) had UPC, and 72 patients had PHC.
Pylorus-preserving pancreatoduodenectomy was performed in 67 patients (69.1%) and conventional pancreatoduodenectomy in 28 patients (28.9%), and 2 patients needed total pancreatectomies.
When comparing UPCs with PHCs, less frequent jaundice (P = 0.009) and more advanced stages of cancers at the time of diagnosis (linear-to-linear association, P = 0.03) were found in UPCs, and CCRT was administered more frequently in UPCs (P = 0.013).
Survival outcomes between PHC and UPC were similar, with median survival rates of 25.9 and 30.5 months, respectively (P = 0.702).
In addition, disease-free survival was similar between the 2 groups (15.6 and 15.2 months, respectively; P = 0.4503).
Our oncologic outcome of pancreatectomy for UPC is likely to be more acceptable compared with those previously reported in the literature.
CONCLUSIONS: Although UPCs are found in relatively advanced clinical stages, favorable oncologic outcomes may be obtained by pancreatectomy following preoperative CCRT.
PMID: 22158044
N-cadherin haploinsufficiency increases survival in a mouse model of pancreatic cancer.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is often detected at a late stage, hence the identification of new therapies that have potential to block tumor progression is critical for this lethal disease.
N-cadherin upregulation has been observed in many cancers including PDA, however, a causal role for this cell adhesion receptor in disease progression has yet to be defined.
The concomitant expression of oncogenic Kras(G12D) and mutant p53 (Trp53(R172H)) in the murine pancreas results in metastatic PDA that recapitulates the cognate features of human pancreatic cancer providing an excellent animal model to identify genes required for tumor progression.
Here we determine the consequences of genetically manipulating N-cadherin expression in a mouse model of PDA.
Remarkably, mice with reduced N-cadherin expression (that is, Ncad(-/+)) survived 25% longer (177 vs 142 days, P<0.05) than animals expressing two wild-type N-cadherin (Cdh2) alleles.
The survival benefit is likely due to a cumulative effect of N-cadherin's role in different aspects of tumorigenesis including tumor-cell survival, growth, migration and invasion.
Interestingly, reduced hedgehog signaling may contribute to the better prognosis for the Ncad(-/+) mice.
Moreover, the matrix metalloproteinase MMP-7, associated with poor prognosis in PDA, was reduced in Ncad(-/+) tumors.
Finally, Ncad(-/+) tumor cells exhibited decreased FGF-stimulated ERK1/2 activation consistent with N-cadherin's ability to promote FGFR signaling.
These data support a critical role for N-cadherin in PDA and its potential prognostic value.
Additionally, this study provides in vivo genetic evidence that the cell-surface protein N-cadherin represents a promising therapeutic target for the treatment of pancreatic cancer.Oncogene advance online publication, 12 December 2011; doi:10.1038/onc.2011.574.
PMID: 22157553
The changing paradigm of treating pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors.
PMID: 22157328
Cathepsin B promotes the progression of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma in mice.
ObjectiveThe lysosomal protease cathepsin B is upregulated in human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) and represents a potential therapeutic target.
Loss of cathepsin B delays tumour progression in mouse models of islet, mammary and intestinal carcinoma and decreases invasion and metastasis.
This study examines the role of cathepsin B in the initiation, progression and metastasis of PDA.MethodsCathepsin B germline knockout mice were crossed with animals expressing an endogenous Kras(G12D) allele in the pancreas, and mice were aged to evaluate the role of cathepsin B in pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN).
A survival study was also performed with mice carrying an additional heterozygous conditional Trp53(R172H) allele.
Cell lines derived from tumours were used to investigate the role of cathepsin B in vitro, and subcutaneous allografts investigated the cell autonomous and non-cell autonomous roles of cathepsin B in pancreatic cancer.ResultsConstitutive cathepsin B loss resulted in delayed progression of both PanIN and PDA and a significant survival advantage in mice.
Cathepsin B-deficient PDA cells and PanIN showed decreased proliferation and mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase signalling.
The reconstitution of deficient cells with cathepsin B reversed these findings, which correlated with decreased levels of the active forms of the related protease cathepsin L.
Conversely, acute ablation of cathepsin L activated the MAP kinase cascade in PDA cells.ConclusionsThese results confirm that cathepsin B plays an important cell autonomous role in the progression of PDA and suggest that the regulation of cathepsin L by cathepsin B may be a means of stimulating cell proliferation in neoplasia.
PMID: 22157216
Phase II Study of Gemcitabine in Combination With Regional Arterial Infusion of Nafamostat Mesilate for Advanced Pancreatic Cancer.
PURPOSE:: To evaluate the efficacy of regional arterial infusion of the synthetic serine protease inhibitor nafamostat mesilate combined with gemcitabine for the treatment of patients with unresectable locally advanced or metastatic pancreatic cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS:: A single-arm, single center, institutional review board-approved phase II trial was conducted.
Thirty-five of 38 consecutive patients were included in the study.
Patients received nafamostat mesilate (4.8 mg/kg continuous regional arterial infusion) with gemcitabine (1000 mg/m intravenously) on days 1, 8, and 15.
This treatment was repeated at 28-day intervals.
The primary endpoints were to evaluate overall survival and 1-year survival rate.
The secondary endpoints were to assess therapeutic response and clinical benefit response.
Overall survival times were estimated by the Kaplan-Meier survival analysis.
RESULTS:: The median survival time was 10.0 months, and the 1-year survival rate was 40.0%.
The response rate and disease control rate were 17.1% and 88.6%, respectively.
A fraction of 25% of the patients who required opioids for cancer-related pain could reduce their opioid intake, and 37.1% of the patients showed healthy weight gain.
Among the patients with metastatic pancreatic cancer, the median survival time was 9.0 months, and the 1-year survival rate was 32.0%.
The proposed regimen offers an economic advantage compared with recent therapy regimens that have shown significant improvements in median survival over standard chemotherapy with gemcitabine.
CONCLUSIONS:: An alternative regimen for unresectable pancreatic cancer, especially for metastatic pancreatic cancer, is proposed based on acceptable survival time, clinical benefit, and cost advantage.
PMID: 22156924
Angiogenesis in synchronous and metachronous colorectal liver metastases: the liver as a permissive soil.
Resection of a primary colorectal carcinoma (CRC) can be accompanied by rapid outgrowth of liver metastases, suggesting a role for angiogenesis.
The aim of this study is to investigate whether the presence of a primary CRC is associated with changes in angiogenic status and proliferation/apoptotic rate in synchronous liver metastases and/or adjacent liver parenchyma.
Gene expression and localization of CD31, HIF-1α, members of the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and Angiopoietin (Ang) system were studied using qRT-PCR and immunohistochemistry in colorectal liver metastases and nontumorous-adjacent liver parenchyma.
Proliferation and apoptotic rate were quantified.
Three groups of patients were included: (1) simultaneous resection of synchronous liver metastases and primary tumor (SS-group), (2) resection of synchronous liver metastases 3 to 12 months after resection of the primary tumor [late synchronous (LS-group)], and (3) resection of metachronous metastases >14 months after resection of the primary tumor (M-group).
In all 3 groups a higher expression of the angiogenic factors was encountered in adjacent liver parenchyma as compared to the metastases.
VEGFR-2 gene expression was abundant in adjacent liver parenchyma in all 3 groups.
VEGF-A and VEGFR-1 were prominent in adjacent parenchyma in the SS-group.
The SS-group showed the highest Ang-2/Ang-1 ratio both in the metastases and the adjacent liver.
This was accompanied by a high turnover of tumor cells.
In the presence of the primary tumor, the liver parenchyma adjacent to the synchronous liver metastases provides an angiogenic prosperous environment for metastatic tumor growth.
PMID: 22156923
Correlation between radiographic classification and pathological grade of portal vein wall invasion in pancreatic head cancer.
A retrospective study was performed to clarify the correlation between radiographic type of portal vein (PV) invasion and pathological grade of PV wall invasion, and their correlation with postoperative prognosis.
In many patients with pancreatic cancer, PV resection is necessary to increase resectability and obtain cancer-free margins.
We analyzed 671 patients who had undergone surgery for invasive adenocarcinoma of the pancreas between July 1981 and June 2010.
Radiographic types of PV invasion of pancreatic head cancer were classified into A (normal), B (unilateral narrowing), C (bilateral narrowing), or D (complete obstruction with collateral veins), by portography or computed tomography.
Pathological grades of PV wall invasion were classified as 0 (no invasion), 1 (tunica adventitia), 2 (tunica media), or 3 (tunica intima).
Four hundred and sixty-three patients underwent resection, and PV resection was performed in 297.
Combined arterial vessel resection was performed in 16 cases.
No significant difference in operative mortality was observed between PV preservation (0.6%) and PV-only resection (2.1%), and no operative deaths occurred after 1999.
Radiographic classification of PV invasion correlated with incidence of pathological PV wall invasion.
In pancreatic head carcinoma, no pathological PV wall invasion was observed in type A (n = 111).
Pathological PV invasion was observed in 51% of type B (42/82), 74% of type C (72/97), and 93% of type D (63/68).
Long-term survival (>5 years) was observed in types A and B, and grades 0 and 1 subgroups.
Pancreatectomy with PV resection can be performed safely.
Even in radiographic classification type B, pathological PV wall invasion was observed in 51% of patients.
Long-term survival was observed in types A and B, and grades 0 and 1.
PMID: 22156621
Phase II open-label study of erlotinib in combination with gemcitabine in unresectable and/or metastatic adenocarcinoma of the pancreas: relationship between skin rash and survival (Pantar study).
BACKGROUND: Skin rash is an adverse event which might be associated with longer survival in patients treated with epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
The aim of this nonrandomised phase II clinical trial is to prospectively evaluate the relationship between skin rash and overall survival (OS) in advanced/metastatic pancreatic cancer treated with erlotinib plus gemcitabine.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients were given gemcitabine (1000 mg/m(2)/week, 3 weeks every 4 weeks) plus erlotinib (100 mg/day orally continuously) until disease progression/unacceptable toxicity.
The primary end point was OS.
RESULTS: A total of 153 eligible patients were enrolled (grade ≥ 2 rash, 25%; grade < 2 rash, 75%).
OS was longer in patients with grade ≥2 rash versus grade <2 (11 versus 5 months; P < 0.001).
Progression-free survival was longer in patients with grade ≥2 rash versus grade <2 (6 versus 3 months; P < 0.001) and shorter in those without rash versus grade 1 (2 versus 4 months; P = 0.005) or grade ≥2 (2 versus 6 months; P < 0.001).
Patients with grade ≥2 rash showed higher rates of overall response (21% versus 7%; P < 0.05) and disease control (84% versus 43%; P < 0.05) versus grade <2.
CONCLUSIONS: This study prospectively confirms the relationship between rash and longer OS in unresectable locally advanced/metastatic pancreatic cancer treated with erlotinib plus gemcitabine.
PMID: 22156295
Whole-exome sequencing of human pancreatic cancers and characterization of genomic instability caused by MLH1 haploinsufficiency and complete deficiency.
Whole-exome sequencing (Exome-seq) has been successfully applied in several recent studies.
We here sequenced the exomes of 15 pancreatic tumor cell lines and their matched normal samples.
We captured 162,073 exons of 16,954 genes and sequenced the targeted regions to a mean coverage of 56-fold.
This study identified a total of 1517 somatic mutations and validated 934 mutations by transcriptome sequencing.
We detected recurrent mutations in 56 genes.
Among them, 41 have not been described.
The mutation rates varied widely among cell lines.
The diversity of the mutation rates was significantly correlated with the distinct MLH1 copy-number status.
Exome-seq revealed intensive genomic instability in a cell line with MLH1 homozygous deletion, indicated by a dramatically elevated rate of somatic substitutions, small insertions/deletions (indels), as well as indels in microsatellites.
Notably, we found that MLH1 expression was decreased by nearly half in cell lines with an allelic loss of MLH1.
While these cell lines were negative in conventional microsatellite instability assay, they showed a 10.5-fold increase in the rate of somatic indels, e.g., truncating indels in TP53 and TGFBR2, indicating MLH1 haploinsufficiency in the correction of DNA indel errors.
We further analyzed the exomes of 15 renal cell carcinomas and confirmed MLH1 haploinsufficiency.
We observed a much higher rate of indel mutations in the affected cases and identified recurrent truncating indels in several cancer genes such as VHL, PBRM1, and JARID1C.
Together, our data suggest that MLH1 hemizygous deletion, through increasing the rate of indel mutations, could drive the development and progression of sporadic cancers.
PMID: 22155851
Total Pancreatectomy with En Bloc Celiac Axis Resection for a Pancreatic Adenocarcinoma Involving both the Gastroduodenal Artery and the Celiac Artery.
A pancreatic adenocarcinoma involving both the celiac artery and the gastroduodenal artery is often considered to be unresectable because the simultaneous division of both arteries may result in an acute severe ischemia of the liver and the stomach.
We report here a case of total pancreatectomy with en bloc celiac axis resection for a 61-year-old female with a pancreatic adenocarcinoma involving both the celiac artery and the gastroduodenal artery.
The patient had a replaced right hepatic artery from the superior mesenteric artery and a replaced left hepatic artery from the left gastric artery, which was directly arising from the aorta.
Preserving these collateral arteries, neither hepatic artery reconstruction nor total gastrectomy was needed after resection.
The reported incidence of similar arterial anatomy was only 0.2% but the precise evaluation of arterial anatomy is important to offer a chance of curative resection for patients with usually unresectable locally advanced pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22155850
Prediction of a Side Effect and Efficacy of Adjuvant Chemotherapy with Gemcitabine for Post Operative Patient of Pancreatic Cancer by a Genetic Polymorphism Analysis.
Background/Aims: Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of the genes for ATP-binding cassette transporters is related to the side effects of anticancer drugs and that of drug metabolism-related enzyme genes is involved in the activation of gemcitabine (GEM).
Methodology: Forty eight patients treated with adjuvant GEM chemotherapy after pancreatic cancer resection was examined for the SNP of multidrug-resistance 1 (MDR1) 2677, MDR1 3435, breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) 421, ribonucleotide reductase M1 (RRM1)(-)524, RRM1(-)37 and deoxycytidine deaminase (CDA) 208.
We divided the patients according to normal group: patients homozygous for a wild-type allele or heterozygous for a mutant allele and mutant group: those homozygous for a mutant allele.
Both groups were compared regarding the outcome and the occurrence and severity of side effects.
Results: MDR1 2677, MDR1 3435, BCRP421, RRM1(-) 524, RRM1(-) 37 and CDA mutant groups comprised 37.5, 31.3, 0, 12.5, 4.2 and 4.2%, respectively.
The occurrence of >G3 side effects was the most frequent in the MDR1 2677 mutant group at 39%.
The disease-free survival and overall survival tended to be longer in the MDR1 2677 mutant group.
Conclusions: A correlation between the SNP of MDR1 2677 and drug response in patients receiving GEM chemotherapy.
PMID: 22155849
Comparison of Multidetector CT and Endoscopic Ultrasonography in Malignant Pancreatic Mass Lesions.
Background/Aims: Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) has been shown to be superior to conventional CT in detecting and staging pancreatic cancer.
We conducted a prospective trial to compare EUS and MDCT, in discriminating benign/malignant, in determining local and vascular invasion of a suspected pancreatic cancer and deciding its resectability.
Methodology: The study was performed at the Gastroenterology Department of Izmir Ataturk Training and Research Hospital, from June 2009 to June 2010, all patients with suspected pancreatic and periampullary tumors referred to our department were enrolled.
A total of 56 patients were evaluated at the beginning.
Five patients having distal CBD tumor (n=2), gallbladder tumor (n=1) and papillary tumor (n=2) were excluded from the study.
Analysis was done for the remaining 51 patients.
Results: For the diagnosis of resectability/unresectability, EUS alone demonstrated a definite role in 4 (9%) of the 43 patients in confirming surgical and pathologic results and MDCT alone demonstrated a definite role in 6 (14%) of the 43 patients in confirming their results.
An accurate diagnostic decision regarding resectability/unresectability was accomplished in 27 (63%) patients with EUS and MDCT.
Conclusions: While MDCT is clinically quite effective, in terms of a correct resectability/unresectability decision, EUS should also be used.
PMID: 22155636
Dysregulation of Wnt/β-Catenin Signaling in Gastrointestinal Cancers.
Aberrant Wnt/β-catenin signaling is widely implicated in numerous malignancies, including cancers of the gastrointestinal tract.
Dysregulation of signaling is traditionally attributed to mutations in Axin, adenomatous polyposis coli, and β-catenin that lead to constitutive hyperactivation of the pathway.
However, Wnt/β-catenin signaling is also modulated through various other mechanisms in cancer, including cross talk with other altered signaling pathways.
A more complex view of Wnt/β-catenin signaling and its role in gastrointestinal cancers is now emerging as divergent phenotypic outcomes are found to be dictated by temporospatial context and relative levels of pathway activation.
This review summarizes the dysregulation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling in colorectal carcinoma, hepatocellular carcinoma, and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, with particular emphasis on the latter two.
We conclude by addressing some of the major challenges faced in attempting to target the pathway in the clinic.
PMID: 22153808
Local control of experimental malignant pancreatic tumors by treatment with a combination of chemotherapy and intratumoral 224radium-loaded wires releasing alpha-emitting atoms.
We developed (224)Ra-loaded wires that when inserted into solid tumors, release radioactive atoms that spread in the tumor and irradiate it effectively with alpha particles (diffusing alpha-emitters radiation therapy [DaRT]).
In this study, we tested the ability of intratumoral (224)Ra-loaded wires to control the local growth of pancreatic tumors and the enhancement of this effect by chemotherapy.
Pancreatic mouse tumors (Panc02) were treated with (224)Ra-loaded wire(s) with or without gemcitabine.
The tumor size and survival were monitored, and autoradiography was performed to evaluate the spread of radioactive atoms inside the tumor.
Mouse and human pancreatic cancer cells, irradiated in vitro by alpha particles with or without chemotherapy, were evaluated for cell growth inhibition.
The insertion of (224)Ra-loaded wires into pancreatic tumors in combination with gemcitabine achieved significant local control and was superior to each treatment alone.
A dosimetric analysis showed the spread of radioactive atoms in the tumor around the wires.
Alpha particles combined with gemcitabine or 5-FU killed mouse and human cells in vitro better than each treatment alone.
DaRT in combination with gemcitabine was proven effective against pancreatic tumors in vivo and in vitro, and the process may be applicable as a palliative treatment for patients with pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22151922
Type 1 autoimmune pancreatitis.
Before the concept of autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP) was established, this form of pancreatitis had been recognized as lymphoplasmacytic sclerosing pancreatitis or non-alcoholic duct destructive chronic pancreatitis based on unique histological features.
With the discovery in 2001 that serum IgG4 concentrations are specifically elevated in AIP patients, this emerging entity has been more widely accepted.
Classical cases of AIP are now called type 1 as another distinct subtype (type 2 AIP) has been identified.
Type 1 AIP, which accounts for 2% of chronic pancreatitis cases, predominantly affects adult males.
Patients usually present with obstructive jaundice due to enlargement of the pancreatic head or thickening of the lower bile duct wall.
Pancreatic cancer is the leading differential diagnosis for which serological, imaging, and histological examinations need to be considered.
Serologically, an elevated level of IgG4 is the most sensitive and specific finding.
Imaging features include irregular narrowing of the pancreatic duct, diffuse or focal enlargement of the pancreas, a peri-pancreatic capsule-like rim, and enhancement at the late phase of contrast-enhanced images.
Biopsy or surgical specimens show diffuse lymphoplasmacytic infiltration containing many IgG4+ plasma cells, storiform fibrosis, and obliterative phlebitis.
A dramatic response to steroid therapy is another characteristic, and serological or radiological effects are normally identified within the first 2 or 3 weeks.
Type 1 AIP is estimated as a pancreatic manifestation of systemic IgG4-related disease based on the fact that synchronous or metachronous lesions can develop in multiple organs (e.g.
bile duct, salivary/lacrimal glands, retroperitoneum, artery, lung, and kidney) and those lesions are histologically identical irrespective of the organ of origin.
Several potential autoantigens have been identified so far.
A Th2-dominant immune reaction and the activation of regulatory T-cells are assumed to be involved in the underlying immune reaction.
IgG4 antibodies have two unique biological functions, Fab-arm exchange and a rheumatoid factor-like activity, both of which may play immune-defensive roles.
However, the exact role of IgG4 in this disease still remains to be clarified.
It seems important to recognize this unique entity given that the disease is treatable with steroids.
PMID: 22149993
Immunotherapy synergizes with chemotherapy targeting pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22149739
Serum mesothelin and megakaryocyte potentiating factor in pancreatic and biliary cancers.
Abstract Background: Tumor mesothelin overexpression is present in different malignancies, including the majority of patients with pancreatic or biliary cancers.
The objective of this study was to evaluate the use of shed serum mesothelin and megakaryocyte potentiating factor (MPF) concentrations as biomarkers for these cancers.
Methods: A total of 151 individuals, divided into five groups, were retrospectively analyzed: healthy donors (n=15), patients with benign non-pancreatic conditions (n=52), benign pancreatic conditions (n=33), biliary carcinoma (n=9), and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (n=42).
Mesothelin and MPF concentrations were measured in serum with the Mesomark(TM) and Human MPF ELISA, respectively.
Results: Mesothelin and MPF concentrations did not signifi-c-antly differ among the five individual participant groups (p=0.34, p=0.33, respectively), nor did any other combination and pair-wise comparison of the participant groups demonstrated a significant difference in biomarker concentrations.
In patients with pancreatic cancer, mesothelin or MPF concentrations were not associated with tumor stage (p=0.87, p=0.48, respectively) or differentiation grade (p=0.73, p=0.52, respectively).
Conclusions: Serum mesothelin and MPF concentrations, measured with standard available ELISAs, were not specific for benign or pancreatic disease.
Both biomarkers were not elevated in patients with pancreatic or biliary cancers, and consequently do not appear to be useful biomarkers for these malignancies.
PMID: 22149586
Self-expandable metal stents in malignant biliary obstruction.
Malignant biliary obstruction can be due to direct tumor infiltration, extrinsic compression, adjacent inflammation, desmoplastic reaction from tumors or, more commonly, a combination of the above factors.
Pancreatic cancer is the most common cause of malignant biliary obstruction, and jaundice occurs in 70-90% of the patients during the course of the disease.
Compared with the uncovered metal stents, covered metal stents have longer patency and a lower rate of tumor ingrowth, but have a higher rate of stent migration.
To combat the occlusion and provide an antitumor effect, drug-eluting stents were developed.
A duodenal stricture complicates biliary stent placement in 10-20% of patients with distal biliary obstruction due to pancreatic cancer.
When both strictures are considered, a biliary stent can be placed either preceding or following duodenal stent placement.
Complications of self-expandable metal stents include stent occlusion, stent migration, cholecystitis and pancreatitis.
PMID: 22149585
Pancreatic cancer: an endoscopic perspective.
Pancreatic cancer continues to be a diagnostic and therapeutic challenge.
The advent of endoscopic ultrasound-guided interventions have brought about a paradigm shift in the endoscopic approach to diagnosis, treatment and palliation of this common malignancy.
The last decade has witnessed significant advances in techniques of endoscopic biliary drainage, endoluminal stenting, celiac plexus neurolysis and image-guided radiation therapy, which have transformed the scope of palliation in pancreatic cancer.
Moreover, endoscopic ultrasound-aided intratumoral delivery of fiducials, radioisotopes and chemotherapeutic agents have shown promising results and warrant further investigation.
This review summarizes the recent advances in endoscopic applications for the management of pancreatic neoplasms.
PMID: 22147975
Pancreatic metastases from renal cell carcinoma: the state of the art.
Pancreatic metastases are rare, with a reported incidence varying from 1.6% to 11% in autopsy studies of patients with advanced malignancy.
In clinical series, the frequency of pancreatic metastases ranges from 2% to 5% of all pancreatic malignant tumors.
However, the pancreas is an elective site for metastases from carcinoma of the kidney and this peculiarity has been reported by several studies.
The epidemiology, clinical presentation, and treatment of pancreatic metastases from renal cell carcinoma are known from single-institution case reports and literature reviews.
There is currently very limited experience with the surgical resection of isolated pancreatic metastasis, and the role of surgery in the management of these patients has not been clearly defined.
In fact, for many years pancreatic resections were associated with high rates of morbidity and mortality, and metastatic disease to the pancreas was considered to be a terminal-stage condition.
More recently, a significant reduction in the operative risk following major pancreatic surgery has been demonstrated, thus extending the indication for these operations to patients with metastatic disease.
PMID: 22147973
Pancreatic cancer risk variant ABO rs505922 in patients with cholangiocarcinoma.
The aim of this study was to investigate an association between the development of cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) and the ABO variant rs505922 (known to increase pancreatic cancer risk) in a large cohort of European individuals with CCA.
In total, 180 individuals with CCA and 350 CCA-free controls were included.
The ABO variant rs505922 was genotyped using a polymerase chain reaction-based assay.
Association between this single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and CCA was tested in contingency tables.
Neither allele distributions nor association tests and regression analysis provided evidence for an increased risk of CCA among carriers of the ABO variant (all P > 0.05).
Nevertheless, we documented a deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in the entire CCA cohort (P = 0.028) and for patients with intrahepatic (P = 0.037) but not extrahepatic tumor localization (P > 0.05).
The association tests did not provide evidence for a prominent role of the investigated SNP in the genetic risk of CCA.
However, Hardy-Weinberg disequilibrium in the entire cohort and the intrahepatic CCA subgroup warrants future studies investigating a potential CCA risk modulation by individual blood groups.
PMID: 22147941
A Live-Attenuated Listeria Vaccine (ANZ-100) and a Live-Attenuated Listeria Vaccine Expressing Mesothelin (CRS-207) for Advanced Cancers: Phase I Studies of Safety and Immune Induction.
PURPOSE: Listeria monocytogenes (Lm)-based vaccines stimulate both innate and adaptive immunity.
ANZ-100 is a live-attenuated Lm strain (Lm ΔactA/ΔinlB).
Uptake by phagocytes in the liver results in local inflammatory responses and activation and recruitment of natural killer (NK) and T cells, in association with increased survival of mice bearing hepatic metastases.
The Lm ΔactA/ΔinlB strain, engineered to express human mesothelin (CRS-207), a tumor-associated antigen expressed by a variety of tumors, induces mesothelin-specific T-cell responses against mesothelin-expressing murine tumors.
These two phase I studies test ANZ-100 and CRS-207 in subjects with liver metastases and mesothelin-expressing cancers, respectively.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A single intravenous injection of ANZ-100 was evaluated in a dose escalation study in subjects with liver metastases.
Nine subjects received 1 × 10(6), 3 × 10(7), or 3 × 10(8) colony-forming units (cfu).
CRS-207 was evaluated in a dose-escalation study in subjects with mesothelioma, lung, pancreatic, or ovarian cancers.
Seventeen subjects received up to 4 doses of 1 × 10(8), 3 × 10(8), 1 × 10(9), or 1 × 10(10) cfu.
RESULTS: A single infusion of ANZ-100 was well tolerated to the maximum planned dose.
Adverse events included transient laboratory abnormalities and symptoms associated with cytokine release.
Multiple infusions of CRS-207 were well tolerated up to 1 × 10(9) cfu, the determined maximum tolerated dose.
Immune activation was observed for both ANZ-100 and CRS-207 as measured by serum cytokine/chemokine levels and NK cell activation.
In the CRS-207 study, listeriolysin O and mesothelin-specific T-cell responses were detected and 37% of subjects lived ≥15 months.
CONCLUSIONS: ANZ-100 and CRS-207 administration was safe and resulted in immune activation.
Clin Cancer Res; 18(3); 858-68.
©2011 AACR.
PMID: 22147753
Antitumor Indolequinones Induced Apoptosis in Human Pancreatic Cancer Cells via Inhibition of Thioredoxin Reductase and Activation of Redox Signaling.
Indolequinones (IQs) were developed as potential antitumor agents against human pancreatic cancer.
IQs exhibited potent antitumor activity against the human pancreatic cancer cell line MIA PaCa-2 with growth inhibitory IC(50) values in the low nanomolar range.
IQs were found to induce time- and concentration-dependent apoptosis and to be potent inhibitors of thioredoxin reductase 1 (TR1) in MIA PaCa-2 cells at concentrations equivalent to those inducing growth-inhibitory effects.
The mechanism of inhibition of TR1 by the IQs was studied in detail in cell-free systems using purified enzyme.
The C-terminal selenocysteine of TR1 was characterized as the primary adduction site of the IQ-derived reactive iminium using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis.
Inhibition of TR1 by IQs in MIA PaCa-2 cells resulted in a shift of thioredoxin-1 redox state to the oxidized form and activation of the p38/c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK) mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway.
Oxidized thioredoxin is known to activate apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1, an upstream activator of p38/JNK in the MAPK signaling cascade and this was confirmed in our study providing a potential mechanism for IQ-induced apoptosis.
These data describe the redox and signaling events involved in the mechanism of growth inhibition induced by novel inhibitors of TR1 in human pancreatic cancer cells.
PMID: 22147512
Recruitment of histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 by the transcriptional repressor ZEB1 downregulates E-cadherin expression in pancreatic cancer.
Objective Pancreatic cancer is characterised by invasive tumour spread and early metastasis formation.
During epithelial-mesenchymal transition, loss of the cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin is frequent and can be caused by genetic or epigenetic modifications, recruitment of transcriptional activators/repressors or post-translational modifications.
A study was undertaken to investigate how E-cadherin expression in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma and pancreatic cancer cell lines is regulated.
Methods In 25 human pancreatic cancer resection specimens, the coding region of the E-cadherin gene (CDH1) was sequenced for somatic mutations.
The tumour samples and 11 established human pancreatic cancer cell lines were analysed by immunohistochemistry, western blot analysis, chromatin immunoprecipitation and methylation-specific PCR.
The role of specific histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) on pancreatic tumour cell migration and proliferation was studied in vitro.
Results Neither somatic mutations nor CDH1 promoter hypermethylation were found to be responsible for downregulation of E-cadherin in pancreatic cancer.
In the transcriptionally active CDH1 promoter, acetylation of histones H3 and H4 was detected whereas HDAC1 and HDAC2 were found attached only to a silent promoter.
Expression of ZEB1, a transcription factor known to recruit HDACs, was seen in E-cadherin-deficient cell lines in which ZEB1/HDAC complexes were found attached to the CDH1 promoter.
Moreover, knockdown of ZEB1 prevented HDAC from binding to the CDH1 promoter, resulting in histone acetylation and expression of E-cadherin.
HDACi treatment attenuated tumour cell migration and proliferation.
Conclusions These findings imply an important role for histone deacetylation in the downregulation of E-cadherin in human pancreatic cancer.
Recruitment of HDACs to the CDH1 promoter is regulated by the transcription factor ZEB1, and inhibition of HDACs may be a promising antitumour therapy for pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22147511
A ZEB1-HDAC pathway enters the epithelial to mesenchymal transition world in pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22147491
Raman spectroscopy as a detection and analysis tool for in vitro specific targeting of pancreatic cancer cells by EGF-conjugated, single-walled carbon nanotubes.
Single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) were covalently linked to epidermal growth factor (EGF) proteins through an esterification process that was found to be responsible for the docking of SWCNTs on the human pancreatic cancer cells (PANC-1) surface, thus providing a mechanism for the enhanced delivery and internalization of the nanotubes.
Micro Raman spectroscopy and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay were used to evaluate the delivery process and kinetics of the SWCNTs.
In vitro studies indicated that the delivery kinetics of SWCNT-EGF conjugates, at a concentration of 85 µg ml(-1) , to the PANC-1 cell surfaces was significant in the first 30 min of incubation, but reached a plateau with time in accordance with the establishment of equilibrium between the association and the dissociation of EGF with the cell receptors.
SWCNT-EGF conjugates could act as strong thermal ablation agents and could induce higher percentages of cellular death compared with the nontargeted SWCNTs alone.
Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
PMID: 22146521
The proline TP53 variant stimulates likely lymphangiogenesis in an orthotopic mouse model of pancreatic cancer.
Pancreatic cancer is a deadly disease characterised by high incidence of TP53 mutations.
Restoration of TP53 function is perceived as a highly attractive therapeutic strategy, whose effects are not well characterised.
The current work adapted an inducible strategy of stage-specific reexpression of wild-type (wt) TP53 in an in vivo orthotopic mouse model of pancreatic cancer.
The reconstitution of wt TP53 function in TP53-mutant DanG and MiaPaCa-2 cells caused G1 cell cycle arrest but no evidence of apoptosis induction.
Consistent with subcutaneous xenograft models, we found that wt TP53 reduced primary tumour growth.
Wt TP53 reexpression during early tumour growth led to significant increase in vascularisation.
This correlated with an unexpectedly high rate of micro-metastases in lymph nodes of animals with wt TP53 induction, despite the 90% decrease in median primary tumour weight.
Reexpression of wt TP53 later in tumour development did not significantly affect the number of CD31-reactive vessels, but increased lymphatic vessel density.
The increased number of lymphatic vessels and micro-metastases suggests that wt TP53 induction complexly affected the biology of different tumour constituents of pancreatic cancer.
Our observation suggests that combination of the inducible system with an orthotopic model can yield important insights into in vivo pancreatic cancer biology.
PMID: 22146176
Advanced staging laparoscopy using single-incision approach for unresectable pancreatic cancer.
As laparoscopy can detect imaging-occult metastatic lesions, it has been validated as a means of improving the assessment of tumor staging.
Although controversy exists as to whether the procedure should be used routinely or selectively in pancreatic cancer patients, patients considered for treatment protocols for locally unresectable pancreatic cancer should be staged laparoscopically before initiation of therapy.
We evaluate the feasibility and safety of advanced staging laparoscopy including peritoneal lavage cytology, laparoscopic ultrasound sonography (LUS), and LUS-guided biopsy through a single incision for locally advanced pancreatic cancer.
Staging laparoscopy was performed in 44 patients with pancreatic cancer for deciding on treatment strategy.
Our procedures included extensive peritoneal lavage of abdominal cavity for cytology, LUS for small metastasis detection, and tissue sample excision including LUS-guided biopsy.
Eleven consecutive patients were treated with a single-incision staging laparoscopy approach (SI-SL group).
The clinical parameters were compared between the SI-SL group and the multi-incision staging laparoscopy group (multi-incision group).
The mean operating time was longer and bleeding volume was less in the SI-SL group, although the differences were without statistical significance.
The conversion rates to laparotomy were 9% in the SI-SL group and 30% in the multi-incision group.
There were no severe postoperative complications.
LUS-guided biopsy revealed malignancy for 3 patients in the SI-SL group.
Advanced SI-SL is a feasible and safe alternative to the multi-incision approach for pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22145210
[Pancreatic carcinoma is still a sad chapter in medicine. Interview by J. Zamečník].
PMID: 22145009
Cytological analysis of small branch-duct intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms provides a more accurate risk assessment of malignancy than symptoms.
The Sendai guidelines for management of patients with clinically suspected intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN) recommend resection of cysts > 30 mm, a dilated main pancreatic duct (MPD) > 6 mm, a mural nodule (MN), symptoms or positive cytology.
Although sensitive, asymptomatic cysts, nonspecific symptoms, and a high threshold for positive cytology limit the specificity of the guidelines.
We have assessed the value of cytology relative to symptom for predicting malignancy in IPMNs without high-risk imaging features.
We retrospectively reviewed the clinical, radiological, and cytological data of 31 small branch-duct IPMNs without a MN.
The cytological presence of high-grade atypical epithelial cells (HGA) was considered true positive, with a corresponding histology of high-grade dysplasia or invasive carcinoma.
The performance of cytology versus symptoms was evaluated by calculating the sensitivity, specificity, negative predictive value (NPV), positive predictive value (PPV), and accuracy.
The sensitivity (0.80), specificity (0.85), and accuracy (0.84) of HGA were higher than the corresponding performance characteristics of symptoms (0.60, 0.45, and 0.48, respectively).
The NPV of no HGA on cytology was > 95%.
Cytology is a better predictor of malignancy than symptoms, for the conservative management of small branch-duct IPMNs.
Cytology contributes to a highly accurate triple negative test for malignancy in small IPMN: No dilated MPD, MN or HGA.
PMID: 22144034
Risk of cancer in patients exposed to gabapentin in two electronic medical record systems.
High doses of gabapentin were associated with pancreatic acinar cell tumors in male Wistar rats, but there is little published epidemiological data regarding gabapentin and carcinogenicity.
We explored the association between gabapentin and cancer in a US medical care program and followed up nominally significant associations in a UK primary care database.
In the US Kaiser Permanente Northern California (KPNC) health system, we performed nested case-control analyses of gabapentin and 55 cancer sites and all cancers combined using conditional logistic regression.
Up to 10 controls were matched to each case on year of birth, sex, and year of cohort entry.
No other covariates were included in models.
Only dispensings for gabapentin 2 years or more before index date were considered.
Nominally significant associations with an OR > 1.00 and p < 0.05 for three or more dispensings versus no dispensings were followed up by similar nested case-control analyses in the UK General Practice Research Database (GPRD), adjusting for potential indications for gabapentin and risk factors for the specific cancers.
The following analyses had OR > 1.00 and p < 0.05 for three or more dispensings of gabapentin versus no dispensing (2-year lag) in KPNC and were also examined in the GPRD: all cancers, breast, lung and bronchus, urinary bladder, kidney/renal pelvis, stomach, anus/anal canal/anorectum, penis, and other nervous system.
These cancers were not statistically significantly associated with gabapentin in the GPRD case-control studies (2-year lag).
The GPRD and KPNC studies did not identify a statistically significant increased risk of pancreatic cancer with more than two prescriptions of gabapentin in the 2-year lagged analyses.
The epidemiological data in a US cohort with up to 12 years of follow-up and a UK cohort with up to 15 years of follow-up do not support a carcinogenic effect of gabapentin use.
However, the confidence intervals for some analyses were wide, and an important effect cannot be confidently excluded.
PMID: 22143577
Surveillance of Pancreatic Cancer Patients after Surgical Resection.
BACKGROUND: There are no clear recommendations to guide posttreatment surveillance in patients with pancreatic cancer.
Our goal was to describe the posttreatment surveillance patterns in patients undergoing curative-intent resection for pancreatic cancer.
METHODS: We used Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER)-Medicare linked data (1992-2005) to identify CT scans and physician visits in patients with pancreatic cancer who underwent curative resection (n = 2393).
Surveillance began 90 days after surgery, and patients were followed for 2 years at 6-month intervals.
Patients were censored if they died, experienced recurrence of disease, or entered hospice.
RESULTS: A total of 2045 patients survived uncensored to the beginning of the surveillance period.
CT scan use decreased from 20.9% of patients in month 4 to 6.4% in month 27.
There was no temporal pattern in CT use to suggest regular surveillance.
Twenty-three percent of patients did not receive a CT scan in the year after surgery, increasing to 42% the second year.
Patients who underwent adjuvant therapy and patients diagnosed in later years had higher CT scan use over the surveillance periods.
Most patients visited both a primary care physician and a cancer specialist in each 6-month surveillance period.
Patients who visited cancer specialists were more likely to have any CT scan and to be scanned more frequently.
CONCLUSIONS: Current surveillance patterns after resection for pancreatic cancer reflect the lack of established guidelines, implying a need for evaluation and standardization of surveillance protocols.
The lack of a temporal pattern in CT testing suggests that most were obtained to evaluate symptoms rather than for routine surveillance.
PMID: 22143536
Expression of FHL1 in gastric cancer tissue and its correlation with the invasion and metastasis of gastric cancer.
This study was performed to analyze the expression of four and a half LIM domains 1 (FHL1) in gastric carcinoma tissue and its correlation with the clinicopathological characteristics of gastric cancer.
In addition, the role of FHL1 in the invasion and metastasis of gastric cancer cells was investigated to provide an experimental basis for future treatments of gastric cancer.
FHL1 mRNA and protein expression in gastric carcinoma and the adjacent normal gastric mucosa tissue were determined using RT-PCR and western blots.
Correlations of FHL1 expression with the incidence, progression, and clinicopathological characteristics of gastric cancer were analyzed.
Changes in the invasion and metastatic potential of MKN45 human gastric cancer cells were observed after the transient transfection with an eukaryotic expression vector containing full-length FHL1.
Expression of FHL1 mRNA in gastric carcinoma tissue was significantly lower than that in the adjacent normal tissue (P < 0.05).
FHL1 expression in gastric carcinoma tissue from patients who were positive for lymph node metastasis was significantly lower than those in patients who were negative for lymph node metastasis (P < 0.05).
Lower FHL1 expression was correlated with lower degrees of differentiation, higher TNM stages, and greater invasive potential of the gastric cancer (P < 0.05).
The FHL1 mRNA and protein expression patterns were similar in gastric cancer.
FHL1 protein expression in gastric carcinoma tissue was significantly lower than that in the surrounding normal tissue (P < 0.05).
FHL1 protein expression was significantly lower in gastric carcinoma tissue from patients who were positive for lymph node metastasis than that detected in patients with no lymph node metastasis (P < 0.05).
Lower FHL1 protein expression was correlated with lower degrees of differentiation, higher TNM stages, and greater invasive potential in gastric cancer (P < 0.05).
However, the expression of FHL1 was independent of the patient's gender, age, and tumor size (P > 0.05).
Overexpression of FHL1 in the MKN45 human gastric cancer cell line using an eukaryotic expression vector resulted in a significant reduction in the invasiveness and metastatic ability of these cells as determined using the Transwell chamber invasion assay (P < 0.05).
The decrease in or loss of FHL1 expression may be related to the incidence, progression, invasiveness, and metastatic potential of gastric cancer.
PMID: 22142827
A genome-wide association study of overall survival in pancreatic cancer patients treated with gemcitabine in CALGB 80303.
Background and Aims: Cancer and Leukemia Group B 80303 was a randomized, phase III study in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer treated with gemcitabine plus either bevacizumab or placebo.
We prospectively collected germline DNA and conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) using overall survival (OS) as the endpoint.
DNA from 351 patients was genotyped for more than 550,000 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP).
Associations between OS and SNPs were investigated using the log-linear 2-way multiplicative Cox proportional hazards model.
The subset of 294 genetically European patients was used for the primary analysis.
A nonsynonymous SNP in interleukin (IL)17F (rs763780, H161R) and an intronic SNP in strong linkage disequilibrium (rs7771466) were associated with OS using genome-wide criteria (P ≤ 10(-7)).
Median OS was significantly shorter (P = 2.61 × 10(-8)) for the rs763780 heterozygotes [3.1 months; 95% confidence interval (CI), 2.3-4.3] than for the patients without this variant (6.8 months; 95% CI, 5.8-7.3).
After adjustment by stratification factors, the P value for the association was 9.51 × 10(-7).
The variant 161R form of IL-17F is a natural antagonist of the antiangiogenic effects of wild-type 161H IL-17F, and angiogenesis may play an important role in the metastatic spread of pancreatic cancer.
In this preliminary study, we hypothesize that the angiogenetic potential of pancreatic cancers in patients with variant IL-17F is higher than that of tumors in patients with wild-type IL-17F, conferring worse prognosis.
This exploratory GWAS may provide the foundation for testing the biology and clinical effects of novel genes and their heritable variants through mechanistic and confirmatory studies in pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22142333
Meta-analysis of 8q24 for seven cancers reveals a locus between NOV and ENPP2 associated with cancer development.
ABSTRACT:.
Human chromosomal region 8q24 contains several genes which could be functionally related to cancer, including the proto-oncogene c-MYC.
However, the abundance of associations around 128 Mb on chromosome 8 could mask the appearance of a weaker, but important, association elsewhere on 8q24.
In this study, we completed a meta-analysis of results from nine genome-wide association studies for seven types of solid-tumor cancers (breast, prostate, pancreatic, lung, ovarian, colon, and glioma) to identify additional associations that were not apparent in any individual study.
Fifteen SNPs in the 8q24 region had meta-analysis p-values < 1E-04.
In particular, the region consisting of 120,576,000-120,627,000 bp contained 7 SNPs with p-values < 1.0E-4, including rs6993464 (p = 1.25E-07).
This association lies in the region between two genes, NOV and ENPP2, which have been shown to play a role in tumor development and motility.
An additional region consisting of 5 markers from 128,478,000 bp - 128,524,000 (around gene POU5F1B) had p-values < 1E-04, including rs6983267, which had the smallest p-value (p = 6.34E-08).
This result replicates previous reports of association between rs6983267 and prostate and colon cancer.
Further research in this area is warranted as these results demonstrate that the chromosomal region 8q24 may contain a locus that influences general cancer susceptibility between 120,576 and 120,630 kb.
PMID: 22140615
Juxtapapillary duodenal diverticulum masquerading as a cystic pancreatic neoplasm.
PMID: 22140510
Inhibition of Hedgehog signaling antagonizes serous ovarian cancer growth in a primary xenograft model.
Recent evidence links aberrant activation of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling with the pathogenesis of several cancers including medulloblastoma, basal cell, small cell lung, pancreatic, prostate and ovarian.
This investigation was designed to determine if inhibition of this pathway could inhibit serous ovarian cancer growth.
We utilized an in vivo pre-clinical model of serous ovarian cancer to characterize the anti-tumor activity of Hh pathway inhibitors cyclopamine and a clinically applicable derivative, IPI-926.
Primary human serous ovarian tumor tissue was used to generate tumor xenografts in mice that were subsequently treated with cyclopamine or IPI-926.
Both compounds demonstrated significant anti-tumor activity as single agents.
When IPI-926 was used in combination with paclitaxel and carboplatinum (T/C), no synergistic effect was observed, though sustained treatment with IPI-926 after cessation of T/C continued to suppress tumor growth.
Hh pathway activity was analyzed by RT-PCR to assess changes in Gli1 transcript levels.
A single dose of IPI-926 inhibited mouse stromal Gli1 transcript levels at 24 hours with unchanged human intra-tumor Gli1 levels.
Chronic IPI-926 therapy for 21 days, however, inhibited Hh signaling in both mouse stromal and human tumor cells.
Expression data from the micro-dissected stroma in human serous ovarian tumors confirmed the presence of Gli1 transcript and a significant association between elevated Gli1 transcript levels and worsened survival.
IPI-926 treatment inhibits serous tumor growth suggesting the Hh signaling pathway contributes to the pathogenesis of ovarian cancer and may hold promise as a novel therapeutic target, especially in the maintenance setting.
PMID: 22140463
Acute pancreatitis accelerates initiation and progression to pancreatic cancer in mice expressing oncogenic Kras in the nestin cell lineage.
Targeting of oncogenic Kras to the pancreatic Nestin-expressing embryonic progenitor cells and subsequently to the adult acinar compartment and Nestin-expressing cells is sufficient for the development of low grade pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) between 2 and 4 months.
The mice die around 6 month-old of unrelated causes, and it is therefore not possible to assess whether the lesions will progress to carcinoma.
We now report that two brief episodes of caerulein-induced acute pancreatitis in 2 month-old mice causes rapid PanIN progression and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) development by 4 months of age.
These events occur with similar frequency as observed in animals where the oncogene is targeted during embryogenesis to all pancreatic cell types.
Thus, these data show that oncogenic Kras-driven PanIN originating in a non-ductal compartment can rapidly progress to PDAC when subjected to a brief inflammatory insult.
PMID: 22139631
Researchers report discoveries in cancer progression and rare skin and pancreatic cancers.
PMID: 22139427
Cucurmosin induces apoptosis of BxPC-3 human pancreatic cancer cells via inactivation of the EGFR signaling pathway.
Pancreatic cancer remains the fourth most common cause of cancer-related death in the United States.
Potent therapeutic strategies are urgently needed for pancreatic cancer.
Cucurmosin is a novel type 1 ribosome-inactivating protein (RIP) isolated from the sarcocarp of Cucurbita moschata (pumpkin).
Due to its cytotoxicity, cucurmosin can inhibit tumor cell proliferation through induction of apoptosis on tumor cells, but the specific mechanism is still unclear.
We explored the function of cucurmosin in BxPC-3 pancreatic cancer cells using multiple cellular and molecular approaches such as 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay, flow cytometry, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), Western blotting and transmission electron microscopy for observing typical changes and formation of apoptotic bodies.
We found that cucurmosin inhibited the proliferation of BxPC-3 cells in a time- and dose-dependent manner, and increased the cell population in the G0-G1 phase.
With increasing concentration of cucurmosin, the expression of EGFR, p-PI3K, Akt, p-Akt, mTOR, p-mTOR, P70S6K-α, p-P70S6K-α, 4E-BP1 and p-4E-BP1 at the protein level was decreased, whereas the expression of p-Bad and caspase-9 was elevated.
However, the mRNA expression of EGFR did not change.
These findings suggest that cucurmosin can down-regulate the expression of EGFR by targeting.
Cucurmosin induces the apoptosis of BxPC-3 pancreatic cancer cells via the PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway.
PMID: 22138895
Employment status and work-related problems of gastrointestinal cancer patients at diagnosis: a cross-sectional study.
Objective To assess the employment status of patients with gastrointestinal cancer at diagnosis and to examine work-related problems of employed patients.
Design New, consecutive patients were included at the Gastrointestinal Oncology Center Amsterdam, a one-stop, rapid access diagnostic assessment centre.
Patients were interviewed on their employment status by a nurse.
If (self-) employed, patients were asked to self-report on work-related problems, perceived distress (0-10), cancer-related problems, fatigue (MFI-20, range 4-20) and work ability (three WAI questions, range 0-10).
Results Of all 333 included new consecutive patients (age range 32-89 years), 95 patients (28%) were (self-) employed at time of diagnosis, 179 (54%) were pensioners, and 59 were not working (18%).
For the assessment of work-related problems, 45 (47%) of these 95 employed patients with cancer participated.
Their mean age was 56 years, and patients had oesophageal/stomach (49%), colorectal (18%) or hepatic/pancreatic/biliary cancer (33%).
Half of the employed patients (49%) were still at work, while 51% were on sick leave.
The main reasons for sick leave were stress (35%), (scheduled) operation (26%), fatigue (17%) and pain (13%).
Most patients on sick leave (70%) had no contact with their own occupational physician, although the majority (67%) would like to continue to work.
Work-related problems were experienced by 73% of working patients.
The mean work ability was 5.4, the mean general fatigue score was 11.5, and the mean distress score was 4.7.
Employed patients on sick leave reported a lower work ability, more fatigue and higher distress but no more cancer-related problems compared with those still working.
Conclusion A quarter of all patients with gastrointestinal cancer seen at an oncological centre are employed at time of diagnosis, and of these employed patients, 73% experience work-related problems.
During diagnosis and treatment, information and support on work-related issues should be offered to patients with cancer as an essential part of high-quality oncological care.
PMID: 22138846
New-onset Diabetes Patients Need Pancreatic Cancer Screening?
OBJECTIVE:: Because patients with new-onset diabetes mellitus (DM) have a significantly increased likelihood of association with pancreatic cancer, we need to select the subgroup of diabetic patients who have more chance of association with pancreatic cancer.
METHODS:: We retrospectively reviewed medical records of case group (151 patients with pancreatic cancer with new-onset DM) and control group (302 patients with new-onset DM without cancer).
RESULTS:: Compared with the control group, pancreatic cancer group were older, had more weight loss, lower usual body mass index (BMI), more family history of pancreatic cancer (3.3% vs.
0.7%; P=0.044), and had less family history of DM (13.9% vs.
37.4%; P<0.001).
If a new-onset DM patient did not have family history of DM, he was of age older than or equal to 65 years or had weight loss of >2 kg or had premorbid usual BMI <25 kg/m, pancreatic cancer associated DM could be discriminated from new-onset type 2 DM with 80.8% sensitivity, 67.6% specificity, 2.5% and 99.7% of positive and negative predictability for pancreatic cancer, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS:: Among patients who meet criteria for diabetes within 2 years, those who are elderly, have lower premorbid BMI, weight loss, no family history of DM, need screening of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22138761
Incidental finding of sclerosing angiomatoid nodular transformation of the spleen.
BACKGROUND: The prevalence of tumors in the spleen is rare; most tumors are benign and of vascular origin.
In 2004 a vascular lesion was first described, the sclerosing angiomatoid nodular transformation (SANT), which is a benign lesion with good circumscription and multinodular angiomatoid appearance.
We report a case of this rare tumor in the spleen which was incidentally found in a patient with a tumorous lesion in the pancreatic tail.
CASE REPORT: A 69-year-old patient was referred to our hospital with a tumor in the pancreatic tail which was suspicious for cancer.
Radiologic work-up revealed furthermore a 4 cm in diameter large lesion central in the spleen suspicious for metastasis of the pancreatic tumor.
The patient underwent surgery and a distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy was performed.
Histologic specimen obtained a sclerosing angiomatoid nodular transformation in the spleen.
The operative and postoperative course was uneventful.
CONCLUSIONS: SANT of the spleen are very rare tumors and should be considered as an important differential diagnosis to other vascular lesions.
PMID: 22138752
Key contribution of CPEB4-mediated translational control to cancer progression.
Malignant transformation, invasion and angiogenesis rely on the coordinated reprogramming of gene expression in the cells from which the tumor originated.
Although deregulated gene expression has been extensively studied at genomic and epigenetic scales, the contribution of the regulation of mRNA-specific translation to this reprogramming is not well understood.
Here we show that cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding protein 4 (CPEB4), an RNA binding protein that mediates meiotic mRNA cytoplasmic polyadenylation and translation, is overexpressed in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas and glioblastomas, where it supports tumor growth, vascularization and invasion.
We also show that, in pancreatic tumors, the pro-oncogenic functions of CPEB4 originate in the translational activation of mRNAs that are silenced in normal tissue, including the mRNA of tissue plasminogen activator, a key contributor to pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma malignancy.
Taken together, our results document a key role for post-transcriptional gene regulation in tumor development and describe a detailed mechanism for gene expression reprogramming underlying malignant tumor progression.
PMID: 22138436
Combinational therapy: New hope for pancreatic cancer?
Pancreatic cancer is a devastating disease with a low overall survival rate.
Chemotherapy is the most common treatment for patients presenting with advanced pancreatic cancer.
Gemcitabine achieves a modest improvement in overall survival and is the gold standard for advanced pancreatic cancer treatment.
Capecitabine and S-1, derivatives of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), offers minimal clinical benefits.
Folfirinox represents a new and aggressive regimen that might benefit patients of metastatic pancreatic cancer with good performance status.
Other chemotherapy drugs such as platinums and irinotecan do not provide significant improvement in overall survival, but have been used as part of combinational therapies.
Comparing to systemically delivered chemotherapy, regional intra-arterial chemotherapy achieves higher local drug concentration in tumors with lower systemic drug toxicity, and may serve as a better treatment regimen.
Although there have been progress made in chemotherapeutic strategies against pancreatic cancer, the overall survival is not significantly improved in the last decade.
Recently, development of chemotherapy in combination with molecular targeted therapies holds great promise in pancreatic cancer treatment, especially in patients with metastatic disease.
Growing bodies of preclinical and clinical evidences indicate that the combination of conventional modalities with specific molecular targeted therapy increase the efficacy of the monotherapy without an increase in toxicity.
In this review, we summarized the current regimens of chemotherapy and molecular targeted therapy for advanced pancreatic cancer and highlighted the novel combinational treatments tested in recent clinical trials.
PMID: 22137846
Synthesis and evaluation of macrocyclic diarylether heptanoid natural products and their analogs.
The macrocyclic diarylether heptanoid (MDEH) natural products have been used in folk medicine for centuries.
MDEHs are reported to exert anti-tumor properties by inhibiting the activation of NF-κB.
Here we report the synthesis of a small MDEH library (first reported synthesis of racemic platycarynol) using a Grubbs cross metathesis/Ullmann cyclization strategy.
Evaluation of the library led to the identification of MDEH 9b which sensitizes pancreatic cancer cells to gemcitabine mediated growth inhibition and apoptosis.
PMID: 22137164
Human equilibrative nucleoside transporter 1 (hENT1) expression is a potential predictive tool for response to gemcitabine in patients with advanced cholangiocarcinoma.
BACKGROUND: Cholangiocarcinoma (CC) is a rare cancer of the liver.
Surgery offers the only chance for cure.
When surgery is unfeasible, chemotherapy is the backbone of treatment.
The combined administration of cisplatin and gemcitabine is considered standard of care.
Human equilibrative nucleoside transporter 1 (hENT1) is the major transporter responsible for gemcitabine uptake into cells.
hENT1 expression is associated with an increased survival for patients receiving gemcitabine after pancreatic cancer surgery, suggesting that hENT1 is predictive of response to gemcitabine.
AIM: To determine whether there is a correlation between the expression of hENT1 and disease outcome in CC.
METHODS: A retrospective study on 43 patients treated at our centre with a locally advanced or metastatic CC, who received first line treatment with gemcitabine, was performed.
RESULTS: For the whole population, median Progression Free Survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) were 4.0 (95% Confidence Interval 2.7-5.3months) and 10.0months (95%CI 6.8-13.2months), respectively.
From the 26 samples available for hENT1 staining, 18 (69%) and 8 (31%) patients had high and low hENT1 immunostaining, respectively.
The median PFS were 2.0 versus 6.0months for low versus high staining respectively (p=0.012).
The median OS were 5.0 versus 11.0months for low versus high staining, respectively (p=0.036).
On multivariate analysis, hENT1 expression was the single independent predictive factor associated with prolonged PFS (HR 0.35, p=0.023) and OS (HR 0.41, p=0.046).
CONCLUSION: In this study we show the potential of hENT1 expression as a predictor of outcome in CC treated with gemcitabine.
Larger studies are necessary to confirm these promising results.
PMID: 22136834
Achieving eugastrinemia in MEN1 patients: both duodenal inspection and formal lymph node dissection are important.
Controversy exists regarding the role and extent of operation for patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) and hypergastrinemia.
An institutional MEN1 database was reviewed to identify patients with evidence of hypergastrinemia.
The relationship of extent of resection to achievement of eugastrinemia was evaluated.
Operation was performed in 20 patients with MEN1 and hypergastrinemia with a median follow-up of 71 months.
Duodenal gastrinomas were identified in 85% of patients who underwent duodenal evaluation.
Nodal metastases were identified in 80%.
Patients who underwent anatomic regional lymph node dissection (RLND) had a median of 16 nodes removed, vs 1 in patients who did not undergo a formal regional lymphadenectomy.
Eugastrinemia was achieved in 12 patients (60%), and 8 (40%) had persistent hypergastrinemia.
Compared with patients with persistent hypergastrinemia, patients rendered eugastrinemic more often underwent duodenal evaluation (11/12 vs 2/8; P = .01) and RLND (11/12 vs 3/8; P = .03); there was no relationship between pancreatic resection and achievement of eugastrinemia (P = .32).
For patients with MEN1-associated hypergastrinemia selected for operative treatment, a strategy including duodenal evaluation and anatomic regional lymphadenectomy is associated with long-term eugastrinemia.
In contrast, the extent of pancreatic resection should be dictated by the extent and distribution of pancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasms, rather than by the presence of hypergastrinemia.
PMID: 22136833
SSTR5 P335L monoclonal antibody differentiates pancreatic neuroendocrine neuroplasms with different SSTR5 genotypes.
Somatostatin receptor type 5 (SSTR5) P335L is a hypofunctional, single nucleotide polymorphism of SSTR5 with implications in the diagnostics and therapy of pancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasms.
The purpose of this study is to determine whether a SSTR5 P335L-specific monoclonal antibody could sufficiently differentiate pancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasms (PNENs) with different SSTR5 genotypes.
Cellular proliferation rate, SSTR5 mRNA level, and SSTR5 protein level were measured by performing MTS assay, a quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction study, Western blot analysis, and immunohistochemistry, respectively.
SSTR5 genotype was determined with the TaqMan SNP Genotyping assay (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA).
We found that the SSTR5 analogue RPL-1980 inhibited cellular proliferation of CAPAN-1 cells more than that of PANC-1 cells.
Only PANC-1 (TT) cells, but not CAPAN-1 (CC) cells expressed SSTR5 P335L.
In 29 white patients with PNENs, 38% had a TT genotype for SSTR5 P335L, 24% had a CC genotype for WT SSTR5, and 38% hada CT genotype for both SSTR5 P335L and WT SSTR5.
Immunohistochemistry using SSTR5 P335L monoclonal antibody detected immunostaining signals only from the neuroendocrine specimens with TT and CT genotypes, but not those with CC genotypes.
A SSTR5 P335L monoclonal antibody that specifically recognizes SSTR5 P335L but not WT SSTR5 could differentiate PNENs with different SSTR5 genotypes, thereby providing a potential tool for the clinical diagnosis of PNEN.
PMID: 22136832
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome associated with a history of alcohol abuse: coincidence or consequence?
This 47-year observational study suggests that sporadic Zollinger-Ellison (Z-E) syndrome, particularly duodenal wall gastrinomas (DWG), is associated with a history of alcohol abuse.
Thirty-nine consecutive Z-E patients were followed from 1962 through 2010.
The drinking patterns of these patients were assessed and compared with 3,786 community controls.
Thirty-five patients had extrapancreatic gastrinomas (34 DWG and/or paraduodenal lymph nodes, 1 antral gastrinoma).
Total gastrectomy was done in 24; 9 underwent less extensive operations to remove DWG, and 2 patients had no operations.
There were no deaths from tumor progression.
Four patients presented with pancreatic gastrinoma (PG) and liver metastasis, all died from tumor progression.
Alcohol abuse (>50 g/d) was documented in 81% of patients with DWG and/or paraduodenal lymph nodes.
The drinking patterns (drinks per day) of DWG patients were significantly different: DWG vs community control-abstainers, 3% vs 24%; 1-2 drinks, 16% vs 62%; 3-5 drinks, 29% vs 12%; and ≥ 6 drinks, 52% vs 2.5% (P < .01).
Alcohol abuse is strongly associated with and may be a risk factor for sporadic Z-E with extrapancreatic DWG.
Liver metastases and tumor deaths were not observed in this subgroup, supporting the concept that DWG and PG are different tumor entities.
PMID: 22136831
Comparison of 6-18F-fluoro-L-DOPA, 18F-2-deoxy-D-glucose, CT, and MRI in patients with pancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasms with von Hippel-Lindau disease.
There are limited data on the utility of 6-(18)F-fluoro-l-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine ((18)F-DOPA) and (18)F-2-deoxy-d-glucose ((18)F-FDG) in the workup of patients with pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PNETs).
The aim of our study was to determine the accuracy of (18)F-DOPA and (18)F-FDG to detect PNETs in patients with von Hippel-Lindau disease (vHL).
We studied prospectively 69 patients with a diagnosis of vHL and pancreatic lesion(s) using computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), (18)F-FDG, and (18)F-DOPA.
Clinical, genetic, and laboratory characteristics were analyzed to determine association with imaging study results.
In sum, 40 patients underwent evaluation by all 4 modalities; 98 PNETs and 55 PNETs were identified on CT and MRI, respectively.
Only 11 of the 98 lesions (11%) were positive on (18)F-DOPA and 45 of the 98 (46%) lesions were positive on (18)F-FDG.
There were 13 (18)F-DOPA and 26 (18)F-FDG avid extrapancreatic lesions.
One patient underwent resection of an (18)F-DOPA avid extrapancreatic lesion in the lung, with pathology demonstrating a NET.
There was no association between (18)F-DOPA and (18)F-FDG avidity and tumor size, age, gender, vHL mutation, or serum chromogranin A level.
(18)F-FDG and MRI may be adjuncts to CT in identifying PNETs and metastatic disease.
(18)F-DOPA has limited value in identifying PNETs in patients with vHL, but may be useful for identifying extrapancreatic NET lesions.
PMID: 22135418
Metscape 2 bioinformatics tool for the analysis and visualization of metabolomics and gene expression data.
MOTIVATION: Metabolomics is a rapidly evolving field that holds promise to provide insights into genotype-phenotype relationships in cancers, diabetes and other complex diseases.
One of the major informatics challenges is providing tools that link metabolite data with other types of high-throughput molecular data (e.g.
transcriptomics, proteomics), and incorporate prior knowledge of pathways and molecular interactions.
RESULTS: We describe a new, substantially redesigned version of our tool Metscape that allows users to enter experimental data for metabolites, genes and pathways and display them in the context of relevant metabolic networks.
Metscape 2 uses an internal relational database that integrates data from KEGG and EHMN databases.
The new version of the tool allows users to identify enriched pathways from expression profiling data, build and analyze the networks of genes and metabolites, and visualize changes in the gene/metabolite data.
We demonstrate the applications of Metscape to annotate molecular pathways for human and mouse metabolites implicated in the pathogenesis of sepsis-induced acute lung injury, for the analysis of gene expression and metabolite data from pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, and for identification of the candidate metabolites involved in cancer and inflammation.
AVAILABILITY: Metscape is part of the National Institutes of Health-supported National Center for Integrative Biomedical Informatics (NCIBI) suite of tools, freely available at http://metscape.ncibi.org.
It can be downloaded from http://cytoscape.org or installed via Cytoscape plugin manager.
CONTACT: metscape-help@umich.edu; akarnovs@umich.edu SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
PMID: 22135173
Extended surgery for advanced pancreatic endocrine tumours.
Pancreatic endocrine tumours are often diagnosed at an advanced stage with hepatic metastasis.
This study investigated whether extended resections for advanced malignant pancreatic endocrine tumours influenced disease-free and disease-specific survival.
Patients who had curative resection of pancreatic endocrine tumours were analysed retrospectively for disease-free and disease-specific survival, with a focus on the role of extended surgical resection.
Forty-one patients were included in the analysis, 13 of whom underwent extended surgical resection in addition to pancreatic resection.
This included partial liver resection in nine patients, portal vein resection in three, partial gastric resection in five and liver transplantation in three patients.
There were no deaths in hospital or within 30 days.
Median follow-up was 40 (range 2-239) months.
Thirty-five, 24 and 13 patients survived more than 1, 3 and 5 years respectively.
Patients who underwent extended resection had similar disease-specific survival to those who had pancreatic resection alone (hazard ratio (HR) 1·50, 95 per cent confidence interval (c.i.) 0·35 to 6·35; P = 0·581) but with a higher frequency of complications (odds ratio (OR) 4·28, 95 per cent c.i.
1·04 to 17·62; P = 0·044).
Among patients with liver metastases, the mortality rate was higher in those in whom liver resection was not possible than in patients who had liver resection (HR 9·24, 1·00 to 85·18; P = 0·049).
Patients who had liver resection had similar disease-specific survival to those without liver metastases (HR 0·84, 0·09 to 7·57; P = 0·877).
Extended surgical resection for locally advanced and metastatic pancreatic endocrine tumours is feasible with encouraging disease-specific survival.
PMID: 22135123
Toxicity as a biomarker of efficacy of molecular targeted therapies: focus on EGFR and VEGF inhibiting anticancer drugs.
In addition to being present in tumor cells, many targets of signal transduction inhibitors are also found in normal tissue.
Side effects attributable to the mechanism of action of molecular targeted agents thus represent "on-target" modulation in normal tissues.
These mechanism-based toxicities can be pharmacodynamic effects of pathway inhibition and, in tumors depending on the inhibited pathway for proliferation, might be biomarkers of efficacy.
The development of rash with tyrosine kinase inhibitors or monoclonal antibodies targeting the epidermal growth factor receptor is associated with superior outcomes in lung, head and neck, colorectal, and pancreatic cancer studies.
Correlated with superior efficacy in retrospective analyses of large studies in advanced colorectal, breast, and renal cell carcinoma, arterial hypertension as an adverse event of antiangiogenic agents may also be a marker of effective target inhibition.
An association between hypothyroidism and the activity of multitargeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors has been identified in renal cell carcinoma patients.
Tumor growth addiction to the specific pathway that is effectively targeted may be the link between a mechanism-based toxicity and efficacy.
The biological basis for this correlation can be pharmacological, with higher drug exposure being associated with greater toxicity and antitumor activity, and can also be genetic, because single nucleotide polymorphisms play an important role in drug pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic processes.
Investigators have proposed that interpatient differences and associated toxicities can be exploited for dose selection and titration, and clinical trials are currently exploring intrapatient "dosing-to-toxicity" strategies.
Ultimately, the predictive value of a side effect of molecular targeted therapies requires validation in prospective trials.
PMID: 22135077
Switching the targeting pathways of a therapeutic antibody by nanodesign.
On the right path: The mechanisms of endocytosis of cetuximab (C225) and its nanoconjugates have been elucidated in a pancreatic cancer cell line.
By using gold nanoparticles as a scaffold, it is possible to switch the pathway for endocytosis from a Dyn-2-dependent caveolar mechanism to Cdc42-dependent pinocytosis/phagocytosis.
Tailoring endocytotic mechanisms may enable specific intracellular pathways to be targeted.
PMID: 22134789
2-Triazenoazaindoles: Α novel class of triazenes inducing transcriptional down-regulation of EGFR and HER-2 in human pancreatic cancer cells.
Pancreatic cancer is a complex malignancy arising from the accumulation of genetic and epigenetic defects in the affected cells.
Standard chemotherapy for patients with advanced disease shows only modest effects and is associated with considerable toxicity.
Overexpression or aberrant activation of members of the epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase family, which includes EGFR and HER-2, occurs frequently and is associated with multiple drug resistance and decreased patient survival.
In this study, we have investigated the therapeutic potential of AS104, a novel compound of the triazene class, with potential inhibitory effects on EGFR.
We found that treatment of cells with AS104 causes significant reduction of cell growth and metabolic activity in four human pancreatic cancer cell lines.
Furthermore, we show that the AS104-mediated induction of apoptotic cell death is associated with stimulation of autophagy in a dose-dependent manner.
Treatment of cells with AS104 results in significant down-regulation of EGFR and HER-2 expression and activity and subsequent inhibition of downstream signaling proteins.
Quantitative RT-PCR analysis and assays with proteasome inhibitors revealed that AS104 regulates the expression of EGFR and HER-2 at the transcriptional level.
These findings provide for the first time experimental evidence for efficacy of AS104 in the simultaneous transcriptional repression of EGFR and HER-2 genes and suggest that AS104 may have therapeutic potential in the treatment of pancreatic cancers that express high levels of the aforementioned receptor tyrosine kinases.
PMID: 22134718
Anticancer effect and feasibility study of hyperthermia treatment of pancreatic cancer using magnetic nanoparticles.
We investigated the effect and feasibility of hyperthermia treatment on subcutaneous pancreatic cancer in female Kunming mice, using a murine pancreatic cancer cell line (MPC-83) established by us and found in this study to originate from epithelial pancreatic acinus.
Magnetic fluid (MF) with ferromagnetic particles of about 20 nm in size was used as a heating mediator.
MF was injected into the subcutaneous nodules with subaxillary regions of mice 10 days after tumor transplantation; homogeneous distribution of magnetic nanoparticles in nodules was easily detected by X-ray 24 h later.
Mice were allocated to four groups as follows: no treatment (control); MF injection alone; alternating magnetic field (AMF) irradiation alone; and MF injection and hyperthermia generated by applying AMF (300 kHz, 110 Gs).
The two hyperthermia-treated subgroup tumors reached central temperatures of 47 and 51˚C, respectively, for 30 min; while rectal temperature in both subgroups remained below 36˚C.
Tumor growth was inhibited and survival significantly prolonged in the hyperthermia group compared with other groups (P<0.05).
Tumor cells near the MF in the hyperthermia group apoptosed or necrosed immediately after hyperthermia.
By day 14, there were no subcutaneous nodules; and residual magnetic nanoparticles were ingested by phagocytes.
Nuclear proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) decreased in hyperthermia group tumor cells compared to the other groups; cytoplasmic heat shock protein 70 (HSP 70) was conspicuously higher immediately after hyperthermia (P<0.05).
This technique had therapeutic potential and provided a new idea in the treatment of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22134629
Metastatic Tumors to the Urinary Bladder: Clinicopathologic Study of 11 Cases.
Secondary neoplasms of the urinary bladder are uncommon, with metastatic tumors being an even rarer event.
The authors studied the clinicopathology of 11 cases of metastatic tumors to bladder, which were collected from their archives between 1995 and 2010.
The most common metastases in this series were breast.
Some unusual metastases, including several not being previously reported, were also presented, namely, ileal carcinoid tumor, ileal gastrointestinal stromal tumor, ovarian squamous carcinoma, pancreatic gastrinoma, and renal collecting duct carcinoma.
Vast majority of these patients (10/11, 91%) were female.
Ninety percent of the patients presented with hematuria and/or obstructive urinary symptom as well as bladder lesions in the area of trigone, posterior wall, and/or bladder neck.
Seven of the 11 patients had a known history of other metastases besides the bladder.
Most of the patients (4/7, 57%) died within 1 year after diagnosis of bladder metastasis.
Metastasis must be distinguished from a primary bladder neoplasm.
Morphology and clinical correlation supplemented with immunohistochemical study is critical for the correct diagnosis.
PMID: 22134518
Primary Pancreatic Lymphoma: A Population-based Analysis Using the SEER Program.
BACKGROUND:: Primary pancreatic lymphoma (PPL) is a rare disease, accounting for only 0.5% of all pancreatic masses.
A paucity of literature exists on the epidemiology and outcomes of PPL.
Here, we present a series of 523 cases of PPL obtained from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results database.
METHODS:: Patients diagnosed with a PPL from 1973 to 2007 were identified.
Data on patient and tumor characteristics as well as initial treatment with surgery or radiation were extracted.
Survival rates were calculated using the Kaplan-Meier method.
A multivariate analysis was performed to determine independent prognostic factors predicting mortality hazard ratios using Cox proportional hazards modeling.
RESULTS:: Fifty-eight percent of patients identified were male.
The median age range at diagnosis was 65 to 69 years.
The most common histologic subtype in the present series was diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, which accounted for 56% of all patients.
The 5-year overall survival for the group was 45%.
Multivariate analysis suggests that age more than 60 years at diagnosis, race of "other" (compared with "white"), and marital status of single or widowed were predictive of increased all-cause mortality (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS:: This represents the largest published series of patients with PPL.
Age more than 60 years, female sex, and marital status of married were identified as independent prognostic factors predicting for decreased all-cause mortality.
PMID: 22134511
The GOFURTGO Study: AGITG phase II study of fixed dose rate gemcitabine-oxaliplatin integrated with concomitant 5FU and 3-D conformal radiotherapy for the treatment of localised pancreatic cancer.
Locally advanced inoperable pancreatic cancer (LAPC) has a poor prognosis.
By increasing intensity of systemic therapy combined with an established safe chemoradiation technique, our intention was to enhance the outcomes of LAPC.
In preparation for phase III evaluation, the feasibility and efficacy of our candidate regimen gemcitabine-oxaliplatin chemotherapy with sandwich 5-fluorouracil (5FU) and three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy (3DCRT) needs to be established.
A total of 48 patients with inoperable LAPC without metastases were given gemcitabine (1000 mg m(-2) d1 + d15 q28) and oxaliplatin (100 mg m(-2) d2 + d16 q28) in induction (one cycle) and consolidation (three cycles), and 5FU 200 mg m(-2) per day over 6 weeks during 3DCRT 54 Gy.
Median duration of sustained local control (LC) was 15.8 months, progression-free survival (PFS) was 11.0 months, and overall survival was 15.7 months.
Survival rates for 1, 2, and 3 years were 70.2%, 21.3%, and 12.8%, respectively.
Global quality of life did not significantly decline from baseline during treatment, which was associated with modest treatment-related toxicity.
Fixed-dose gemcitabine and oxaliplatin, combined with an effective and safe regimen of 5FU and 3DCRT radiotherapy, was feasible and reasonably tolerated.
The observed improved duration of LC and PFS with more intensive therapy over previous trials may be due to patient selection, but suggest that further evaluation in phase III trials is warranted.
PMID: 22134508
Phase I study of the histone deacetylase inhibitor entinostat in combination with 13-cis retinoic acid in patients with solid tumours.
Preclinical studies suggest that histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors may restore tumour sensitivity to retinoids.
The objective of this study was to determine the safety, tolerability, and the pharmacokinetic (PK)/pharmacodynamic (PD) profiles of the HDAC inhibitor entinostat in combination with 13-cis retinoic acid (CRA) in patients with solid tumours.
Patients with advanced solid tumours were treated with entinostat orally once weekly and with CRA orally twice daily × 3 weeks every 4 weeks.
The starting dose for entinostat was 4 mg m(-2) with a fixed dose of CRA at 1 mg kg(-1) per day.
Entinostat dose was escalated by 1 mg m(-2) increments.
Pharmacokinetic concentrations of entinostat and CRA were determined by LC/MS/MS.
Western blot analysis of peripheral blood mononuclear cells and tumour samples were performed to evaluate target inhibition.
A total of 19 patients were enroled.
The maximum tolerated dose (MTD) was exceeded at the entinostat 5 mg m(-2) dose level (G3 hyponatremia, neutropenia, and anaemia).
Fatigue (G1 or G2) was a common side effect.
Entinostat exhibited substantial variability in clearance (147%) and exposure.
CRA trough concentrations were consistent with prior reports.
No objective responses were observed, however, prolonged stable disease occurred in patients with prostate, pancreatic, and kidney cancer.
Data further showed increased tumour histone acetylation and decreased phosphorylated ERK protein expression.
The combination of entinostat with CRA was reasonably well tolerated.
The recommended phase II doses are entinostat 4 mg m(-2) once weekly and CRA 1 mg kg(-1) per day.
Although no tumour responses were seen, further evaluation of this combination is warranted.
PMID: 22134241
Selective radiosensitization of p53 mutant pancreatic cancer cells by combined inhibition of Chk1 and PARP1.
We have recently shown that inhibition of HRR (homologous recombination repair) by Chk1 (checkpoint kinase 1) inhibition radiosensitizes pancreatic cancer cells and others have demonstrated that Chk1 inhibition selectively sensitizes p53 mutant tumor cells.
Furthermore, PARP1 [poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase-1] inhibitors dramatically radiosensitize cells with DNA double strand break repair defects.
Thus, we hypothesized that inhibition of HRR (mediated by Chk1 via AZD7762) and PARP1 [via olaparib (AZD2281)] would selectively sensitize p53 mutant pancreatic cancer cells to radiation.
We also used 2 isogenic p53 cell models to assess the role of p53 status in cancer cells and intestinal epithelial cells to assess overall cancer specificity.
DNA damage response and repair were assessed by flow cytometry, γH2AX, and an HRR reporter assay.
We found that the combination of AZD7762 and olaparib produced significant radiosensitization in p53 mutant pancreatic cancer cells and in all of the isogenic cancer cell lines.
The magnitude of radiosensitization by AZD7762 and olaparib was greater in p53 mutant cells compared with p53 wild type cells.
Importantly, normal intestinal epithelial cells were not radiosensitized.
The combination of AZD7762 and olaparib caused G 2 checkpoint abrogation, inhibition of HRR, and persistent DNA damage responses.
These findings demonstrate that the combination of Chk1 and PARP1 inhibition selectively radiosensitizes p53 mutant pancreatic cancer cells.
Furthermore, these studies suggest that inhibition of HRR by Chk1 inhibitors may be a useful strategy for selectively inducing a BRCA1/2 'deficient-like' phenotype in p53 mutant tumor cells, while sparing normal tissue.
PMID: 22134116
Therapeutic efficacy of a lipid-based prodrug of mitomycin C in pegylated liposomes: Studies with human gastro-entero-pancreatic ectopic tumor models.
BACKGROUND: A mitomycin-C lipid-based prodrug (MLP) formulated in pegylated liposomes (PL-MLP) was previously reported to have significant antitumor activity and reduced toxicity in mouse tumor models (Clin Cancer Res 12:1913-20, 2006).
MLP is activated by thiolysis releasing mitomycin-C (MMC) which rapidly dissociates from liposomes.
The purpose of this study was to examine the plasma stability, pharmacokinetics, and antitumor activity of PL-MLP in mouse models of human gastroentero-pancreatic tumors.
METHODS: MLP was incorporated with almost 100% efficiency in pegylated liposomes composed of hydrogenated phosphatidylcholine, with or without cholesterol (Chol).
Mean vesicle size was 45-65nm for liposome preparations downsized by homogenization, and 80-100nm when downsized by extrusion, the latter displaying narrower polydispersity.
MLP to phospholipid mole ratio was 5% (~20μg MMC-equivalents/μmol).
Therapeutic studies were carried out in the N87 gastric carcinoma (Ca), HCT15 colon Ca, and Panc-1 pancreatic Ca models implanted s.c.
in CD1 nude mice.
Treatment was administered i.v.
in mice with established tumors.
RESULTS: PL-MLP was very stable when incubated in plasma, and whole blood with a maximum of 5% release and activation to free MMC after 24h.
In the presence of a strong reducing agent (dithiotreitol), MLP was almost entirely activated to free MMC.
Pharmacokinetic studies revealed major differences in plasma clearance between free MMC and PL-MLP.
The longest half-lives were observed for extruded and Chol-containing preparations.
Using a liposome radiolabel, it was found that the plasma levels of liposomes and prodrug were nearly superimposable confirming the absence of drug leakage in circulation.
In vivo prodrug activation was significantly increased by co-injection of a large dose of a biocompatible reducing agent, N-acetylcysteine.
PL-MLP was significantly more effective in delaying tumor growth and resulted in more tumor regressions than irinotecan in the N87 and HCT15 models, and than gemcitabine in the Panc-1 model.
PL-MLP was ~3-fold less toxic than free MMC at MMC-equivalent doses, and displayed mild myelosuppression at therapeutic doses.
CONCLUSIONS: Delivery of MLP in pegylated liposomes is more effective than conventional chemotherapy in the treatment of gastroentero-pancreatic ectopic tumor models, and may represent an effective tool for treatment of these malignancies in the clinical setting with improved safety over free MMC.
Reducing agents offer a tool for controlling in vivo prodrug release.
PMID: 22133915
[Chemotherapy of metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma: challenges and encouraging results].
The outcome for patients with metastatic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is dismal.
In this article, we will review current first-line treatments for metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma focusing on phase III randomized studies.
Single-agent gemcitabine, the reference treatment since 1995, offers only slight benefit.
Numerous trials using gemcitabine in combination with different cytotoxic agents have resulted in no major improvement compared to gemcitabine alone.
Only the gemcitabine-erlotinib combination has shown a small, but statistically improvement in survival.
In selected patients with good performance status ECOG 0-1, no cardiac ischemia and almost normal bilirubin level, the Folfirinox regimen, when compared to gemcitabine as single agent, was associated with more toxicities, but also with significant increased survival and delay in the degradation of quality of life.
So, Folfirinox is a new more toxic and more efficient regimen that may be considered in patients with good performance status.
PMID: 22133881
Pancreatic ductal cells in development, regeneration, and neoplasia.
The pancreas is a complex organ comprised of three critical cell lineages: islet (endocrine), acinar, and ductal.
This review will focus upon recent insights and advances in the biology of pancreatic ductal cells.
In particular, emphasis will be placed upon the regulation of ductal cells by specific transcriptional factors during development as well as the underpinnings of acinar-ductal metaplasia as an important adaptive response during injury and regeneration.
We also address the potential contributions of ductal cells to neoplastic transformation, specifically in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
PMID: 22133573
Is the combination of chromogranin A and pancreatic polypeptide serum determinations of interest in the diagnosis and follow-up of gastro-entero-pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours?
INTRODUCTION: Chromogranin A (CgA) is the principal tumour marker for gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumours (GEPNET).
Combining serum CgA and pancreatic polypeptide (PP) levels may increase the sensitivity of tumour markers in the diagnosis of GEPNET.
OBJECTIVES: (1) To evaluate the sensitivity of PP and CgA in GEPNET.
(2) To compare changes in serum CgA and PP levels with the morphological evolution of the tumours.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Sixty-six pancreatic and 49 gastrointestinal NET, with at least one serum determination of CgA and PP at the same time were retrieved from an institutional data base.
Secondly, the variations in serum CgA or PP at successive determinations were compared to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours (RECIST) criteria in 57 patients (112 follow-up visits) with high serum CgA levels and in 21 patients (37 follow-up visits) with high serum PP levels.
RESULTS: Among the 115 patients included in the study group, an increase in serum CgA (normal <98μg/L) or PP (normal <100pmol/L) was found in respectively 79 (69%) and 36 (31%) cases.
Seven patients had normal CgA and elevated PP levels.
Both markers were significantly more elevated in metastatic disease (74% versus 51% for CgA and 37% versus 18% for PP).
The concordance rates between serum markers and RECIST criteria were 51% for CgA and 54% for PP.
CONCLUSIONS: Serum PP determination identify few false-negative results of serum CgA determination in GEPNET.
Our study does not validate the use of CgA or PP as surrogate markers for detecting changes in tumour burden.
PMID: 22132974
Combination effects of digalloylresveratrol with arabinofuranosylcytosine and difluorodeoxycytidine in human leukemia and pancreatic cancer cells.
Digalloylresveratrol (DIG) is a newly synthesized agent aimed to combine the biological effects of the natural compounds, gallic acid and resveratrol, which both are free radical scavengers exhibiting anticancer activity.
In this study, we investigated the effects of DIG on the growth of human HL-60 leukemia cells and on the colony formation of human BxPC-3 and PANC-1 pancreatic cancer cells.
DIG was applied alone and in combination with arabinofuranosylcytosine (Ara-C) or difluorodeoxycytidine (dFdC), depending on the cell line employed.
All IC(50) values observed were in the low micromolar range rendering DIG a promising antitumor compound in vitro.
Considering the combination experiments, DIG yielded additive effects with Ara-C in HL-60 cells and-to a lesser extent-with dFdC in BxPC-3 and PANC-1 cells.
Owing to our results, DIG may be further investigated in vitro and in animals.
PMID: 22132131
Murine pancreatic adenocarcinoma dampens SHIP-1 expression and alters MDSC homeostasis and function.
Pancreatic cancer is one of the most aggressive cancers, with tumor-induced myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) contributing to its pathogenesis and ineffective therapies.
In response to cytokine/chemokine receptor activation, src homology 2 domain-containing inositol 5'-phosphatase-1 (SHIP-1) influences phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) signaling events, which regulate immunohomeostasis.
We hypothesize that factors from murine pancreatic cancer cells cause the down-regulation of SHIP-1 expression, which may potentially contribute to MDSC expansion, and the suppression of CD8(+) T cell immune responses.
Therefore, we sought to determine the role of SHIP-1 in solid tumor progression, such as murine pancreatic cancer.
Immunocompetent C57BL/6 mice were inoculated with either murine Panc02 cells (tumor-bearing [TB] mice) or Phosphate Buffer Saline (PBS) (control mice).
Cytometric Bead Array (CBA) analysis of supernatants of cultured Panc02 detected pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6, IL-10 and MCP-1.
TB mice showed a significant increase in serum levels of pro-inflammatory factors IL-6 and MCP-1 measured by CBA.
qRT-PCR and Western blot analyses revealed the in vivo down-regulation of SHIP-1 expression in splenocytes from TB mice.
Western blot analyses also detected reduced SHIP-1 activity, increased AKT-1 and BAD hyper-phosphorylation and up-regulation of BCL-2 expression in splenocytes from TB mice.
In vitro, qRT-PCR and Western blot analyses detected reduced SHIP-1 mRNA and protein expression in control splenocytes co-cultured with Panc02 cells.
Flow cytometry results showed significant expansion of MDSC in peripheral blood and splenocytes from TB mice.
AutoMACS sorted TB MDSC exhibited hyper-phosphorylation of AKT-1 and over-expression of BCL-2 detected by western blot analysis.
TB MDSC significantly suppressed antigen-specific CD8(+) T cell immune responses in vitro.
SHIP-1 may regulate immune development that impacts MDSC expansion and function, contributing to pancreatic tumor progression.
Thus, SHIP-1 can be a potential therapeutic target to help restore immunohomeostasis and improve therapeutic responses in patients with pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22132114
Proteomics portrait of archival lesions of chronic pancreatitis.
Chronic pancreatitis is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the pancreas.
The etiology is multi-fold, but all lead to progressive scarring and loss of pancreatic function.
Early diagnosis is difficult; and the understanding of the molecular events that underlie this progressive disease is limited.
In this study, we investigated differential proteins associated with mild and severe chronic pancreatitis in comparison with normal pancreas and pancreatic cancer.
Paraffin-embedded formalin-fixed tissues from five well-characterized specimens each of normal pancreas (NL), mild chronic pancreatitis (MCP), severe chronic pancreatitis (SCP) and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) were subjected to proteomic analysis using a "label-free" comparative approach.
Our results show that the numbers of differential proteins increase substantially with the disease severity, from mild to severe chronic pancreatitis, while the number of dysregulated proteins is highest in pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
Important functional groups and biological processes associated with chronic pancreatitis and cancer include acinar cell secretory proteins, pancreatic fibrosis/stellate cell activation, glycoproteins, and inflammatory proteins.
Three differential proteins were selected for verification by immunohistochemistry, including collagen 14A1, lumican and versican.
Further canonical pathway analysis revealed that acute phase response signal, prothrombin activation pathway, and pancreatic fibrosis/pancreatic stellate cell activation pathway were the most significant pathways involved in chronic pancreatitis, while pathways relating to metabolism were the most significant pathways in pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
Our study reveals a group of differentially expressed proteins and the related pathways that may shed light on the pathogenesis of chronic pancreatitis and the common molecular events associated with chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
PMID: 22131088
Novel integrated robotic approach for suprapancreatic D2 nodal dissection for treating gastric cancer: technique and initial experience.
Robotic surgery for the treatment of gastric cancer has been reported, but the technique is not yet established.
The objective of this study was to assess the feasibility and safety of our novel integrated procedure for robotic suprapancreatic D2 nodal dissection during distal gastrectomy.
At our hospital from January 2009 to December 2010, a total of 25 consecutive cases of gastric cancer were treated by robotic distal gastrectomy with intracorporeal Billroth I reconstruction.
These patients were enrolled in a prospective study to assess the safety and feasibility of robotic distal gastrectomy with nodal dissection by our novel integrated approach, which consists of three elements: arm formation, the surgical approach, a cutting device.
To evaluate the learning curves involved in this approach, clinicopathologic features and surgical outcomes were compared between the initial (n = 12) and late (n = 13) phases.
All operations were completed without the need for open or conventional laparoscopic surgery.
The mean operating time was 361 ± 58.1 min (range 258-419 min), and blood loss recorded was 51.8 ± 38.2 ml (range 4-123 ml).
The median number of retrieved lymph nodes was 44.3 ± 18.4 (range 26-95).
R0 resection was accomplished in all cases.
There were no deaths or complications related to pancreatic damage.
Operating time and surgeon console time for the late phase were significantly shorter than those for the initial phase.
Our novel robotic approach for D2 nodal dissection in gastric cancer is feasible and safe.
PMID: 22130621
Downstaging in Pancreatic Cancer: A Matched Analysis of Patients Resected Following Systemic Treatment of Initially Locally Unresectable Disease.
BACKGROUND: Patients with locally unresectable pancreatic cancer (AJCC stage III) have a median survival of 10-14 months.
The objective of this study was to evaluate outcome of initially unresectable patients who respond to multimodality therapy and undergo resection.
METHODS: Using a prospectively collected database, patients were identified who were initially unresectable because of vascular invasion and had sufficient response to nonoperative treatment to undergo resection.
Overall survival (OS) was compared with a matched group of patients who were initially resectable.
Case matching was performed using a previously validated pancreatic cancer nomogram.
RESULTS: A total of 36 patients with initial stage III disease were identified who underwent resection after treatment with either systemic therapy or chemoradiation.
Initial unresectability was determined by operative exploration (n = 15, 42%) or by cross-sectional imaging (n = 21, 58%).
Resection consisted of pancreaticoduodenectomy (n = 31, 86%), distal pancreatectomy (n = 4, 11%), and total pancreatectomy (n = 1, 3%).
Pathology revealed T3 lesions in 26 patients (73%), node positivity in 6 patients (16%), and a negative margin in 30 patients (83%).
The median OS in this series was 25 months from resection and 30 months since treatment initiation.
There was no difference in OS from time of resection between the initial stage III patients and those who presented with resectable disease (P = .35).
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, patients who were able to undergo resection following treatment of initial stage III pancreatic cancer experienced survival similar to those who were initially resectable.
Resection is indicated in this highly select group of patients.
PMID: 22130069
Novel tumor suppressive function of Smad4 in serum starvation-induced cell death through PAK1-PUMA pathway.
DPC4 (deleted in pancreatic cancer 4)/Smad4 is an essential factor in transforming growth factor (TGF)-β signaling and is also known as a frequently mutated tumor suppressor gene in human pancreatic and colon cancer.
However, considering the fact that TGF-β can contribute to cancer progression through transcriptional target genes, such as Snail, MMPs, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-related genes, loss of Smad4 in human cancer would be required for obtaining the TGF-β signaling-independent advantage, which should be essential for cancer cell survival.
Here, we provide the evidences about novel role of Smad4, serum-deprivation-induced apoptosis.
Elimination of serum can obviously increase the Smad4 expression and induces the cell death by p53-independent PUMA induction.
Instead, Smad4-deficient cells show the resistance to serum starvation.
Induced Smad4 suppresses the PAK1, which promotes the PUMA destabilization.
We also found that Siah-1 and pVHL are involved in PAK1 destabilization and PUMA stabilization.
In fact, Smad4-expressed cancer tissues not only show the elevated expression of PAK1, but also support our hypothesis that Smad4 induces PUMA-mediated cell death through PAK1 suppression.
Our results strongly suggest that loss of Smad4 renders the resistance to serum-deprivation-induced cell death, which is the TGF-β-independent tumor suppressive role of Smad4.
PMID: 22129531
The proteome of normal pancreatic juice.
The aims of this study were to characterize the proteome of normal pancreatic juice, to analyze the effect of secretin on the normal proteome, and to compare these results with published data from patients with pancreatic cancer.
Paired pancreatic fluid specimens (before and after intravenous secretin stimulation) were obtained during endoscopic pancreatography from 3 patients without significant pancreatic pathology.
Proteins were identified and quantified by mass spectrometry-based protein quantification technology.
The human RefSeq (NCBI) database was used to compare the data in samples from patients without pancreatic disease with published data from 3 patients with pancreatic cancer.
A total of 285 proteins were identified in normal pancreatic juice.
Ninety had sufficient amino acid sequences identified to characterize the protein with a high level of confidence.
All 90 proteins were present before and after secretin administration but with altered relative concentrations, usually by 1 to 2 folds, after stimulation.
Comparison with 170 published pancreatic cancer proteins yielded an overlap of only 42 proteins.
Normal pancreatic juice contains multiple proteins related to many biological processes.
Secretin alters the concentration but not the spectrum of these proteins.
The pancreatic juice proteome of patients without pancreatic disease and that of patients with pancreatic cancer differ markedly.
PMID: 22129180
Loss of expression of DNA mismatch repair proteins is rare in pancreatic and small intestinal neuroendocrine tumors.
Two recent studies have identified a high rate of microsatellite instability (MSI) in pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (pNETs).
Microsatellite instability is rare in small intestinal neuroendocrine tumors (NETs).
It is unclear why there is discordance in the frequency of MSI in the 2 studies of pNETs and why this mechanism is comparatively rare in small intestinal tumors.
Loss of expression of DNA mismatch repair (MMR) proteins, which is known to correlate strongly with MSI, is not well studied in pancreatic or small intestinal NETs.
To determine if there is loss of expression of MMR protein expression in pancreatic or small intestinal NETs.
Sixty-nine patients (31 male, 38 female; mean age, 59.2 years) were identified who had a resection for a primary pancreatic (n  =  35) or primary small intestinal (n  =  34) NET during an 18-year period.
Immunohistochemical stains for MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2 were applied to archived tissue from all cases.
All pNETs with adequate tissue (n  =  32) were also assessed by MSI analysis.
There was preserved expression of MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2 in all 35 pNETs.
Of 32 pNETs tested by polymerase chain reaction, 28 were microsatellite stable and DNA did not amplify in 4.
In 34 small intestinal NETs, 2 cases had indeterminate MLH1 and 1 case had indeterminate PMS2 expression.
The remainder had intact MMR protein expression.
Defects in DNA MMR proteins are rare in pancreatic and small intestinal NETs, raising doubt that MSI plays a significant role in the pathogenesis of these tumors.
PMID: 22128317
A case of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma with marked mucus production.
PMID: 22128312
[mTOR complexes - molecular spiders in molecular networks].
PI3K route is one of the most outstanding signal transduction pathways, which has a key role in the decision-making processes and functions of a cell.
In this network mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) is a well-known integrator.
mTOR forms two complexes, and their increased activity is present in many human tumors.
Therefore, mTOR inhibitors became more and more important in the targeted therapy, first of all in the treatment of renal cancer, neuroendocrine pancreatic cancer and certain astrocytomas, and many trials are going on in other tumor types.
The therapeutic results are obvious, but problems also occur, which stimulate application of new strategies and development of new drugs in order to approach the more individual cancer therapy.
PMID: 22128300
Loss of 18q22.3 involving the carboxypeptidase of glutamate-like gene is associated with poor prognosis in resected pancreatic cancer.
Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related death, and studies on the clinical relevance of its genomic imbalances are warranted.
Recurrent copy number alterations of cytobands and genes were analyzed by array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) in 44 resected pancreatic cancer specimens.
Prognostic markers identified by aCGH were validated by PCR gene copy number assay in an independent validation cohort of 61 resected pancreatic cancers.
The functions of gene identified were evaluated by proliferation, cell cycle, and migration assays in pancreatic cancer cells.
We showed recurrent copy number gains and losses in the first cohort.
Loss of 18q22.3 was significantly associated with short-term overall survival in the first cohort (P = 0.019).
This cytoband includes the carboxypeptidase of glutamate-like (CPGL) gene.
CPGL gene deletion was associated with shorter overall survival in the validation cohort (P = 0.003).
CPGL deletion and mutations of TP53 or Kras seem to be independent events.
A Cox model analysis of the two cohorts combined showed that loss of 18q22.3/deletion of the CPGL gene was an independent poor prognostic factor for overall survival (HR = 2.72, P = 0.0007).
Reconstitution of CPGL or its splicing variant CPGL-B into CPGL-negative pancreatic cancer cells attenuated cell growth, migration, and induced G(1) accumulation.
Loss of 18q22.3/deletion of the CPGL gene is a poor prognostic marker in resected pancreatic cancer, and functional studies suggest the CPGL gene as growth suppressor gene in pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22128285
c-MET as a potential therapeutic target and biomarker in cancer.
The receptor tyrosine kinase c-MET and its ligand, hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), regulate multiple cellular processes that stimulate cell proliferation, invasion and angiogenesis.
This review provides an overview of the evidence to support c-MET or the HGF/c-MET signaling pathway as relevant targets for personalized cancer treatment based on high frequencies of c-MET and/or HGF overexpression, activation, amplification in non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC), gastric, ovarian, pancreatic, thyroid, breast, head and neck, colon and kidney carcinomas.
Additionally, the current knowledge of small molecule inhibitors (tivantinib [ARQ 197]), c-MET/HGF antibodies (rilotumumab and MetMAb) and mechanisms of resistance to c-MET-targeted therapies are discussed.
PMID: 22127781
Screening for Pancreatic Cancer in a High-Risk Cohort: An Eight-Year Experience.
BACKGROUND: Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is the fourth leading cause of cancer death.
METHODS: A prospective cohort study was undertaken between 2003 and 2011 at a tertiary care centre in Toronto, Canada.
Two hundred and sixty-two subjects were enrolled based on an elevated estimated lifetime risk for pancreatic cancer due to known genetic mutations and/or cancer family history.
Subjects underwent annual magnetic resonance imaging, followed by additional investigations if abnormal findings were detected.
Evidence of malignancy or suspicious macroscopic abnormalities prompted referral for surgical intervention.
RESULTS: Average length of follow-up was 4.2 years, during which 84/262 (32%) subjects demonstrated pancreatic abnormalities.
Three participants developed pancreatic adenocarcinoma (one 1.5-cm tumor was resected but recurred, while the other two subjects developed metastatic cancer), and a fourth participant developed a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor that was resected.
Fifteen subjects had radiologic evidence of branch-duct intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms, of which two underwent surgical resection.
Sixty-five subjects had simple pancreatic cysts that have remained stable.
CONCLUSION: Magnetic resonance imaging can detect small pancreatic tumors and cystic lesions, but further improvement in sensitivity is needed.
An understanding of the natural history of pre-invasive lesions in members of high-risk families is necessary for developing a more effective screening program.
PMID: 22127206
Photoactivated cationic alkyl-substituted porphyrin binding to g4-RNA in the 5'-UTR of KRAS oncogene represses translation.
The KRAS transcript is characterized by a 192-nt 5'-UTR containing repetitive runs of two-guanines which can fold in several G-quadruplexes.
These folded structures have a high affinity for the cationic porphyrin tri-meso(N-methyl-4-pyridyl), meso(N-tetradecyl-4-pyridyl) porphine (TMPyP4-C14), which efficiently penetrates cell membranes.
Upon photoactivation TMPyP4-C14 induces a dramatic down-regulation of oncogenic KRAS and cell growth arrest in pancreatic cancer cells.
PMID: 22127113
The nuclear epidermal growth factor receptor signaling network and its role in cancer.
The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a member of the EGFR family of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs).
EGFR activation via ligand binding results in signaling through various pathways ultimately resulting in cellular proliferation, survival, angiogenesis, invasion, and metastasis.
Aberrant expression or activity of EGFR has been strongly linked to the etiology of several human epithelial cancers including but not limited to head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), colorectal cancer (CRC), breast cancer, pancreatic cancer, and brain cancer.
Thus intense efforts have been made to inhibit the activity of EGFR by designing antibodies against the ligand binding domains (cetuximab and panitumumab) or small molecules against the tyrosine kinase domain (erlotinib, gefitinib, and lapatinib).
Although targeting membrane-bound EGFR has shown benefit, a new and emerging role for EGFR is now being elucidated.
In this review we will summarize the current knowledge of the nuclear EGFR signaling network, including how it is trafficked to the nucleus, the functions it serves in the nucleus, and how these functions impact cancer progression, survival, and response to chemotherapeutics.
PMID: 22126293
Aberrant epigenetic grooming of miRNAs in pancreatic cancer: a systems biology perspective.
Pancreatic cancer (PC) is a complex disease harboring a myriad of genetic and epigenetic changes.
The dismal survival of patients diagnosed with PC is in part due to de novo and acquired resistance to conventional therapeutics, resulting from deregulated signaling including aberrant expression of small nc miRNAs.
Emerging research in this area has lead to the identification and characterization of deregulated miRNAs, which have generated a renewed interest and hope in that novel targeting of miRNAs may lead to a better clinical outcome for patients diagnosed with PC.
However, recent evidence suggests that miRNAs are also under a highly coordinated system of epigenetic regulation emphasizing the fact that the design of miRNAs as targeted therapy may not be as simple as originally anticipated.
For a successful miRNA-based therapeutic regimen, a holistic integrated approach may be required to take into account because of these emerging epigenetic regulatory mechanisms.
In this article, we will discuss miRNA epigenetics, it's significance in PC and the use of a systems science to identify these aberrant epigenetically groomed miRNAs, and we believe that such knowledge would likely benefit further research to realize the dream of miRNA-based targeted therapy for human malignancies.
PMID: 22125638
Pancreatic cancer susceptibility loci and their role in survival.
Pancreatic cancer has one of the worst mortality rates of all cancers.
Little is known about its etiology, particularly regarding inherited risk.
The PanScan project, a genome-wide association study, identified several common polymorphisms affecting pancreatic cancer susceptibility.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in ABO, sonic hedgehog (SHH), telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT), nuclear receptor subfamily 5, group A, member 2 (NR5A2) were found to be associated with pancreatic cancer risk.
Moreover the scan identified loci on chromosomes 13q22.1 and 15q14, to which no known genes or other functional elements are mapped.
We sought to replicate these observations in two additional, independent populations (from Germany and the UK), and also evaluate the possible impact of these SNPs on patient survival.
We genotyped 15 SNPs in 690 cases of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and in 1277 healthy controls.
We replicated several associations between SNPs and PDAC risk.
Furthermore we found that SNP rs8028529 was weakly associated with a better overall survival (OS) in both populations.
We have also found that NR5A2 rs12029406_T allele was associated with a shorter survival in the German population.
In conclusion, we found that rs8028529 could be, if these results are replicated, a promising marker for both risk and prognosis for this lethal disease.
PMID: 22125185
Antioxidants in patients receiving total parenteral nutrition after gastrointestinal cancer surgery.
Total parenteral nutrition (TPN) is essential for patients with postoperative impairing gastrointestinal function who are unable to receive and absorb oral/enteral feeding for at least 7 days.
Oxidative stress plays a major role in the ethiopathogenesis of cancers.
In this study, total antioxidant status (TAS), glutathione peroxidase (GPx), superoxide dismutase, malondialdehyde and ascorbic acid were studied in patients operated because of small intestine, colorectal or pancreatic cancer and subsequently receiving TPN in comparison with patients receiving standard nutrition after the operation.
TAS level and GPx activity were decreased in patients with small intestine cancer but did not differ in patients with colorectal and pancreatic cancer before and after surgery.
In all patient groups receiving TPN, superoxide dismutase activity after the surgery was kept at the same level as before.
On the fifth day after the surgery, malondialdehyde concentration in each group was restored to the value observed before surgery.
On the fifth day of TPN treatment, ascorbic acid concentration was increased in every group of patients.
TPN applied during the postoperative period alleviates oxidative stress resulting from surgery.
In the case of small intestine cancer, the addition of vitamins and antioxidants to the nutrition mixture seems to result in depletion of antioxidant enzymes' activities.
Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
PMID: 22125066
A genome-wide RNAi screen for polypeptides that alter rpS6 phosphorylation.
Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a giant protein kinase that controls cell proliferation, growth, and metabolism.
mTOR is regulated by nutrient availability, by mitogens, and by stress, and operates through two independently regulated hetero-oligomeric complexes.
We have attempted to identify the cellular components necessary to maintain the activity of mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1), the amino acid-dependent, rapamycin-inhibitable complex, using a whole genome approach involving RNAi-induced depletion of cellular polypeptides.
We have used a pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cell line, Mia-PaCa for this screen; as with many pancreatic cancers, these cells exhibit constitutive activation of mTORC1.
PDAC is the most common form of pancreatic cancer and the 5-year survival rate remains 3-5% despite current nonspecific and targeted therapies.
Although rapamycin-related mTOR inhibitors have yet to demonstrate encouraging clinical responses, it is now evident that this class of compounds is capable of only partial mTORC1 inhibition.
Identifying previously unappreciated proteins needed for maintenance of mTORC1 activity may provide new targets and lead to the development of beneficial therapies for pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22125026
Role of VHL gene mutation in human renal cell carcinoma.
The Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) is an inherited neoplasia syndrome caused by the inactivation of VHL tumor suppressor gene, and somatic mutation of this gene has been related to the development of sporadic clear cell renal carcinoma.
The affected individuals are at higher risk for the development of tumor in other organs, which include pheochromocytomas, retinal angioma, pancreatic cysts, and CNS hemangioblastomas.
The VHL mRNA encodes a protein (pVHL) that contains 213 amino acid residues which migrate with an apparent molecular weight of 24 to 30 kDa.
The VHL gene protein has multiple functions that are linked to tumor suppression, but the best recognized and evidently linked to the development of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is inhibition of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF), as well as plays a role in targeting HIF for ubiquitin-mediated degradation.
Aberrations in VHL's function, either through mutation or promoter hypermethylation, lead to the accumulation of HIF, which will transcriptionally upregulate a sequence of hypoxia responsive genes, including epidermal growth factor, vascular endothelial growth factor, platelet-derived growth factor, and other proangiogenic factors, resulting in upregulated blood vessel growth, one of the prerequisites of a tumor.
HIF plays a critical role in pVHL-defective tumor formation, raising the possibility that drugs directed against HIF or its downstream targets (such as vascular endothelial growth factor) may one day play a role in the treatment of RCC.
Moreover, a number of drugs have been developed that target HIF-responsive gene products, many of these targeted therapies have demonstrated significant activity in kidney cancer clinical trials and signify substantive advances in the treatment of this disease.
PMID: 22124368
Radiotherapy: the importance of local control in pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22124105
FOLFIRINOX: a great leap forward, but for whom?
PMID: 22123527
Concomitant lung and gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors and the value of gallium-68 PET/CT.
Well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) of the lung occur as typical and atypical carcinoids.
Little is known about the biology of these tumors in respect of their ability to metastasize or the probability of development of concomitant neuroendocrine tumors.
Here we report a patient diagnosed with a second neuroendocrine tumor of the ileum 4 years after curative resection of a typical carcinoid of the left lung.
The intestinal neuroendocrine tumor was successfully detected by gallium-68 based somatostatin receptor positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) and surgically removed using gamma probe detection based on the same labeling.
This case report underlines the utility of somatostatin receptor PET/CT based detection and follow-up of NETs.
PMID: 22123505
Multidetector CT of multicentric solid pseudopapillary tumor of the pancreas: a case report and review of the literature.
Solid pseudopapillary tumor of the pancreas (SPTP) is a rare pancreatic tumor.
Rarely does the tumor have a multicentric location.
We report this unusual case of a 24-year-old woman who had 2 large synchronous SPTPs detected incidentally by routine physical examination.
There was a 4.0×5.0 cm mass in the pancreatic head and a 7.0×8.0 cm mass in the pancreatic tail.
To the best of our knowledge, 3 cases of multicentric SPTP have been reported, but none have been described in the radiology literature.
We report a case and describe the CT imaging features of multicentric SPTP with a review of the literature.
PMID: 22123160
Perineural invasion and lymph node involvement as indicators of surgical outcome and pattern of recurrence in the setting of preoperative gemcitabine-based chemoradiation therapy for resectable pancreatic cancer.
To analyze the histopathological indicators significantly associated with surgical outcome and the pattern of recurrence in the setting of preoperative gemcitabine-based chemoradiation therapy (CRT) and subsequent pancreatectomy.
Clinicopathological assessment of the resected specimen is an indispensable tool for predicting patient prognosis and localizing high-risk sites for tumor relapse.
This procedure is also essential for the establishment of efficient postoperative follow-up protocols in the setting of a preoperative CRT strategy.
In a prospective phase II clinical trial at our hospital, 110 patients received preoperative CRT and subsequent resection.
All 110 resected cases were included in this study.
We employed disease-free survival (DFS) as a surgical outcome, and the pattern of recurrence was divided into 2 categories: (1) recurrence in the abdominal cavity (RAC), defined as either a locoregional or a peritoneal recurrence; or (2) distant recurrence (DR), defined as cancer recurrence in a distant organ.
Clinicopathological variables were analyzed in association with DFS, RAC, and DR.
Positive nodal involvement and perineural invasion were independent factors that were significantly associated with an unfavorable DFS (P = 0.021 and P = 0.026, respectively).
The presence of perineural invasion was the single independent variable significantly associated with an increased risk of RAC (P = 0.002), whereas the status of nodal involvement was the single independent variable significantly associated with an increased risk of DR (P = 0.013).
The status of nodal involvement and perineural invasion in resected specimens are significantly associated with DFS and clearly predict the pattern of recurrence in the setting of a preoperative gemcitabine-based CRT strategy.
This study is registered at UMIN-CTR and carries the ID number UMIN000001804.
PMID: 22121010
Prevalence of diabetes mellitus secondary to pancreatic diseases (type 3c).
BACKGROUND: Diabetes mellitus secondary to pancreatic diseases is a condition seldom thought of in clinical practice.
Yet, a high percentage of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency has been reported for the general population and especially for diabetic subjects.
Thus we investigated the prevalence of diabetes mellitus due to pancreatic diseases.
METHODS: In this study we investigated 1868 patients diagnosed with diabetes mellitus who had been admitted to our hospital during the last 24 months.
Patient data were diligently studied and patients were reclassified according to the diabetes classification as proposed by the American Diabetes Association.
RESULTS: Among 1868 subjects, 172 patients could be classified as type 3c diabetes mellitus (9.2%).
Among these were 135 diagnosed with chronic pancreatitis (78.5%), 12 with hereditary hemochromatosis, 14 with pancreatic cancer and 7 with cystic fibrosis.
Thus, diabetes mellitus due to chronic pancreatitis occurred in this collective in 7.2% of all diabetic subjects.
Misclassification of these patients was very common.
Only 51.2% (88/172) were initially classified correctly.
Most type 3 diabetes patients were initially misclassified as type 2 diabetes (69/84).
CONCLUSIONS: Diabetes mellitus secondary to pancreatic diseases (especially chronic pancreatitis) seems more common than generally believed with a prevalence of 9.2% among the subjects studied here.
Since the awareness of this diabetes type is poor, misclassification is quite frequent.
A common problem seems to be the differentiation between type 2 and type 3.
Yet, the right classification of diabetes mellitus is important, since there are special therapeutic options and problems in patients with diabetes secondary to pancreatic diseases.
Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
PMID: 22120961
Phase I/II study of gemcitabine as a fixed dose rate infusion and S-1 combination therapy (FGS) in gemcitabine-refractory pancreatic cancer patients.
PURPOSE: There is no standard regimen for gemcitabine (Gem)-refractory pancreatic cancer (PC) patients.
In a previous phase II trial, S-1 was found to exhibit marginal efficacy.
Gem administration by fixed dose rate infusion of 10 mg/m(2)/min (FDR-Gem) should maximize the rate of intracellular accumulation of gemcitabine triphosphate and might improve clinical efficacy.
We conducted the phase I/II of FDR-Gem and S-1 (FGS) in patients with Gem-refractory PC.
METHODS: The patients received FDR-Gem on day 1 and S-1 orally twice daily on days 1-7.
Cycles were repeated every 14 days.
Patients were scheduled to receive Gem (mg/m(2)/week) and S-1 (mg/m(2)/day) at four dose levels in the phase I: 800/80 (level 1), 1,000/80 (level 2), 1,200/80 (level 3) and 1,200/100 (level 4).
Forty patients were enrolled in the phase II study at recommended dose.
RESULTS: The recommended dose was the level 3.
In the phase II, a partial response has been confirmed in seven patients (18%).
The median overall survival time and median progression-free survival time are 7.0 and 2.8 months, respectively.
The common adverse reactions were anorexia, leukocytopenia and neutropenia.
CONCLUSION: This combination regimen of FGS is active and well tolerated in patients with Gem-refractory PC.
PMID: 22120713
The immediate early gene Ier2 promotes tumor cell motility and metastasis, and predicts poor survival of colorectal cancer patients.
Here, we report unbiased screens for genes expressed in metastatic tumor cells that are associated with cell motility.
These screens identified Ier2, an immediate early gene of unknown function, as potentially having a role in tumor cell motility and metastasis.
Knockdown of Ier2 in 3T3 fibroblasts inhibited their motility upon relief of contact inhibition in monolayer wounding assays.
Furthermore, ectopic Ier2 expression promoted the motility and invasiveness of poorly metastatic 1AS pancreatic tumor cells in vitro.
Relief of contact inhibition was associated with translocation of the Ier2 protein from the cytoplasm to the nucleus in both 3T3 fibroblasts and 1AS tumor cells.
Importantly, ectopic Ier2 expression in 1AS cells stimulated metastasis formation when cells were implanted into experimental animals.
Furthermore, we found elevated Ier2 expression in a wide variety of human tumor types.
This correlated with poor metastasis-free and overall survival in patients with colorectal adenocarcinomas.
Together, these data reveal Ier2 as a new player in the regulation of tumor progression and metastasis, and suggest that Ier2 may be useful prognostically and therapeutically in the management of cancer.Oncogene advance online publication, 28 November 2011; doi:10.1038/onc.2011.535.
PMID: 22120667
Exploiting oncogene-induced replicative stress for the selective killing of Myc-driven tumors.
Oncogene-induced replicative stress activates an Atr- and Chk1-dependent response, which has been proposed to be widespread in tumors.
We explored whether the presence of replicative stress could be exploited for the selective elimination of cancer cells.
To this end, we evaluated the impact of targeting the replicative stress-response on cancer development.
In mice (Mus musculus), the reduced levels of Atr found on a mouse model of the Atr-Seckel syndrome completely prevented the development of Myc-induced lymphomas or pancreatic tumors, both of which showed abundant levels of replicative stress.
Moreover, Chk1 inhibitors were highly effective in killing Myc-driven lymphomas.
By contrast, pancreatic adenocarcinomas initiated by K-Ras(G12V) showed no detectable evidence of replicative stress and were nonresponsive to this therapy.
Besides its impact on cancer, Myc overexpression aggravated the phenotypes of Atr-Seckel mice, revealing that oncogenes can modulate the severity of replicative stress-associated diseases.
PMID: 22119988
IRF-2 is over-expressed in pancreatic cancer and promotes the growth of pancreatic cancer cells.
Pancreatic cancer is one of the most malignant diseases in the world.
Interferon regulator factor 2 (IRF-2), an interferon regulatory factor, has been known to act as an oncogene in distinct types of cancer.
In this study, we found that the expression of IRF-2 was up-regulated in primary pancreatic cancer samples and associated with tumor size, differentiation, tumor-node-metastasis stage, and survival of the patients.
In pancreatic cancer cells, knockdown on the expression of IRF-2 inhibited cell growth in the liquid culture and on the soft agar.
Mechanistically, IRF-2 modulated the growth of pancreatic cancer cells through regulating proliferation and apoptosis effectors, such as cyclin D1 and BAX.
Collectively, these results suggest that IRF-2 plays an important role in the tumorigenesis of pancreatic cancer and down-regulation of IRF-2 would be a new treatment target for pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22119354
Comorbidity, age and overall survival in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer - Results from NCIC CTG PA.3: A phase III trial of gemcitabine plus erlotinib or placebo.
BACKGROUND: The effect of comorbidity, age and performance status (PS) on treatment of advanced pancreatic cancer is poorly understood.
We examined these factors as predictors of outcome in advanced pancreatic cancer patients treated with gemcitabine +/- erlotinib.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Comorbidity was evaluated by two physicians using the Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) and correlated with clinical outcome data from the NCIC Clinical Trials Group (NCIC CTG) PA.3 clinical trial.
RESULTS: Five hundred and sixty-nine patients were included; 47% were aged ⩾65years old, 36% had comorbidity (CCI>0).
In multivariate analysis, neither age (p=0.22) nor comorbidity (p=0.21) was associated with overall survival.
The baseline presence of better PS and lower pain intensity scores was associated with better overall survival (p<0.0001 and p=0.01, respectively).
An improvement in survival with the addition of erlotinib therapy was seen in patients age <65 (adjusted hazard ratio (HR) 0.73, p=0.01) or in the presence of comorbidity (adjusted HR 0.72, p=0.03).
However, neither age nor CCI score was predictive of erlotinib benefit after test for interaction.
Patients treated with gemcitabine plus erlotinib who were ⩾65years of age or those with comorbidity had a higher rate of infections ⩾grade 3.
CONCLUSION: Low baseline pain intensity and better PS were associated with improved overall survival, while age and comorbidity were not independent prognostic factors for patients treated with gemcitabine-based therapy.
PMID: 22119145
Stem cells as the root of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
Emerging evidence suggests that stem cells play a crucial role not only in the generation and maintenance of different tissues, but also in the development and progression of malignancies.
For the many solid cancers, it has now been shown that they harbor a distinct subpopulation of cancer cells that bear stem cell features and therefore, these cells are termed cancer stem cells (CSC) or tumor-propagating cells.
CSC are exclusively tumorigenic and essential drivers for tumor progression and metastasis.
Moreover, it has been shown that pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma does not only contain one homogeneous population of CSC rather than diverse subpopulations that may have evolved during tumor progression.
One of these populations is called migrating CSC and can be characterized by CXCR4 co-expression.
Only these cells are capable of evading the primary tumor and traveling to distant sites such as the liver as the preferred site of metastatic spread.
Clinically even more important, however, is the observation that CSC are highly resistant to chemo- and radiotherapy resulting in their relative enrichment during treatment and rapid relapse of disease.
Many laboratories are now working on the further in-depth characterization of these cells, which may eventually allow for the identification of their Achilles heal and lead to novel treatment modalities for fighting this deadly disease.
PMID: 22118834
Molecular Profiling of Synchronous and Metachronous Cancers of the Pancreas Reveal Molecular Mimicry Between Samples from the Same Patient.
BACKGROUND: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is rarely a survivable disease.
In rare cases, separate synchronous tumors are discovered at the time of resection, while in others, patients present with a metachronous cancer after prior surgical resection.
Studying molecular markers of synchronous and metachronous lesions may aid to clarify the biology of this often deadly disease.
METHODS: Two patients presented with synchronous tumors (each one with a tumor in the pancreatic head/neck and the other in the tail, designated patients A and B).
An additional patient (patient C) underwent an R0 resection for PDA of the head and recurred 1.5 y later with PDA in the tail.
Genomic DNA was laser capture microdissected (LCM) from the tumor and molecular analysis was performed.
K-ras status and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) were determined from multiple specimens for each case.
RESULTS: All samples from each patient harbored identical K-ras mutations.
In patient A, the tumor at the head of the pancreas had more clonal genetic instability as reflected by LOH analysis over multiple LCM samples.
Patient B had more genetic instability in the tail lesion compared with the neck.
Patient C had virtually the identical molecular profile in both tumors, supporting the notion that both tumors were related.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that the synchronous and metachronous tumors likely are initiated from identical precursor lesions and/or events (i.e., K-ras mutations).
Future studies will need to investigate if these tumors will respond similarly to adjuvant therapies targeted against the clonal molecular events in the tumor.
PMID: 22118662
β2-adrenoceptor blockage induces G1/S phase arrest and apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells via Ras/Akt/NFκB pathway.
Smoking and stress, pancreatic cancer (PanCa) risk factors, stimulate nitrosamine 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK) and catecholamines production respectively.
NNK and catecholamine bind the β-adrenoceptors and induce PanCa cell proliferation; and we have previously suggested that β-adrenergic antagonists may suppress proliferation and invasion and stimulate apoptosis in PanCa.
To clarify the mechanism of apoptosis induced by β2-adrenergic antagonist, we hypothesize that blockage of the β2-adrenoceptor could induce G1/S phase arrest and apoptosis and Ras may be a key player in PanCa cells.
The β1 and β2-adrenoceptor proteins were detected on the cell surface of PanCa cells from pancreatic carcinoma specimen samples by immunohistochemistry.
The β2-adrenergic antagonist ICI118,551 significantly induced G1/S phase arrest and apoptosis compared with the β1-adrenergic antagonist metoprolol, which was determined by the flow cytometry assay.
β2-adrenergic antagonist therapy significantly suppressed the expression of extracellular signal-regulated kinase, Akt, Bcl-2, cyclin D1, and cyclin E and induced the activation of caspase-3, caspase-9 and Bax by Western blotting.
Additionally, the β2-adrenergic antagonist reduced the activation of NFκB in vitro cultured PanCa cells.
The blockage of β2-adrenoceptor markedly induced PanCa cells to arrest at G1/S phase and consequently resulted in cell death, which is possibly due to that the blockage of β2-adrenoceptor inhibited NFκB, extracellular signal-regulated kinase, and Akt pathways.
Therefore, their upstream molecule Ras may be a key factor in the β2-adrenoceptor antagonist induced G1/S phase arrest and apoptosis in PanCa cells.
The new pathway discovered in this study may provide an effective therapeutic strategy for PanCa.
PMID: 22117151
microRNAs as markers of survival and chemoresistance in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
microRNAs (miRs) are a recently recognized class of noncoding short RNAs, 17-25 nucleotides in length, that play a role in post-transcriptional gene regulation by translational repression and/or mRNA degradation.
Various miRs have been highlighted in pancreatic cancer development and metastasis, and as potential clinical diagnostic/prognostic biomarkers.
Recently, studies have indicated that miRs are responsible for resistance to chemotherapeutic agents.
The miR-10b has been identified as a 'metastamiR' in various tumor types, notably breast cancer, but data surrounding its relevance in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma has been sparse.
The evaluated article presents data indicating that miR-10b is upregulated in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and can be used as a diagnostic marker in endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsies of suspicious pancreatic lesions.
In addition, miR-10b may be able to guide neoadjuvant gemcitabine-based chemoradiotherapy and predict metastatic-free survival and overall survival.
PMID: 22116673
Concomitant inhibition of HSP90, its mitochondrial localized homologue TRAP1 and HSP27 by green tea in pancreatic cancer HPAF-II cells.
Pancreatic cancer is a deadly disease characterized by poor prognosis and patient survival.
Green tea polyphenols have been shown to exhibit multiple antitumor activities in various cancers, but studies on the pancreatic cancer are very limited.
To identify the cellular targets of green tea action, we exposed a green tea extract (GTE) to human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma HPAF-II cells and performed two-dimensional gel electrophoresis of the cell lysates.
We identified 32 proteins with significantly altered expression levels.
These proteins are involved in drug resistance, gene regulation, motility, detoxification and metabolism of cancer cells.
In particular, we found GTE inhibited molecular chaperones heat-shock protein 90 (Hsp90), its mitochondrial localized homologue Hsp75 (tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated protein 1, or Trap1) and heat-shock protein 27 (Hsp27) concomitantly.
Western blot analysis confirmed the inhibition of Hsp90, Hsp75 and Hsp27 by GTE, but increased phosphorylation of Ser78 of Hsp27.
Furthermore, we showed that GTE inhibited Akt activation and the levels of mutant p53 protein, and induced apoptosis and growth suppression of the cells.
Our study has identified multiple new molecular targets of GTE and provided further evidence on the anticancer activity of green tea in pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22116540
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers in cancer progression and survival: a systematic review.
To investigate the association between angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) and disease progression and survival in cancer patients.
Using terms for cancer and ACEIs/ARBs, MEDLINE, EMBASE and Web of Science were systematically searched for observational/interventional studies that used clinically relevant outcomes for cancer progression and survival.
Ten studies met the inclusion criteria.
Two studies showed a significant improvement in overall survival (OS) with ACEI/ARB use among patients with advanced pancreatic (HR 0.52, 95% CI 0.29-0.88) and non-small cell lung cancer (HR 0.56, 95% CI 0.33-0.95).
An improvement in progression-free survival (PFS) was also reported for pancreatic cancer patients (HR 0.58, 95% CI 0.34-0.95) and patients with renal cell carcinoma (HR 0.54, p = 0.02).
ACEI/ARB use was protective against breast cancer recurrence (HR 0.60, 95% CI 0.37-0.96), colorectal cancer distant metastasis (OR 0.22, 95% CI 0.08-0.65) and prostate specific antigen (PSA) failure in prostate cancer patients (p = 0.034).
One study observed a worse OS (HR 2.01, 95% CI 1.00-4.05) and PFS in ACEI users with multiple myeloma (p = 0.085) while another reported an increased risk of breast cancer recurrence (HR = 1.56, 95% CI 1.02-2.39).
There is some evidence to suggest that ACEI or ARB use may be associated with improved outcomes in cancer patients.
Larger, more robust studies are required to explore this relationship further.
PMID: 22116519
Molecular pathogenesis of pancreatic cancer and clinical perspectives.
Pancreatic cancer remains stubbornly resistant to many key cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents and novel targeted therapies.
The molecular heterogeneity of this cancer may account for therapy failures to date, although our growing arsenal of novel targeted agents could translate into patient survival.
The main objectives of this review are to elucidate histological subtypes of pancreatic neoplasms that exhibit the characteristic of a gradual process of differentiation from benign entities to malignant ones.
In addition, important genes, molecular abnormalities, and significant pathways of pancreatic cancer are analyzed and a potential clinical interpretation is presented (p16/cdkn2a, k-ras mutations, smad-4/tgf-/stat3, stk-11, braf, brca-2, neurotensin, mucs proteins, palb2, mitochondrial mutations, DNA mismatch repair genes, methylation, microrna expression, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, egfr mutations, the pi3k-akt-mtor pathway, the vegf pathway, heat shock proteins, cxcr4, the cox pathway, the src pathway, the hedgehog pathway, pancreatic stellate cells, a progression model, and molecular events in uncommon pancreatic tumors).
Finally, future therapeutic directions are elucidated.
PMID: 22116396
An annular pancreas associated with carcinoma of the papilla of Vater: report of a case.
An annular pancreas is an uncommon congenital anomaly that usually presents early in childhood.
Malignancy in the setting of an annular pancreas is unusual.
We herein report a case of annular pancreas with carcinoma of the papilla of Vater.
A 59-year-old man presented with epigastric discomfort and was referred to us after gastroduodenal endoscopy showed a tumor of the papilla of Vater.
Preoperative imaging showed the pancreatic parenchyma encircling the descending duodenum and a tumor at the papilla of Vater.
A pancreaticoduodenectomy was performed for the annular pancreas and the ampullary tumor.
Histological examination confirmed a complete annular pancreas and carcinoma in situ of the papilla of Vater.
We also provide a review of the reported cases of an annular pancreas with periampullary neoplasms and discuss the clinical characteristics of this anomaly.
PMID: 22115979
The level of menadione redox-cycling in pancreatic β-cells is proportional to the glucose concentration: role of NADH and consequences for insulin secretion.
Pancreatic β-cells release insulin in response to elevation of glucose from basal (4-7mM) to stimulatory (8-16mM) levels.
Metabolism of glucose by the β-cell results in the production of low levels of reactive oxygen intermediates (ROI), such as hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)), a newly recognized coupling factor linking glucose metabolism to insulin secretion.
However, high and toxic levels of H(2)O(2) inhibit insulin secretion.
Menadione, which produces H(2)O(2) via redox cycling mechanism in a dose-dependent manner, was investigated for its effect on β-cell metabolism and insulin secretion in INS-1 832/13, a rat β-cell insulinoma cell line, and primary rodent islets.
Menadione-dependent redox cycling and resulting H(2)O(2) production under stimulatory glucose exceeded several-fold those reached at basal glucose.
This was paralleled by a differential effect of menadione (0.1-10μM) on insulin secretion, which was enhanced at basal, but inhibited at stimulatory glucose.
Redox cycling of menadione and H(2)O(2) formation was dependent on glycolytically-derived NADH, as inhibition of glycolysis and application of non-glycogenic insulin secretagogues did not support redox cycling.
In addition, activity of plasma membrane electron transport, a system dependent in part on glycolytically-derived NADH, was also inhibited by menadione.
Menadione-dependent redox cycling was sensitive to the NQO1 inhibitor dicoumarol and the flavoprotein inhibitor diphenylene iodonium, suggesting a role for NQO1 and other oxidoreductases in this process.
These data may explain the apparent dichotomy between the stimulatory and inhibitory effects of H(2)O(2) and menadione on insulin secretion.
PMID: 22115911
StellaTUM: current consensus and discussion on pancreatic stellate cell research.
PMID: 22115568
Outcomes of patients undergoing percutaneous biliary drainage to reduce bilirubin for administration of chemotherapy.
To describe outcomes in patients undergoing percutaneous biliary drainage to reduce total serum bilirubin level for administration of chemotherapy.
A total of 647 consecutive patients underwent percutaneous biliary drainage between September 2001 and December 2008.
In 168, the indication for biliary drainage was to decrease total serum bilirubin level to permit administration of chemotherapy.
Of these, 20 were excluded because they had hepatic arterial infusion pumps, leaving 148 patients as the study group.
The primary diagnoses for these patients were gallbladder cancer (n = 23), cholangiocarcinoma (n = 21), pancreatic cancer (n = 36), and other metastatic cancers (n = 68).
Medical records and imaging studies were reviewed for demographic data, procedural information, pre- and postdrainage total serum bilirubin level levels, 30-day complications, and subsequent biliary procedures.
The probability of attaining a total serum bilirubin level of 1 mg/dL or lower by 100 days was 31% (95% CI, 23%-39%).
Predrainage total serum bilirubin level of 9 mg/dL or lower (hazard ratio [HR], 3.27; 95% CI, 1.86-5.75; P < .001), 100% liver drainage (HR 2.73, 95% CI, 1.56-4.78; P <.001), and lower predrainage International Normalized Ratio (INR; HR, 0.80; 95% CI, 0.70-0.92; P = .002) were associated with an increased likelihood of attaining a total serum bilirubin level of 1 mg/dL or lower.
The most common indication for follow-up was pericatheter leakage, which occurred in nearly one third of cases.
During follow-up, patients required three visits per 100 catheter-days, or approximately one per month.
Median overall survival in this population was approximately 3.5 months.
Only 31% of patients attained a normal serum bilirubin level by 100 days, and median overall survival was 107 days.
Careful patient selection is warranted before biliary drainage for this indication.
Maximal biliary drainage, a preprocedure total serum bilirubin of less than 9 mg/dL, and a lower INR were factors associated with serum bilirubin normalization in this cohort.
PMID: 22114719
Essential role of the small GTPase Ran in postnatal pancreatic islet development.
The small GTPase Ran orchestrates pleiotropic cellular responses of nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling, mitosis and subcellular trafficking, but whether deregulation of these pathways contributes to disease pathogenesis has remained elusive.
Here, we generated transgenic mice expressing wild type (WT) Ran, loss-of-function Ran T24N mutant or constitutively active Ran G19V mutant in pancreatic islet β cells under the control of the rat insulin promoter.
Embryonic pancreas and islet development, including emergence of insulin(+) β cells, was indistinguishable in control or transgenic mice.
However, by one month after birth, transgenic mice expressing any of the three Ran variants exhibited overt diabetes, with hyperglycemia, reduced insulin production, and nearly complete loss of islet number and islet mass, in vivo.
Deregulated Ran signaling in transgenic mice, adenoviral over-expression of WT or mutant Ran in isolated islets, or short hairpin RNA (shRNA) silencing of endogenous Ran in model insulinoma INS-1 cells, all resulted in decreased expression of the pancreatic and duodenal homeobox transcription factor, PDX-1, and reduced β cell proliferation, in vivo.
These data demonstrate that a finely-tuned balance of Ran GTPase signaling is essential for postnatal pancreatic islet development and glucose homeostasis, in vivo.
PMID: 22114139
MicroRNA Alterations of Pancreatic Intraepithelial Neoplasias.
MicroRNA (miRNA) alterations are likely to contribute to the development of pancreatic cancer and may serve as markers for the early detection of pancreatic neoplasia.
To identify the miRNA alterations that arise during the development of pancreatic cancer, we determined the levels of 735 miRNAs in 34 pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasias (PanIN) and 15 normal pancreatic duct samples isolated by laser capture microdissection using TaqMan miRNA microarrays.
Differential expression of selected miRNAs was confirmed by FISH analysis and by quantitative real-time reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis of selected candidate miRNAs in an independent set of PanIN and normal duct samples.
We identified 107 aberrantly expressed miRNAs in different PanIN grades compared with normal pancreatic duct samples and 35 aberrantly expressed miRNAs in PanIN-3 lesions compared with normal pancreatic duct samples.
These differentially expressed miRNAs included those that have been previously identified as differentially expressed in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDAC; including miR-21, miR-200a/b/c, miR-216a/b, miR-217, miR-146a, miR-155, miR-182, miR-196b, miR-203, miR-222, miR-338-3p, miR-486-3p, etc.) as well as miRNAs not previously described as differentially expressed in these lesions (miR-125b, miR-296-5p, miR-183*, miR-603, miR-625/*, miR-708, etc.).
miR-196b was the most selectively differentially expressed miRNA in PanIN-3 lesions.
Many miRNAs undergo aberrant expression in PanIN lesions and are likely to be important in the development of PDAC.
The miRNAs, such as miR-196b, whose expression is limited to PanIN-3 lesions or pancreatic cancers could be useful as diagnostic markers.
Clin Cancer Res; 18(4); 981-92.
©2011 AACR.
PMID: 22114136
MicroRNA molecular profiles associated with diagnosis, clinicopathologic criteria, and overall survival in patients with resectable pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
MicroRNAs (miRNA) have potential as diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers and as therapeutic targets in cancer.
We sought to establish the relationship between miRNA expression and clinicopathologic parameters, including prognosis, in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC).
Global miRNA microarray expression profiling of prospectively collected fresh-frozen PDAC tissue was done on an initial test cohort of 48 patients, who had undergone pancreaticoduodenectomy between 2003 and 2008 at a single institution.
We evaluated association with tumor stage, lymph node status, and site of recurrence, in addition to overall survival, using Cox regression multivariate analysis.
Validation of selected potentially prognostic miRNAs was done in a separate cohort of 24 patients.
miRNA profiling identified expression signatures associated with PDAC, lymph node involvement, high tumor grade, and 20 miRNAs were associated with overall survival.
In the initial cohort of 48 PDAC patients, high expression of miR-21 (HR = 3.22, 95% CI: 1.21-8.58) and reduced expression of miR-34a (HR = 0.15, 95% CI: 0.06-0.37) and miR-30d (HR = 0.30, 95% CI: 0.12-0.79) were associated with poor overall survival following resection independent of clinical covariates.
In a further validation set of 24 patients, miR-21 and miR-34a expression again significantly correlated with overall survival (P = 0.031 and P = 0.001).
Expression patterns of miRNAs are significantly altered in PDAC.
Aberrant expression of a number of miRNAs was independently associated with reduced survival, including overexpression of miR-21 and underexpression of miR-34a.
Summary: miRNA expression profiles for resected PDAC were examined to identify potentially prognostic miRNAs.
miRNA microarray analysis identified statistically unique profiles, which could discriminate PDAC from paired nonmalignant pancreatic tissues as well as molecular signatures that differ according to pathologic features.
miRNA expression profiles correlated with overall survival of PDAC following resection, indicating that miRNAs provide prognostic utility.
PMID: 22113956
New faecal tests in gastroenterology.
Most abdominal disorders present with a limited number of overlapping symptoms.
Blood tests are not routinely available for use in diagnosis and so investigation tends to require complex imaging procedures or endoscopy and biopsy.
These are invasive for the patient, may be associated with morbidity and mortality and have considerable resource implications.
Biochemical tests on a single sample of faeces are therefore a valuable alternative.
Measurement of faecal calprotectin has been shown to have a role in the diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease and in its monitoring.
Lactoferrin is also of benefit used in this way.
Faecal elastase has been demonstrated to be of use in the diagnosis of pancreatic insufficiency.
A number of faecal markers have been explored in colorectal cancer.
Faecal occult blood testing is used for population screening, but the metabolomic marker tumour, M2-pyruvate kinase, has potential for use in both diagnosis and screening.
DNA testing has advantages in colorectal cancer but the exact applications of such tests require further evaluation.
PMID: 22113634
[Caregiving burden and associated factors among caregivers of terminally ill gastrointestinal cancer patients].
Heavy caregiving burdens can harm the physical and mental health of primary caregivers and reduce patient care quality.
Understanding caregiving burden and its associated factors among primary caregivers of terminally ill patients with gastrointestinal cancer can help improve holistic terminal healthcare quality.
The authors explore in this paper the relationship between caregiving burden and terminally ill gastrointestinal cancer patient disease characteristics, demographic backgrounds, level of social support, self-care efficacy, fear of death and self-perceived symptom distress in both patients and primary caregivers.
This was a cross-sectional, descriptive, and correlational study that used convenience sampling and structured questionnaires.
Data were collected from 178 family caregivers of terminally ill patients with gastrointestinal cancer in the Tainan and Chiayi areas of Southern Taiwan.
The caregiving burden of caregivers of terminally ill gastrointestinal cancer patients in hospice homecare was significantly higher than that of those recruited from outpatient departments.
Caregiving burden for liver and pancreatic cancer patients was significantly higher than for colorectal cancer patients.
The caregiving burden of spousal caregivers was significantly higher than that of lineal blood relatives.
The caregiving burden of caregivers with worse self-perceived health status was significantly higher than that of those with better self-perceived health status.
The most important explanatory factors of caregiving burden among primary caregivers terminally ill gastrointestinal cancer patients were (in descending order) social support, self-perceived symptom distress in patient, self-perceived health status, location of study subject recruitment, fear of death, and relationship with patient; these factors explained 63.8% of the total variation.
Social support was the most important explanatory factor, explaining 37.2% of total variance.
We recommend that terminal health care teams better assess the social support given primary caregivers of terminally ill gastrointestinal cancer patients, that assistance be provided to caregivers with less social support, that caregiver life-and-death education be improved, and that primary caregivers be taught how to accept and positively handle the death of the loved one in their care.
More attention should be paid to controlling symptoms of terminal stage cancer patients in order to reduce caregiver self-perceived symptom distress.
Evaluation of caregiving burden is especially important for those primary caregivers who are hospice homecare workers, spouses, and of lower self-perceived health status.
PMID: 22113584
Oral ingestion of Capsaicin, the pungent component of chili pepper, enhances a discreet population of macrophages and confers protection from autoimmune diabetes.
Vanilloid receptor 1 (VR1) is expressed on immune cells as well as on sensory neurons.
Here we report that VR1 can regulate immunological events in the gut in response to its ligand Capsaicin (CP), a nutritional factor, the pungent component of chili peppers.
Oral administration of CP attenuates the proliferation and activation of autoreactive T cells in pancreatic lymph nodes (PLNs) but not other lymph nodes, and protects mice from development of type 1 diabetes (T1D).
This is a general phenomenon and not restricted to one particular strain of mice.
Engagement of VR1 enhances a discreet population of CD11b(+)/F4/80(+) macrophages in PLN, which express anti-inflammatory factors interleukin (IL)-10 and PD-L1.
This population is essential for CP-mediated attenuation of T-cell proliferation in an IL-10-dependent manner.
Lack of VR1 expression fails to inhibit proliferation of autoreactive T cells, which is partially reversed in (VR1(+/+) → VR1(-/-)) bone marrow chimeric mice, implying the role of VR1 in crosstalk between neuronal and immunological responses in vivo.
These findings imply that endogenous ligands of VR1 can have profound effect on gut-mediated immune tolerance and autoimmunity by influencing the nutrient-immune interactions.
PMID: 22113502
Disruption of p16 and activation of Kras in pancreas increase ductal adenocarcinoma formation and metastasis in vivo.
Inactivation of tumor suppressor gene p16/INK4A and oncogenic activation of KRAS occur in almost all pancreatic cancers.
To better understand the roles of p16 in pancreatic tumorigenesis, we created a conditional p16 knockout mouse line (p16flox/flox), in which p16 is specifically disrupted in a tissue-specific manner without affecting p19/ARF expression.
p16flox/flox; LSL-KrasG12D; Pdx1-Cre mice developed the full spectrum of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (mPanIN) lesions, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA), and metastases were observed in all the mice.
Here we report a mouse model that simulates human pancreatic tumorigenesis at both genetic and histologic levels and is ideal for studies of metastasis.
During the progression from primary tumors to metastases, the wild-type allele of Kras was progressively lost (loss of heterozygosity at Kras or LOH at Kras) in p16flox/flox; LSL- KrasG12D; Pdx1-Cre mice.
These observations suggest a role for Kras beyond tumor initiation.
In vitro assays performed with cancer cell lines derived from primary pancreatic tumors of these mice showed that cancer cells with LOH at Kras exhibited more aggressive phenotypes than those retained the wild-type Kras allele, indicating that LOH at Kras can provide cancer cells functional growth advantages and promote metastasis.
Increased LOH at KRAS was also observed in progression of human pancreatic primary tumors to metastases, again supporting a role for the KRAS gene in cancer metastasis.
This finding has potential translational implications- future KRAS target therapies may need to consider targeting oncogenic KRAS specifically without inhibiting wild-type KRAS function.
PMID: 22113313
GALV expression enhances the therapeutic efficacy of an oncolytic adenovirus by inducing cell fusion and enhancing virus distribution.
The limitations of the current oncolytic adenoviruses for cancer therapy include insufficient potency and poor distribution of the virus throughout the tumor mass.
To address these problems, we generated an oncolytic adenovirus expressing the hyperfusogenic form of the gibbon-ape leukemia virus (GALV) envelope glycoprotein under the control of the adenovirus major late promoter.
The oncolytic properties of the new fusogenic adenovirus, ICOVIR16, were analyzed both in vitro and in vivo, and compared with that of its non-fusogenic counterpart, ICOVIR15.
Our results indicate that GALV expression by ICOVIR16 induced extensive syncytia formation and enhanced tumor cell killing in a variety of tumor cell types.
When injected intratumorally or intravenously into mice with large pre-established melanoma or pancreatic tumors, ICOVIR16 rapidly reduced tumor burden, and in some cases, resulted in complete eradication of the tumors.
Importantly, GALV expression induced tumor cell fusion in vivo and enhanced the spreading of the virus throughout the tumor.
Taken together, these results indicate that GALV expression can improve the antitumoral potency of an oncolytic adenovirus and suggest that ICOVIR16 is a promising candidate for clinical evaluation in patients with cancer.Gene Therapy advance online publication, 24 November 2011; doi:10.1038/gt.2011.184.
PMID: 22113043
[An experience of cyberknife treatment in patients with advanced pancreaticobilliary malignancy].
CyberKnifeTM stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) has been thought as a promising treatment modality for inoperable or recurred pancreaticobiliary malignancies.
But, clinical course of CyberKnifeTM treatment have not been established yet, so we report the experience of CyberKnifeTM treatment in 19 patients with recurred or advanced pancreaticobilliary malignancies.
Between July 2008 and May 2009, 19 patients (gallbladder cancer 4, common bile duct cancer 5, and pancreatic cancer 10) with recurred (12) and advanced pancreaticobiliary cancer (7) underwent CyberKnifeTM treatment in Soonchunhyang University Hospital.
Tumor size was evaluated at 1, 3, 6, 8 and every 3 months after SBRT.
The mean age was 60.2 years, and the mean size of target lesions was 28.1±1.30 mm.
After CyberKnifeTM treatment, the average size of target lesions was decreased; 2.53±4.18 mm from months 0-1 in 19 patients, 2.47±4.7 mm from months 1-3 in 15 patients, 0.08±5.11 mm from months 3-6 in 12 patients.
However, the average size of target lesions was increased 3.67±8.98 mm from months 6-8 in 6 patients.
There were 2 cases of massive duodenal ulcer bleeding after CyberKnifeTM treatment, one of them expired due to ulcer bleeding.
Also, other minor complications appeared such as 1 case of abdominal pain and 1 case of diarrhea.
CyberKnifeTM treatment seems to be effective in local control of pancreaticobiliary cancer, but we experienced serious complications.
Further prospective studies will be needed for the proper evaluation of role of CyberknifeTM treatment in patients with advanced pancreaticobiliary malignancies.
PMID: 22112810
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide receptors in most gastroenteropancreatic and bronchial neuroendocrine tumors.
Context: Gastrointestinal peptide hormone receptors overexpressed in neuroendocrine tumors (NET), such as somatostatin or glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptors, are used for in vivo tumor targeting.
Unfortunately, not all NET express these receptors sufficiently.
Objective: Our aim was to evaluate in vitro the expression of another incretin receptor, glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) receptor, in human tumors and compare it with that in adjacent nonneoplastic tissues and also with somatostatin and GLP-1 receptor expression.
Methods: GIP receptor protein expression was qualitatively and quantitatively investigated in 260 human tumors and in nonneoplastic human tissues with receptor autoradiography using [(125)I]GIP(1-30).
Pharmacological competition experiments and mRNA analysis were performed to provide proof of specificity.
Somatostatin receptor and GLP-1 receptor autoradiography were performed in adjacent sections.
Results: GIP receptors are expressed in the majority of pancreatic, ileal, and bronchial NET.
Importantly, most of the somatostatin receptor-negative NET and GLP-1 receptor-negative malignant insulinomas are GIP receptor positive.
Conversely, the epithelial and stromal gastrointestinal tumors, including gastric, colonic, and hepatocellular carcinomas, cholangiocarcinomas, and gastrointestinal stromal tumors as well as lung adenocarcinomas are usually GIP receptor negative, except for 26% of pancreatic adenocarcinomas.
Pancreatic islets, but not acini, are GIP receptor positive.
The rank order of potencies for receptor binding and mRNA analysis by PCR reveal specific GIP receptors.
Conclusions: The numerous GIP receptors in gastroenteropancreatic and bronchial NET represent novel universal molecular targets for clinical applications, in particular for in vivo scintigraphy and targeted radiotherapy.
These results may also be the basis for multiple targeting, with concomitant use of GIP, somatostatin, and GLP-1 analogs as radiotracers.
PMID: 22112419
Frequency of subtypes of biliary intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm and their MUC1, MUC2, and DPC4 expression patterns differ from pancreatic intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm.
Biliary intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (B-IPMN) has been proposed as a unique clinicopathologic disease with distinct histopathologic features, although wide acceptance remains controversial.
A recent consensus conference classified pancreatic IPMN (P-IPMN) into 4 subtypes (ie, gastric, intestinal, pancreatobiliary, oncocytic) based on morphologic appearance and mucin (MUC) staining properties.
The aim of this study was to determine whether B-IPMN has similar histopathologic and immunologic subtypes to P-IPMN.
Specific immunostaining for MUC1, MUC2, and deleted for pancreas cancer, locus 4 were performed on specimens from 19 patients with a histopathologic diagnosis of B-IPMN.
Immunostaining patterns of B-IPMN were correlated with histopathology.
Based on histopathology, the following subtypes of B-IPMN were identified: pancreatobiliary n = 9 (47%), intestinal n = 8 (42%), oncocytic n = 2 (11%), and gastric n = 0 (0%).
Pancreatobiliary and oncocytic subtypes of B-IPMN were positive for MUC1 and negative for MUC2, and intestinal subtypes were positive for MUC2 and negative for MUC1.
Thirteen of the 19 B-IPMN were associated with invasive carcinoma; loss of deleted for pancreas cancer, locus 4 was found in 6 of 13 invasive components and in 3 of 19 noninvasive components of B-IPMN.
Five-year survival for patients with resected B-IPMN and invasive carcinoma was 38%, which is similar to that for resected P-IPMN with invasive carcinoma.
Histopathologic subtypes and type-specific MUC expression patterns of B-IPMN resemble those of P-IPMN.
MUC1 expression and/or absence of MUC2 expression, which correlate with aggressive features of P-IPMN, were found in B-IPMN and correlate with invasive B-IPMN.
Loss of deleted for pancreas cancer, locus 4 parallels the findings observed in P-IPMN.
These findings provide additional support that B-IPMN is a unique entity with similarities to main duct P-IPMN.
PMID: 22112418
Who receives their complex cancer surgery at low-volume hospitals?
Previous literature has consistently shown worse operative outcomes at low-volume hospitals (LVH) after complex cancer surgery.
Whether patient-related factors impact this association remains unknown.
We hypothesize that patient-related factors contribute to receipt of complex cancer surgery at LVH.
Using the 2003-2008 National Inpatient Sample, we identified 59,841 patients who underwent cancer operations for lung, esophagus, and pancreas tumors.
Logistic regression models were used to examine the impact of sociodemographic factors on receipt of complex cancer surgery at LVH.
Overall, 38.4% received their cancer surgery at LVH.
A higher proportion of esophagectomies were performed at LVH (70.3%), followed by pancreatectomy (38.2%) and lung resection (33.8%).
Patients who were non-white, with non-private insurance, and had more comorbidities were all more likely to receive their cancer surgery at LVH (for all, p < 0.05).
Multivariate analyses continued to demonstrate that non-white race, insurance status, increased comorbidities, region, and nonelective admission predicted receipt of cancer surgery at LVH across all 3 procedures.
In this large national study, non-white race and increased comorbidities contributed to receipt of cancer surgery at LVH.
Patient selection and access to high-volume hospitals are likely reasons worthy of additional investigation.
This study provides additional insight into the volume-outcomes relationship.
Given the demonstrated outcomes disparity between high-volume hospitals and LVH, future policy and research should encourage mechanisms for referral of patients with cancer to high-volume hospitals for their surgical care.
PMID: 22112292
Fasting blood glucose level and prognosis in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.
Diabetes has been consistently linked to many forms of cancers, such as liver, colorectal, pancreatic, and breast cancer, however, the role of diabetes in outcome among cancer patients remains unclear.
In this study, we retrospectively reviewed electronic medical records of 342 inpatients newly diagnosed with NSCLC referred by a teaching hospital cancer center in southern Taiwan between 2005 and 2007 to examine the effects of fasting glucose levels at time of cancer diagnosis on overall survival in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
All patients were followed up until the end of 2010.
The Kaplan-Meier method was used to compare survival curves for patients with and without diabetes.
The Cox proportional hazards model was used to estimate hazard ratios for the association between diabetes, other prognostic factors and patient survival.
We observed that significant prognostic factors for poor overall survival in patients with NSCLC included older age, smoking, poor performance status, advanced stage (stage IIIB or IV), and no cancer-directed surgery treatment.
Particularly, we identified that diabetic state defined by fasting blood glucose level ≥126mg/dl was another independent prognostic factor for these patients.
Compared with those who had normal range of fasting glucose level (70-99mg/dl), patients with high fasting glucose level (≥126mg/dl) had 69% excess risk of all-cause mortality in patients with NSCLC.
In conclusion: Diabetes as indicated by elevated fasting blood glucose was independently associated with a significantly higher risk of all-cause mortality in patients with NSCLC, indicating that diabetes or hyperglycemia effectively controlled may present an opportunity for improving prognosis in NSCLS patients with abnormal glucose level.
PMID: 22111082
Significance of CD133 as a cancer stem cell markers focusing on the tumorigenicity of pancreatic cancer cell lines.
The cancer stem cell hypothesis states that the capacity of a cancer to grow and propagate is dependent on a small subset of cells.
To determine the significances of the cancer stem cell markers CD133, CD44, and CD24 using a comparative analysis with a focus on tumorigenicity.
Four pancreatic cancer cell lines, Capan-1, Mia-PACA-2, Panc-1, and SNU-410 were analyzed for the expressions of CD133, CD44, and CD24 by flow cytometry.
The tumorigenicity was compared using tumor volumes and numbers of tumors formed/numbers of injection in nonobese diabetic severe combined deficiency mice.
Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis was used to confirm that xenograft explants originated from human pancreatic cancer cells.
CD133 was positive in only Capan-1, CD44 positive in all, CD24 partially positive in Panc-1.
After injecting 2 × 10(6) cells, all mice administered Capan-1 or Mia-Paca-2 developed tumors, 3 of 5 administered Panc-1 developed tumors, but no mouse administered SNU-410 developed any tumors.
The volumes of Capan-1 tumors were seven times larger than those of Mia-Paca-2 tumors.
When 2 × 10(5) or 2 × 10(4) of Capan-1 or Mia-Paca-2 was injected, tumors developed in all Capan-1 treated mice, but not in Mia-Paca-2 treated mice.
Furthermore, xenograft explants of Capan-1 expressed CD133+CD44+ and Capan-1 injected mice developed lung metastasis.
FACS analysis showed that xenograft explants originated from human pancreatic cancer cell lines.
CD133 positive cells have higher tumorigenic and metastatic potential than CD44 and CD24 positive cells, which suggests that CD133 might be a meaningful cell surface marker of pancreatic cancer stem cells.
PMID: 22110950
The use of protein-based biomarkers for the diagnosis of cystic tumors of the pancreas.
Proteomics is a powerful method used to identify, characterize, and quantify proteins within biologic samples.
Pancreatic cystic neoplasms are a common clinical entity and represent a diagnostic and management challenge due to difficulties in accurately diagnosing cystic lesions with malignant potential and assessing the risk of malignant degeneration.
Currently, cytology and other biomarkers in cyst fluid have had limited success in accurately distinguishing both the type of cystic neoplasm and the presence of malignancy.
Emerging data suggests that the use of protein-based biomarkers may have greater utility in helping clinicians correctly diagnose the type of cyst and to identify which cystic neoplasms are malignant.
Several candidate proteins have been identified within pancreatic cystic neoplasms as potential biomarkers.
Future studies will be needed to validate these findings and move these biomarkers into the clinical setting.
PMID: 22110842
Molecular predictors of gemcitabine response in pancreatic cancer.
Gemcitabine is one of the most used anti-neoplastic drugs with documented activity in almost all major localizations of cancer.
In pancreatic cancer treatment, gemcitabine occupies a prominent place as a first line chemotherapy, partly because of the paucity of other efficacious chemotherapy options.
In fact, only a minority of pancreatic cancer patients display a response or even stability of disease with the drug.
There are currently no clinically applicable means of predicting which patient will derive a clinical benefit from gemcitabine although several proposed markers have been studied.
These markers are proteins involved in drug up-take, activation and catabolism or proteins that define the ability of the cell to undergo apoptosis in response to the drug.
Several of these markers are reviewed in this paper.
We also briefly discuss the possible role of stem cells in drug resistance to gemcitabine.
PMID: 22110740
LIV-1 promotes prostate cancer epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and metastasis through HB-EGF shedding and EGFR-mediated ERK signaling.
LIV-1, a zinc transporter, is an effector molecule downstream from soluble growth factors.
This protein has been shown to promote epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human pancreatic, breast, and prostate cancer cells.
Despite the implication of LIV-1 in cancer growth and metastasis, there has been no study to determine the role of LIV-1 in prostate cancer progression.
Moreover, there was no clear delineation of the molecular mechanism underlying LIV-1 function in cancer cells.
In the present communication, we found increased LIV-1 expression in benign, PIN, primary and bone metastatic human prostate cancer.
We characterized the mechanism by which LIV-1 drives human prostate cancer EMT in an androgen-refractory prostate cancer cells (ARCaP) prostate cancer bone metastasis model.
LIV-1, when overexpressed in ARCaP(E) (derivative cells of ARCaP with epithelial phenotype) cells, promoted EMT irreversibly.
LIV-1 overexpressed ARCaP(E) cells had elevated levels of HB-EGF and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) 2 and MMP 9 proteolytic enzyme activities, without affecting intracellular zinc concentration.
The activation of MMPs resulted in the shedding of heparin binding-epidermal growth factor (HB-EGF) from ARCaP(E) cells that elicited constitutive epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) phosphorylation and its downstream extracellular signal regulated kinase (ERK) signaling.
These results suggest that LIV-1 is involved in prostate cancer progression as an intracellular target of growth factor receptor signaling which promoted EMT and cancer metastasis.
LIV-1 could be an attractive therapeutic target for the eradication of pre-existing human prostate cancer and bone and soft tissue metastases.
PMID: 22110720
Expression of DNMT1 and DNMT3a are regulated by GLI1 in human pancreatic cancer.
GLI1, as an indispensable transcriptional factor of Hedgehog signaling pathway, plays an important role in the development of pancreatic cancer (PC).
DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) mediate the methylation of quantity of tumor-related genes.
Our study aimed to explore the relationship between GLI1 and DNMTs.
Expressions of GLI1 and DNMTs were detected in tumor and adjacent normal tissues of PC patients by immunohistochemistry (IHC).
PANC-1 cells were treated by cyclopamine and GLI1-siRNA, while BxPC-3 cells were transfected with overexpression-GLI1 lentiviral vector.
Then GLI1 and DNMTs expression were analyzed by qRT-PCR and western blot (WB).
Then we took chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) to demonstrate GLI1 bind to DNMT1.
Finally, nested MSP was taken to valuate the methylation levels of APC and hMLH1, when GLI1 expression altered.
IHC result suggested the expressions of GLI1, DNMT1 and DNMT3a in PC tissues were all higher than those in adjacent normal tissues (p<0.05).
After GLI1 expression repressed by cyclopamine in mRNA and protein level (down-regulation 88.1±2.2%, 86.4±2.2%, respectively), DNMT1 and DNMT3a mRNA and protein level decreased by 91.6%±2.2% and 83.8±4.8%, 87.4±2.7% and 84.4±1.3%, respectively.
When further knocked down the expression of GLI1 by siRNA (mRNA decreased by 88.6±2.1%, protein decreased by 63.5±4.5%), DNMT1 and DNMT3a mRNA decreased by 80.9±2.3% and 78.6±3.8% and protein decreased by 64.8±2.8% and 67.5±5.6%, respectively.
Over-expression of GLI1 by GLI1 gene transfection (mRNA increased by 655.5±85.9%, and protein increased by 272.3±14.4%.), DNMT1 and DNMT3a mRNA and protein increased by 293.0±14.8% and 578.3±58.5%, 143.5±17.4% and 214.0±18.9%, respectively.
ChIP assays showed GLI1 protein bound to DNMT1 but not to DNMT3a.
Results of nested MSP demonstrated GLI1 expression affected the DNA methylation level of APC but not hMLH1 in PC.
DNMT1 and DNMT3a are regulated by GLI1 in PC, and DNMT1 is its direct target gene.
PMID: 22110523
T cells and adoptive immunotherapy: recent developments and future prospects in gastrointestinal oncology.
Gastrointestinal oncology is one of the foremost causes of death: the gastric cancer accounts for 10.4% of cancer deaths worldwide, the pancreatic cancer for 6%, and finally, the colorectal cancer for 9% of all cancer-related deaths.
For all these gastrointestinal cancers, surgical tumor resection remains the primary curative treatment, but the overall 5-year survival rate remains poor, ranging between 20-25%; the addition of combined modality strategies (pre- or postoperative chemoradiotherapy or perioperative chemotherapy) results in 5-year survival rates of only 30-35%.
Therefore, many investigators believe that the potential for making significant progress lies on understanding and exploiting the molecular biology of gastrointestinal tumors to investigate new therapeutic strategies such as specific immunotherapy.
In this paper we will focus on recent knowledge concerning the role of T cells and the use of T adoptive immunotherapy in the treatment of gastrointestinal cancers.
PMID: 22110279
αv integrin: a new gastrin target in human pancreatic cancer cells.
To analyse αv integrin expression induced by gastrin in pancreatic cancer models.
αv integrin mRNA expression in human pancreatic cancer cells was analysed using a "cancer genes" array and confirmed by real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Western blotting and semi-quantitative immunohistochemistry were used to examine protein levels in human pancreatic cancer cell lines and pancreatic tissues, respectively.
The role of αv integrin on gastrin-induced cell adhesion was examined using blocking anti-αv integrin monoclonal antibodies.
Adherent cells were quantified by staining with crystal violet.
Using a "cancer genes" array we identified αv integrin as a new gastrin target gene in human pancreatic cancer cells.
A quantitative real-time PCR approach was used to confirm αv integrin gene expression.
We also demonstrate that Src family kinases and the PI 3-kinase, two signalling pathways specifically activated by the CCK-2 receptor (CCK2R), are involved in gastrin-mediated αv integrin expression.
In contrast, inhibition of the ERK pathway was without any effect on αv integrin expression induced by gastrin.
Our results also show that gastrin modulates cell adhesion via αv integrins.
Indeed, in vitro adhesion assays performed on fibronectin show that gastrin significantly increases adhesion of pancreatic cancer cells.
The use of blocking anti-αv integrin monoclonal antibodies completely reversed the increase in cell-substrate adhesion induced by gastrin.
In addition, we showed in vivo that the targeted CCK2R expression in the pancreas of Elas-CCK2 mice, leads to the overexpression of αv integrin.
This process may contribute to pancreatic tumour development observed in these transgenic animals.
αv integrin is a new gastrin target in pancreatic cancer models and contributes to gastrin effects on cell adhesion.
PMID: 22110277
Fascin promotes the motility and invasiveness of pancreatic cancer cells.
To explore the role of actin-bundling protein, fascin during the progression of pancreatic cancer.
The plasmid expressing human fascin-1 was stably transfected into the pancreatic cancer cell line MIA PaCa-2.
The proliferation, cell cycle, motility, scattering, invasiveness and organization of the actin filament system in fascin-transfected MIA PaCa-2 cells and control non-transfected cells were determined.
Heterogeneous overexpression of fascin markedly enhanced the motility, scattering, and invasiveness of MIA PaCa-2 cells.
However, overexpression of fascin had minimal effect on MIA PaCa-2 cell proliferation and cell cycle.
In addition, cell morphology and organization of the actin filament system were distinctly altered in fascin overexpressed cells.
When transplanted into BALB/c-nu mice, fascin-transfected pancreatic cancer cells developed solid tumors at a slightly slower rate, but these tumors displayed more aggressive behavior in comparison with control tumors.
Fascin promotes pancreatic cancer cell migration, invasion and scattering, thus contributes to the aggressive behavior of pancreatic cancer cells.
PMID: 22110218
Intra-arterial chemoinfusion prior to chemoradiotherapy with full-dose systemic gemcitabine for management of locally advanced pancreatic cancer.
Although chemoradiotherapy with full-dose gemcitabine as a strategy for locally advanced pancreatic cancer was expected to optimize local tumor control and prevent distant metastasis, the volume of the radiation field is the critical factor related to toxicities.
We are currently developing a novel therapeutic technique to conduct neoadjuvant treatments of intra-arterial chemoinfusion prior to chemoradiotherapy with the aim of tumor volume reduction.
Case.
In two patients with locally invasive pancreatic cancer, the pancreatic blood supply was altered under angiographic guidance, and an intra-arterial catheter with a subcutaneous port was left in place for the administration of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) 1,000 mg/m(2).
After shrinkage of the tumor, chemoradiotherapy with gemcitabine 1,000 mg/m(2) was delivered.
In both patients, the full-dose gemcitabine was administered concurrently with radiation therapy without severe complications.
The patients responded to the treatment with survival times of 42 and 38 months.
Intra-arterial chemoinfusion followed by chemoradiation with full-dose systemic gemcitabine might prove to be a promising therapeutic approach for locally advanced pancreatic cancer.
Large prospective Phase II trials of this combination regimen are warranted.
PMID: 22110205
The role of circulating dendritic cells in patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer.
Pancreatic cancer is a malignant neoplasm with a poor prognosis that might be associated with defective immune function.
In this study, we aimed to clarify the role of circulating myeloid dendritic cells (cmDCs) and lymphoid (cl) DCs in patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer.
This study covered the period from January 2001 to December 2009, and involved 104 patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer.
We measured the number of cmDCs and clDCs using flow cytometry before and after chemotherapy, chemoradiotherapy and immuno-chemotherapy.
The percentage of the cmDC subset in the unresectable pancreatic cancer patients was significantly lower than in healthy volunteers (p=0.006).
There was no difference in the cmDC subset between patients with distant organ metastasis and locally advanced pancreatic cancer.
The patients with a high percentage (≥0.23%) of cmDC subset survived longer than patients with a low percentage (<0.23%) (p=0.0030).
Multivariate analysis showed that cmDC was the only independent prognostic factor (p=0.0059).
The percentage of cmDC subset was significantly increased after immuno-chemotherapy (p=0.0055).
A high level of cmDCs is associated with better survival rate and is an independently favorable prognostic factor in patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer.
It is likely that immunochemotherapy increases the number of cmDCs.
PMID: 22110196
Mechanisms underlying gemcitabine resistance in pancreatic cancer and sensitisation by the iMiD™ lenalidomide.
Gemcitabine is currently the leading therapeutic for pancreatic cancer treatment, despite growing resistance.
Studying the mechanisms that underlie gemcitabine resistance and discovery of agents that increase the tumour sensitivity to gemcitabine, is therefore desirable.
The thalidomide analogue lenalidomide has been approved for use in multiple myeloma in combination with dexamethasone.
Although it is primarily immunomodulatory, it also has direct effects on tumours.
We investigated the sensitivity of three pancreatic cell lines PANC-1, MIA-PaCa-2 and BxPC-3 to gemcitabine.
We observed that PANC-1 cells display most resistance to gemcitabine and MIA-PaCa-2 are most sensitive.
Western blot analysis revealed that PANC-1 exhibits high phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated kinase (pERK) expression, whereas MIA-PaCa-2 displays low expression.
Combining gemcitabine and lenalidomide reduced the IC(50) of gemcitabine up to 40% (p<0.05).
Western blot analysis showed lenalidomide significantly reduced pERK expression in all cell lines (p<0.05).
It was hypothesised that gemcitabine sensitivity could be increased through combination with a pERK-reducing agent.
The mitogen-activated kinase (MEK) specific inhibitor U0126 was used on PANC-1 cells to restore gemcitabine sensitivity.
U0126 significantly increased cell killing by gemcitabine from 30% to 60% (p<0.001).
Sensitive MIA-PaCa-2 cells were transfected with a constitutively active MEK mutant to reduce gemcitabine sensitivity.
Transfection resulted in a significant reduction in cell killing by gemcitabine from 54-16% (p<0.05).
These results provide evidence that ERK activity underlies sensitivity to gemcitabine and that addition of an agent that reduces this activity, such as lenalidomide, enhances gemcitabine efficacy.
In conclusion, these results provide an understanding of gemcitabine resistance and could be used to predict successful combination therapies.
PMID: 22109853
High level interleukin-6 in the medium of human pancreatic cancer cell culture suppresses production of neurotransmitters by PC12 cell line.
It has been suggested that pancreatic cancer is associated with a greater prevalence of depression than many other cancers, but the mechanism accounting for this potential association has not yet been illustrated.
In the present study, conditioned media (CM) from three pancreatic cancer cell lines and primary pancreatic cancer cells from two patients were added to culture system of differentiated pheochromocytoma cell line PC12.
The release of dopamine (DA) and norepinephrine (NE) by PC12 was significantly inhibited after CM treatment (P < 0.05), similar to what happened after recombinant interleukin 6(IL-6) treatment.
Furthermore, pretreatment with anti-IL-6 antibody significantly blocked the inhibitory effects of pancreatic cancer CM on DA and NE production (P < 0.05).
We also demonstrated that tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), the rate-limiting enzyme for synthesis of catecholamine, was reduced after exposure to IL-6, which was accompanied by JAK-STAT3 pathway activation.
Our results demonstrated that IL-6 in CM from pancreatic cancer down-regulated the production of DA and NE by PC12 cell.
The possible underlying mechanisms might be decreasing TH production via activation of JAK-STAT3 signal transduction pathway.
The present study might help to better understand the close relationship between pancreatic cancer and depression.
PMID: 22109562
The Effect of JDP2 and ATF2 on the Epithelial-mesenchymal Transition of Human Pancreatic Cancer Cell Lines.
Pancreatic cancer is a common malignancy with a bleak outcome due to the early occurrence of micro-metastases and poor prognosis.
The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is considered to be related to the invasion and metastasis of a variety of malignant tumors.
Currently, there is no research regarding the relationship of pancreatic cancer EMT with Jun dimerization protein 2 (JDP2), an inhibitor of the activator protein-1 (AP-1) family, and activating transcription factor-2 (ATF2), an AP-1-family member.
In this study, we used western blot analysis and immunofluorescence to detect the protein expression of the epithelial marker E-cadherin and the mesenchymal marker vimentin in the pancreatic cancer cell line BxPC3, which was transfected with JDP2 and induced by Collagen I.
Compared with the negative control, the E-cadherin and vimentin expression levels did not change significantly, whereas E-cadherin expression decreased and vimentin expression increased in the control group transfected with empty plasmid, suggesting that JDP2 inhibits the EMT induced by Collagen I.
Additionally, we verified that compared with the negative control, the morphology of the Capan2 cell line induced by TGF-β1 after transfection with ATF2 was significantly changed, as was the mRNA expression of E-cadherin, whereas the mRNA expression of vimentin, Snail, and ATF2 was significantly increased.
Cell invasiveness was also significantly increased (P < 0.01), suggesting that ATF2, together with TGF-β1, induced EMT in the Capan2 cell line.
The members of the AP-1 family are closely related to EMT and that JDP2, as an AP-1-family inhibitor, inhibits EMT, which could lead to a new direction in molecular-targeted therapy for pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22109288
Pancreatic surgery for the radiologist, 2011: an illustrated review of classic and newer surgical techniques for pancreatic tumor resection.
OBJECTIVE: Pancreatic surgery has evolved considerably since the earliest described pancreatectomies were performed in the late 1800s.
Emerging surgical techniques for pancreatic cancer have modified what was traditionally deemed unresectable disease.
This review summarizes the main type of pancreatic resections used for tumor removal on the basis of location and biologic behavior.
CONCLUSION: CT interpretation should incorporate an understanding of current surgical techniques to provide surgeons with the information necessary for patient selection and preoperative planning.
PMID: 22109279
Establishment of a highly migratory subclone reveals that CD133 contributes to migration and invasion through epithelial-mesenchymal transition in pancreatic cancer.
Pancreatic cancer is a lethal disease because of invasion and early metastasis.
Although CD133, a marker of cancer stem cells (CSCs) in a variety of solid tumors, has been studied in recent decades, its function remains obscure.
Recent reports suggest that epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) may be related to the properties of CSCs.
In this study, we investigated whether CSC markers are associated with EMT.
For Capan1M9, a highly migratory cell subclone established from human pancreatic cancer cell line Capan-1, CD133 expression, migration, and invasion were greater than for the parent cells.
In Capan1M9 cells, the EMT-related transcription factors Slug and Snail were up-regulated, and N-cadherin and fibronectin were also substantially increased.
In contrast, occludin and desmoplakin were suppressed.
Knockdown of endogenous CD133 in the Capan1M9 cells led to Slug suppression and reduction of migration and invasion.
Taken together, CD133 has an important role in migration and invasion by facilitating EMT in pancreatic cancer cells.
PMID: 22109105
PRSS1 intron mutations in patients with pancreatic cancer and chronic pancreatitis.
Genetic risk factors of chronic pancreatitis (CP) have been identified and a number of studies have found that CP can lead to pancreatic cancer.
Therefore, the detection of pancreatitis-associated gene mutations can aid the pancreatic cancer diagnostic process.
Mutations in three genes, the cationic trypsinogen (PRSS1) gene, the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene and the pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor (SPINK1) gene, have been identified as risk factors for CP.
The aim of this study was to describe specific novel mutations in the intron of the PRSS1 gene in patients with pancreatic cancer and CP.
A total of 65 unrelated patients with pancreatic cancer and 29 with CP were reviewed.
Mutations and polymorphisms of the PRSS1 gene were analyzed by direct sequencing.
Information regarding clinical data and smoking exposure was collected by personal interviews using a structured questionnaire.
IVS 3+36 A>G mutation in the PRSS1 gene was found in 2 cases with pancreatic cancer, and these 2 patients were classified as never-smokers.
IVS 3+127 T>A and IVS 3+157 G>C double mutations were identified in one patient with CP.
All patients were found to have serum trypsin levels lower than that of the normal controls.
Therefore, the PRSS1 gene mutation may be a special common cause of pancreatic cancer and CP.
PMID: 22108826
Curcumin analogue CDF inhibits pancreatic tumor growth by switching on suppressor microRNAs and attenuating EZH2 expression.
The histone methyltransferase EZH2 is a central epigenetic regulator of cell survival, proliferation, and cancer stem cell (CSC) function.
EZH2 expression is increased in various human cancers, including highly aggressive pancreatic cancers, but the mechanisms underlying for its biologic effects are not yet well understood.
In this study, we probed EZH2 function in pancreatic cancer using diflourinated-curcumin (CDF), a novel analogue of the turmeric spice component curcumin that has antioxidant properties.
CDF decreased pancreatic cancer cell survival, clonogenicity, formation of pancreatospheres, invasive cell migration, and CSC function in human pancreatic cancer cells.
These effects were associated with decreased expression of EZH2 and increased expression of a panel of tumor-suppressive microRNAs (miRNA), including let-7a, b, c, d, miR-26a, miR-101, miR-146a, andmiR-200b, c that are typically lost in pancreatic cancer.
Mechanistic investigations revealed that reexpression of miR-101 was sufficient to limit the expression of EZH2 and the proinvasive cell surface adhesion molecule EpCAM.
In an orthotopic xenograft model of human pancreatic cancer, administration of CDF inhibited tumor growth in a manner associated with reduced expression of EZH2, Notch-1, CD44, EpCAM, and Nanog and increased expression of let-7, miR-26a, and miR-101.
Taken together, our results indicated that CDF inhibited pancreatic cancer tumor growth and aggressiveness by targeting an EZH2-miRNA regulatory circuit for epigenetically controlled gene expression.
PMID: 22108522
Proton pump inhibitors and histamine-2-receptor antagonists and pancreatic cancer risk: a nested case-control study.
The relationship between use of proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) and histamine-2-receptor antagonists (H(2)RAs) and pancreatic cancer risk has yet to be examined.
Data from a range of studies suggest biologically plausible mechanisms, whereby these drugs (or the conditions for which they are prescribed) may affect pancreatic cancer risk.
The objective of this study was to investigate the relationship between use of PPIs/H(2)RAs and pancreatic cancer risk.
A nested case-control study was conducted within the UK general practice research database (GPRD).
Cases had a diagnosis of exocrine pancreatic cancer and controls were matched to cases on general practice site, sex and year of birth.
Exposure to PPIs and to H(2)RAs since entry into GPRD until 2 years before the diagnosis date (corresponding date in controls) and in the 5 years before the diagnosis date were separately assessed.
Conditional logistic regression analyses were used to generate odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) associated with PPI or H(2)RA use compared with nonuse.
Ever use of PPIs since entry into the GPRD (excluding the 2 years prior to diagnosis) was not associated with risk of pancreatic cancer; OR (95% CI) 1.02 (0.85-1.22).
Neither the dose nor the duration of PPI or H(2)RA use was associated with pancreatic cancer risk.
No consistent patterns of association were seen when cumulative exposure (dose and duration) to these drugs was examined separately or together.
PPI/H(2)RA use, in a UK population, was not associated with pancreatic cancer risk.
PMID: 22107757
Anticancer activity of an imageable curcuminoid 1-[2-aminoethyl-(6-hydrazinopyridine-3-carbamidyl)-3,5-bis-(2-fluorobenzylidene)-4-piperidone (EFAH).
3,5-Bis(2-fluorobenzylidine)-4-piperidone or EF24 is a potent anticancer derivative of curcumin.
Using an amine derivative of EF24, we synthesized a hydrazinonicotinic acid conjugate, EFAH, for Tc-99m radiolabelling and single photon emission tomography imaging.
The aqueous solubility of EFAH (3.5 mg/mL) was significantly more than that of EF24 (1.2 mg/mL); the octanol/water partition coefficient of EFAH was estimated at log P = 0.33.
As an antiproliferative agent, EFAH was as effective as EF24 in suppressing the proliferation of H441, MiaPaCa-2 and Panc-1 cells.
Daily intraperitoneal injection of EFAH (5 μg) for 3 weeks in mice carrying xenografts of Panc-1 pancreatic cancer showed a mean tumour volume reduction of 79%; the tumour weight decreased by 82% in the treated group.
For imaging and biodistribution, EFAH was labelled with Tc-99m (98% RCY) and intravenously administered in rats.
Approximately 23.7% and 14.3% of injected dose accumulated in liver and intestine, respectively, suggesting that EFAH is mostly eliminated by hepatobiliary route.
The results indicate that HYNIC modification of EF24 for Tc-99m radiolabelling does not affect its antiproliferative efficacy.
For the first time, a visual biodisposition of EF24 in a live animal model has been demonstrated.
Such knowledge could be of benefit in developing therapeutic curcuminoids, such as EF24.
PMID: 22107748
Distal Pancreatectomy with En bloc Celiac Axis Resection Performed while Monitoring Hepatic Arterial Flow by using a Transonic Flowmeter during Operation.
Background/Aims: Pancreatic body cancer often involves the common hepatic artery and/or the celiac axis, and is regarded as an unresectable disease.
Hepatic blood flow must be monitored while performing distal pancreatectomy with en bloc celiac axis resection (DP-CAR) for managing the progression of pancreatic body cancer.
We first confirmed a safe level of blood flow by monitoring hepatic venous oxygen saturation (ShvO2) to prevent hepatic ischemia caused by occlusion of the common hepatic artery.
However, this method is technically difficult and a long period of time is required to insert the catheter.
Thus, we monitored hepatic arterial flow by using a transonic flowmeter in the hepatic artery during operation.
Methodology: Between April 1992 and January 2011, 14 patients underwent DP-CAR.
In 6 of these 14 patients we measured ShvO2.
In 2 of the 14 patients, a transonic flowmeter was used for determining the hepatic arterial flow during operation.
Results: There were no complications during this operation.
Operation time when the blood flow was monitored using a transonic flowmeter was less than that when ShvO2 was measured.
Conclusions: Monitoring the transonic flowmeter hepatic artery is a useful and quick method for real-time evaluation of hepatic circulation during operation.
PMID: 22107711
Waterfalls of mucin.
PMID: 22106322
Transfusion criteria for fresh frozen plasma in liver resection: a 3 + 3 cohort expansion study.
To establish transfusion criteria for use of fresh frozen plasma (FFP) in liver resection.
Fresh frozen plasma has been transfused in liver resection without adequate supporting evidence, leading to unnecessary use.
Prospective study using a phase 1 dose-escalation, 3 + 3 cohort expansion design, modified for FFP transfusion.
We designated a serum albumin level of 3.0 g/dL (step 1) as the starting limit for no transfusion and reduced the level in 0.2-g/dL steps.
Advancement to the next step was permitted when the albumin level equaled the target value for the previous step in 3 patients.
If the albumin value on postoperative day 2 fell below the target value, 100 mL of albumin, 25%, was transfused on that day and on postoperative day 3.
The study continued until high-grade postoperative complications occurred without transfusion.
If 1 of 3 patients developed Clavien-Dindo grade II or higher complications, 3 more patients (3 + 3 cohort) were added to the same step.
Hepatobiliary pancreatic surgery center of a university hospital.
Patients with hepatocellular carcinoma who had had Child-Pugh class A liver function and an intraoperative blood loss of less than 1000 mL.
Transfusion or no transfusion of FFP.
Main Outcome Measure Reduction of transfusion rate in liver resection.
Of the 213 consecutive patients with liver cancer enrolled, 172 patients (80.8%) fulfilled the inclusion criteria.
Step progression proceeded until step 5 (albumin level, 2.2 g/dL) without high-grade complications, but step 2 (albumin level, 2.8 g/dL) required 63 patients to complete because 1 patient developed grade II complications (massive ascites).
Step progression was broken off at step 5 in the 172nd patient because the postoperative day 2 albumin value did not fall below the step 4 level (2.4 g/dL), defined as the goal limit.
The overall operative morbidity rate was 27.9%; the mortality rate was 0%.
The FFP transfusion rate was significantly reduced from 48.6% in a previous series involving 222 patients (unpublished historical data from our institution) to 0.6% (1 of 172 patients) in the present study (P < .001).
The postoperative hospital stay in the present study was significantly shorter than that in our previous series (13 vs 16 days; P = .01).
Total medical costs were significantly reduced from a median of $21 061 (range, 10 032-59 410) to $17 267 (11 823-35 785; P = .04).
In liver resection, FFP transfusion is not necessary in patients with serum albumin levels higher than 2.4 g/dL on postoperative day 2.
PMID: 22106320
Predicting the risk of perioperative mortality in patients undergoing pancreaticoduodenectomy: a novel scoring system.
To develop and validate a risk score to predict the 30- and 90-day mortality after a pancreaticoduodenectomy or total pancreatectomy on the basis of preoperative risk factors in a high-volume program.
Data from a prospectively maintained institutional database were collected.
In a random subset of 70% of patients (training cohort), multivariate logistic regression was used to develop a simple integer score, which was then validated in the remaining 30% of patients (validation cohort).
Discrimination and calibration of the score were evaluated using area under the receiver operating characteristic curve and Hosmer-Lemeshow test, respectively.
Tertiary referral center.
The study comprised 1976 patients in a prospectively maintained institutional database who underwent pancreaticoduodenectomy or total pancreatectomy between 1998 and 2009.
The 30- and 90-day mortality.
In the training cohort, age, male sex, preoperative serum albumin level, tumor size, total pancreatectomy, and a high Charlson index predicted 90-day mortality (area under the curve, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.71-0.85), whereas all these factors except Charlson index also predicted 30-day mortality (0.79; 0.68-0.89).
On validation, the predicted and observed risks were not significantly different for 30-day (1.4% vs 1.0%; P = .62) and 90-day (3.8% vs 3.4%; P = .87) mortality.
Both scores maintained good discrimination (for 30-day mortality, area under the curve, 0.74; 95% CI, 0.54-0.95; and for 90-day mortality, 0.73; 0.62-0.84).
The risk scores accurately predicted 30- and 90-day mortality after pancreatectomy.
They may help identify and counsel high-risk patients, support and calculate net benefits of therapeutic decisions, and control for selection bias in observational studies as propensity scores.
PMID: 22105852
Rapamycin induces glucose intolerance in mice by reducing islet mass, insulin content, and insulin sensitivity.
Rapamycin, a specific inhibitor for mTOR complex 1, is an FDA-approved immunosuppressant for organ transplant.
Recent developments have raised the prospect of using rapamycin to treat cancer or diabetes and to delay aging.
It is therefore important to assess how rapamycin treatment affects glucose homeostasis.
Here, we show that the same rapamycin treatment reported to extend mouse life span significantly impaired glucose homeostasis of aged mice.
Moreover, rapamycin treatment of lean C57B/L6 mice reduced glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in vivo and ex vivo as well as the insulin content and beta cell mass of pancreatic islets.
Confounding the diminished capacity for insulin release, rapamycin decreased insulin sensitivity.
The multitude of rapamycin effects thus all lead to glucose intolerance.
As our findings reveal that chronic rapamycin treatment could be diabetogenic, monitoring glucose homeostasis is crucial when using rapamycin as a therapeutic as well as experimental reagent.
PMID: 22105367
Role of MUC4-NIDO domain in the MUC4-mediated metastasis of pancreatic cancer cells.
MUC4 is a large transmembrane type I glycoprotein that is overexpressed in pancreatic cancer (PC) and has been shown to be associated with its progression and metastasis.
However, the exact cellular and molecular mechanism(s) through which MUC4 promotes metastasis of PC cells has been sparsely studied.
Here we showed that the nidogen-like (NIDO) domain of MUC4, which is similar to the G1-domain present in the nidogen or entactin (an extracellular matrix protein), contributes to the protein-protein interaction property of MUC4.
By this interaction, MUC4 promotes breaching of basement membrane (BM) integrity, and spreading of cancer cells.
These observations are corroborated with the data from our study using an engineered MUC4 protein without the NIDO domain, which was ectopically expressed in the MiaPaCa PC cells, lacking endogenous MUC4 and nidogen protein.
The in vitro studies demonstrated an enhanced invasiveness of MiaPaCa cells expressing MUC4 (MiaPaCa-MUC4) compared with vector-transfected cells (MiaPaCa-Vec; P=0.003) or cells expressing MUC4 without the NIDO domain (MiaPaCa-MUC4-NIDO(Δ); P=0.03).
However, the absence of NIDO-domain has no significant role on cell growth and motility (P=0.93).
In the in vivo studies, all the mice orthotopically implanted with MiPaCa-MUC4 cells developed metastasis to the liver as compared with MiaPaCa-Vec or the MiaPaCa-MUC4-NIDO(Δ) group, hence, supporting our in vitro observations.
Additionally, a reduced binding (P=0.0004) of MiaPaCa-MUC4-NIDO(Δ) cells to the fibulin-2 coated plates compared with MiaPaCa-MUC4 cells indicated a possible interaction between the MUC4-NIDO domain and fibulin-2, a nidogen-interacting protein.
Furthermore, in PC tissue samples, MUC4 colocalized with the fibulin-2 present in the BM.
Altogether, our findings demonstrate that the MUC4-NIDO domain significantly contributes to the MUC4-mediated metastasis of PC cells.
This may be partly due to the interaction between the MUC4-NIDO domain and fibulin-2.Oncogene advance online publication, 21 November 2011;doi:10.1038/onc.2011.505.
PMID: 22104728
IFN-γ combined with targeting of XIAP leads to increased apoptosis-sensitisation of TRAIL resistant pancreatic carcinoma cells.
The tumour necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) is a specific and potent inducer of apoptosis in cancer cells, but the resistance of many tumour cells to TRAIL still represents a major hurdle for the clinical treatment of tumours with TRAIL.
As apoptosis is regulated by the balance of activities of several anti-apoptotic factors and pro-apoptotic factors, we analysed the relative contribution of the two sides and found that down-regulation of Bcl-x(L) and in particular XIAP, but not c-Flip, sensitised the TRAIL resistant pancreatic cancer cell line Panc-1.
A combination of both XIAP and Bcl-x(L) knock-downs showed no substantial added benefit indicating that both act in the same pathway.
Notably, the degree of sensitisation by silencing of anti-apoptotic genes was further elevated by concomitantly increasing the pro-apoptotic potential in Panc-1 cells through over-expression of TRAIL-R1 or IFN-γ-mediated increases in caspase-8 levels.
Similar sensitisation effects were obtained for another TRAIL-resistant pancreatic tumour cell line, AsPC-1.
Our findings demonstrate that modulation of the balance between anti- and pro-apoptotic pathways from both sides by inhibition of apoptosis-antagonists and stimulation of pro-apoptotic factors provides the best way to enhance the anti-tumourigenic effect of TRAIL.
PMID: 22104618
Does health-related quality of life improve for advanced pancreatic cancer patients who respond to gemcitabine? Analysis of a randomized phase III trial of the cancer and leukemia group B (CALGB 80303).
Gemcitabine for advanced pancreatic cancer (APC) is palliative and the prognosis is poor, making health-related quality of life (HRQOL) particularly important.
We evaluated HRQOL with the EuroQol (EQ-5D™) in patients with APC participating in Cancer and Leukemia Group B 80303, a multicenter, double-blind, randomized trial comparing overall survival (OS) between two treatment arms: gemcitabine with bevacizumab or gemcitabine with placebo.
A consecutive subsample of patients was invited to complete the EQ-5D surveys.
Because neither clinical nor HRQOL outcomes differed based on the study arm, analyses were pooled.
Changes in mean scores from baseline to eight weeks and the prognostic value of the EQ-5D were evaluated.
Mean index scores remained stable (0.78 at baseline [n=267], 0.79 at eight weeks [n=186], P=0.34, Wilcoxon signed rank test), attributable to a modest deterioration of physical function domain scores coincident with small improvements in pain and anxiety/depression scores.
A small decline in visual analogue scale scores was observed (70.7 vs.
68.2, P=0.026).
HRQOL changes within chemotherapy response strata revealed stable index scores but a trend of worsened physical function among patients with disease progression compared with those with stable or improved disease.
Visual analogue scale scores trended downward over time irrespective of chemotherapy response status, with a statistically meaningful deterioration in patients who progressed (68.9 vs.
64.4, P=0.029).
Baseline scores from both EQ-5D scales were significant predictors of OS in Cox proportional hazard models.
Response to gemcitabine treatment in APC is not associated with appreciable improvement of global HRQOL.
Small improvements in pain and mood are observed despite progressive functional decline.
Those who respond to gemcitabine may experience a slight slowing of functional deterioration.
PMID: 22104574
Cigarette smoking and pancreatic cancer: an analysis from the International Pancreatic Cancer Case-Control Consortium (Panc4).
BACKGROUND: To evaluate the dose-response relationship between cigarette smoking and pancreatic cancer and to examine the effects of temporal variables.
METHODS: We analyzed data from 12 case-control studies within the International Pancreatic Cancer Case-Control Consortium (PanC4), including 6507 pancreatic cases and 12 890 controls.
We estimated summary odds ratios (ORs) by pooling study-specific ORs using random-effects models.
RESULTS: Compared with never smokers, the OR was 1.2 (95% confidence interval [CI] 1.0-1.3) for former smokers and 2.2 (95% CI 1.7-2.8) for current cigarette smokers, with a significant increasing trend in risk with increasing number of cigarettes among current smokers (OR = 3.4 for ≥35 cigarettes per day, P for trend <0.0001).
Risk increased in relation to duration of cigarette smoking up to 40 years of smoking (OR = 2.4).
No trend in risk was observed for age at starting cigarette smoking, whereas risk decreased with increasing time since cigarette cessation, the OR being 0.98 after 20 years.
CONCLUSIONS: This uniquely large pooled analysis confirms that current cigarette smoking is associated with a twofold increased risk of pancreatic cancer and that the risk increases with the number of cigarettes smoked and duration of smoking.
Risk of pancreatic cancer reaches the level of never smokers ∼20 years after quitting.
PMID: 22103617
EGFR isoforms in exosomes as a novel method for biomarker discovery in pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22103494
PPARs and angiogenesis.
The PPAR (peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor) family consists of three ligand-activated nuclear receptors: PPARα, PPARβ/δ and PPARγ.
These PPARs have important roles in the regulation of glucose and fatty acid metabolism, cell differentiation and immune function, but were also found to be expressed in endothelial cells in the late 1990s.
The early endothelial focus of PPARs was PPARγ, the molecular target for the insulin-sensitizing thiazolidinedione/glitazone class of drugs.
Activation of PPARγ was shown to inhibit angiogenesis in vitro and in models of retinopathy and cancer, whereas more recent data point to a critical role in the development of the vasculature in the placenta.
Similarly, PPARα, the molecular target for the fibrate class of drugs, also has anti-angiogenic properties in experimental models.
In contrast, unlike PPARα or PPARγ, activation of PPARβ/δ induces angiogenesis, in vitro and in vivo, and has been suggested to be a critical component of the angiogenic switch in pancreatic cancer.
Moreover, PPARβ/δ is an exercise mimetic and appears to contribute to the angiogenic remodelling of cardiac and skeletal muscle induced by exercise.
This evidence and the emerging mechanisms by which PPARs act in endothelial cells are discussed in more detail.
PMID: 22102578
COLT-Cancer: functional genetic screening resource for essential genes in human cancer cell lines.
Genome-wide pooled shRNA screens enable global identification of the genes essential for cancer cell survival and proliferation and provide a 'functional genetic' map of human cancer to complement genomic studies.
Using a lentiviral shRNA library targeting approximately 16,000 human genes and a newly developed scoring approach, we identified essential gene profiles in more than 70 breast, pancreatic and ovarian cancer cell lines.
We developed a web-accessible database system for capturing information from each step in our standardized screening pipeline and a gene-centric search tool for exploring shRNA activities within a given cell line or across multiple cell lines.
The database consists of a laboratory information and management system for tracking each step of a pooled shRNA screen as well as a web interface for querying and visualization of shRNA and gene-level performance across multiple cancer cell lines.
COLT-Cancer Version 1.0 is currently accessible at http://colt.ccbr.utoronto.ca/cancer.
PMID: 22101590
Case report. Peripancreatic intranodal haemangioma mimicking pancreatic neuroendocrine tumour: imaging and pathological findings.
Haemangiomas are common benign tumours that are generally detected within the skin, mucosal surfaces and soft tissues.
However, intranodal haemangiomas are extremely rare and are among the benign primary vascular abnormalities of the lymph nodes that include lymphangioma, haemangioendothelioma, angiomyomatous hamartoma and haemangiomas.
In this case report, we present the imaging and pathological findings of an intranodal haemangioma in the pancreatic head simulating a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumour.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of an intranodal haemangioma in this location.
PMID: 22101589
Case report. Unusual presentation of a pancreatic mass in an infant: pancreatic haemangioendotheliomatosis.
Primary pancreatic tumours are extremely rare in children.
We report a case of a 5-month-old male with a diffuse invasive tumour of the head of the pancreas.
The tumour demonstrated peripancreatic extension into the porta hepatis, which occluded the portal vein and invaded the superior mesenteric artery.
It was found to be haemangioendotheliomatosis of the pancreas.
Imaging, pathological findings and a brief relevant classification of haemangioma are discussed.
PMID: 22101587
Case report. Acinar cell carcinoma with fatty change arising from the pancreas.
Acinar cell carcinoma of the pancreas is a rare malignant tumour developing from acinar cells, accounting for approximately 1% of pancreatic exocrine tumours.
We experienced a case of an acinar cell carcinoma with fatty change.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case report of an acinar cell carcinoma with fatty change in the clinical literature.
PMID: 22100984
Kinome-wide siRNA screening identifies molecular targets mediating the sensitivity of pancreatic cancer cells to Aurora kinase inhibitors.
Aurora kinases are a family of mitotic kinases that play important roles in the tumorigenesis of a variety of cancers including pancreatic cancer.
A number of Aurora kinase inhibitors (AKIs) are currently being tested in preclinical and clinical settings as anti-cancer therapies.
However, the antitumor activity of AKIs in clinical trials has been modest.
In order to improve the antitumor activity of AKIs in pancreatic cancer, we utilized a kinome focused RNAi screen to identify genes that, when silenced, would sensitize pancreatic cancer cells to AKI treatment.
A total of 17 kinase genes were identified and confirmed as positive hits.
One of the hits was the platelet-derived growth factor receptor, alpha polypeptide (PDGFRA), which has been shown to be overexpressed in pancreatic cancer cells and tumor tissues.
Imatinib, a PDGFR inhibitor, significantly enhanced the anti-proliferative effect of ZM447439, an Aurora B specific inhibitor, and PHA-739358, a pan-Aurora kinase inhibitor.
Further studies showed that imatinib augmented the induction of G2/M cell cycle arrest and apoptosis by PHA-739358.
These findings indicate that PDGFRA is a potential mediator of AKI sensitivity in pancreatic cancer cells.
PMID: 22100906
Gemcitabine versus gemcitabine plus dalteparin thromboprophylaxis in pancreatic cancer.
BACKGROUND: Annualised figures show an up to 7-fold higher incidence of vascular thromboembolism (VTE) in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer (APC) compared to other common malignancies.
Concurrent VTE has been shown to confer a worse overall prognosis in APC.
METHODS: One hundred and twenty three APC patients were randomised to receive either gemcitabine 1000mg/m(2) or the same with weight-adjusted dalteparin (WAD) for 12weeks.
Primary end-point was the reduction of all-type VTE during the study period.
NCT00462852, ISRCTN: 76464767.
FINDINGS: The incidence of all-type VTE during the WAD treatment period (<100days from randomisation) was reduced from 23% to 3.4% (p=0.002), with a risk ratio (RR)of 0.145, 95% confidence interval (CI) (0.035-0.612) and an 85% risk reduction.
All-type VTE throughout the whole follow-up period was reduced from 28% to 12% (p=0.039), RR=0.419, 95% CI (0.187-0.935) and a 58% risk reduction.
Lethal VTE <100days was seen only in the control arm, 8.3% compared to 0% (p=0.057), RR=0.092, 95% CI (0.005-1.635).
INTERPRETATION: Weight adjusted dalteparin used as primary prophylaxis for 12weeks is safe and produces a highly significant reduction of all-type VTE during the prophylaxis period.
The benefit is maintained after dalteparin withdrawal although decreases with time.
PMID: 22100174
ShRNA silencing glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta inhibits tumor growth and angiogenesis in pancreatic cancer.
Glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta (GSK-3β), a serine/threonine protein kinase, plays a vital role in the tumorigenesis of many cancers, but its role in pancreatic cancer remains unknown.
In this study, we showed that GSK-3β was aberrantly activated in pancreatic cancer.
GSK-3β knockdown resulted in arrested proliferation and increased apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cell lines.
Expression of Bcl-2 and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) decreased significantly in a GSK-3β knockdown group.
In a xenograft tumor model, GSK-3β knockdown inhibited tumor growth and angiogenesis.
Our study showed that GSK-3β may become a promising therapeutic target for human pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22099799
Cutaneous manifestations in 100 renal and reno-pancreatic recipients of Uruguay.
Uruguay is the second country of Latin America in prevalence of renal replacement therapies, including functioning kidney allografts.
Long-term immunosuppressive therapy is essential for adequate graft function, but results in reduced immunosurveillance leading to an increased risk of complications such as infections and malignancies.
A variety of cutaneous manifestations as well as an increase in non-melanoma skin cancers have been reported in this population.
The objective of this study was to evaluate the frequency and clinical spectrum of cutaneous manifestations in renal and reno-pancreatic recipients in Uruguay.
One hundred renal or reno-pancreatic recipients aged between 21- and 77-years-old were evaluated between September 2009 and September 2010.
A total of 104 dermatoses were observed; 68% of the patients had at least one cutaneous manifestation.
The most frequent dermatoses were cutaneous side effects due to immunosuppressive treatment (43.3%), followed by infections (27.9%), miscellaneous causes (22.1%), as well as malignant and premalignant lesions (6.7%).
This is the first study evaluating dermatological complications in organ transplant recipients in our country.
Most of the patients had at least one dermatological manifestation of immunosuppression, including a malignant or pre-malignant lesion, highlighting that this is a high-risk dermatological population.
Cancer is one of the most important causes of death in recipients with functioning grafts.
Its prevention is a major goal in the care of transplant recipients.
Physicians in transplant units should be aware of the importance of dermatological screening and skin cancer surveillance.
PMID: 22099597
Contribution of Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition and Cancer Stem Cells to Pancreatic Cancer Progression.
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma remains among the most lethal of human malignancies.
Overall 5-y survival is less than 5%, and only 20% of patients presenting with localized disease amenable to surgical resection.
Even in patients who undergo resection, long-term survival remains extremely poor.
A major contributor to the aggressiveness of multiple cancers, and pancreatic cancer in particular, is the process of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT).
This review highlights the growing evidence of EMT in pancreatic cancer progression, focusing on the contribution of EMT to the development of cancer stem cells and on interaction of EMT with other pathways central to cancer progression, such as Hedgehog signaling, the K-ras oncogene, and transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β).
We will also discuss EMT-targeting agents currently in development and in clinical trials that may help to reduce the morbidity and mortality associated with pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22099584
Multiple Kinase Pathways Involved in the Different De Novo Sensitivity of Pancreatic Cancer Cell Lines to 17-AAG.
BACKGROUND: 17-Allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-AAG) specifically targets heat shock protein (HSP)90 and inhibits its chaperoning functions for multiple kinases involved in cancer cell growth and survival.
To select responsive patients, the molecular mechanisms underlying the sensitivity of cancer cells to 17-AAG must be elucidated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We used cytotoxicity assays and Western blotting to explore the effects of 17-AAG and sorafenib on cell survival and expression of multiple kinases in the pancreatic cancer cell lines AsPC-1 and Panc-1.
Gene cloning and transfection, siRNA silencing, and immunohistochemistry were used to evaluate the effects of mutant p53 protein on 17-AAG sensitivity.
RESULTS: AsPC-1 and Panc-1 responded differently to 17-AAG, with half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC(50)) values of 0.12 and 3.18 μM, respectively.
Comparable expression of HSP90, HSP70, and HSP27 was induced by 17-AAG in AsPC-1 and Panc-1 cells.
P-glycoprotein and mutant p53 did not affect 17-AAG sensitivity in these cell lines.
Multiple kinases are more sensitive to HSP90 inhibition in AsPC-1 than in Panc-1 cells.
After 17-AAG treatment, p-Bad (S112) decreased in AsPC-1 cells and increased in Panc-1 cells.
Sorafenib markedly increased p-Akt, p-ERK1/2, p-GSK-3β, and p-S6 in both cell lines.
Accordingly, 17-AAG and sorafenib acted antagonistically in AsPC-1 and Panc-1 cells, except at high concentrations in AsPC-1 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Differential inhibition of multiple kinases is responsible for the different de novo sensitivity of AsPC-1 and Panc-1 cells to HSP90 inhibition.
P-glycoprotein and mutant p53 protein did not play a role in the sensitivity of pancreatic cancer cells to 17-AAG.
PMID: 22099403
[Smokeless tobacco].
Use of smokeless tobacco (ST) (chewing tobacco and snuff) can lead to a number of consequences detrimental to health.
ST rapidly delivers high doses of nicotine, which can lead to dependence and is also a source of carcinogenic nitrosamines.
Changes usually develop in the mouth area where the ST is most often placed.
Non-malignant oral lesions include leuko-oedema, hyperkeratotic lesions of the oral mucosa and localised periodontal disease.
Oral premalignant lesions are leukoplakia, erythroplakia, submucosal fibrosis and lichen planus.
Betel chewing, with or without tobacco, may increase the incidence of oral cancer.
There is conflicting evidence with regard to snuff users about the risk of oral and gastro-oesophageal cancer.
ST use is a risk factor for pancreatic cancer and may increase the risk of fatal myocardial infarction and ischemic stroke.
During pregnancy, ST is associated with an increase in pre-eclampsia, preterm delivery and stillbirth.
Nicotine replacement therapy and bupropion reduce withdrawal symptoms and tobacco craving during ST cessation.
However, they have not been shown to help long-term abstinence.
Information concerning the potential hazards of ST products should be incorporated into educational programmes to discourage its use and to help users to quit.
Smokeless tobacco is not recommended to help smoking cessation.
PMID: 22099029
Feasibility of Electromagnetic Transponder Use to Monitor Inter- and Intrafractional Motion in Locally Advanced Pancreatic Cancer Patients.
PURPOSE: The primary objective of this study was to determine the feasibility of electromagnetic transponder implantation in patients with locally advanced unresectable pancreatic cancer.
Secondarily, the use of transponders to monitor inter- and intrafractional motion, and the efficacy of breath holding for limiting target motion, were examined.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: During routine screening laparoscopy, 5 patients without metastatic disease were implanted with transponders peri-tumorally.
The Calypso System's localization and tracking modes were used to monitor inter- and intrafractional motion, respectively.
Intrafractional motion, with and without breath holding, was also examined using Calypso tracking mode.
RESULTS: Transponder implantation was well tolerated in all patients, with minimal migration, aside from 1 patient who expulsed a single transponder.
Interfractional motion based on mean shifts from setup using tattoos/orthogonal imaging to transponder based localization from 164 treatments was significant in all dimensions.
Mean shift (in millimeters), followed by the standard deviation and p value, were as follows: X-axis: 4.5 mm (1.0, p = 0.01); Y axis: 6.4 mm (1.9, p = 0.03); and Z-axis 3.9 mm (0.6, p = 0.002).
Mean intrafractional motion was also found to be significant in all directions: superior, 7.2 mm (0.9, p = 0.01); inferior, 11.9 mm (0.9, p < 0.01); anterior: 4.9 mm (0.5, p = 0.01); posterior, 2.9 mm (0.5, p = 0.02); left, 2.2 mm (0.4, p = 0.02); and right, 3.1 mm (0.6, p = 0.04).
Breath holding during treatment significantly decreased tumor motion in all directions.
CONCLUSIONS: Electromagnetic transponder implantation appears to be safe and effective for monitoring inter- and intrafractional motion.
Based on these results a larger clinical trial is underway.
PMID: 22096801
[Progression of chemotherapy].
PMID: 22096800
[Progression of surgical treatment].
PMID: 22096570
Primary cilium depletion typifies cutaneous melanoma in situ and malignant melanoma.
Cutaneous melanoma is a lethal malignancy that arises spontaneously or via in situ precursor neoplasms.
While melanoma in situ and locally invasive malignant melanoma can be cured surgically, these lesions can sometimes be difficult to distinguish from melanocytic nevi.
Thus, the identification of histolopathologic or molecular features that distinguish these biologically distinct lesions would represent an important advance.
To this end, we determined the abundance of melanocytic primary cilia in a series of 62 cases composed of typical cutaneous melanocytic nevi, melanoma in situ, invasive melanoma, and metastatic melanoma.
Primary cilia are sensory organelles that modulate developmental and adaptive signaling and notably, are substantially depleted from the neoplastic epithelium of pancreatic carcinoma at a stage equivalent to melanoma in situ.
In this series, we find that while nearly all melanocytes in 22 melanocytic nevi possessed a primary cilium, a near-complete loss of this organelle was observed in 16 cases of melanoma in situ, in 16 unequivocal primary invasive melanomas, and in 8 metastatic tumors, each associated with a cutaneous primary lesion.
These findings suggest that the primary cilium may be used to segregate cutaneous invasive melanoma and melanoma in situ from melanocytic nevi.
Moreover, they place the loss of an organelle known to regulate oncogenic signaling at an early stage of melanoma development.
PMID: 22096026
EpCAM/CD3-Bispecific T-cell engaging antibody MT110 eliminates primary human pancreatic cancer stem cells.
Tumor-initiating cells with stem-like properties, also termed cancer stem cells (CSC), have been shown to sustain tumor growth as well as metastasis and are highly resistant to chemotherapy.
Because pancreatic CSCs have been isolated on the basis of EpCAM expression, we investigated whether a targeted immunotherapy to EpCAM using the bispecific T-cell-engaging antibody MT110 is capable of eradicating CSCs.
We studied in vitro and in vivo the effects of MT110 on CSCs using both established cell lines as well as primary cells of human pancreatic cancer.
Although established cell lines were more responsive to MT110-engaged T cells, also primary cells showed a time- and dose-dependent response to treatment with the bispecific antibody.
In addition, the population of highly tumorigenic CSCs was efficiently targeted by the EpCAM/CD3-bispecific antibody MT110 in vitro and in vivo using a mouse model of established primary pancreatic cancer.
Pancreatic cancer cells derived from metastases were slightly more resistant to MT110 treatment on the basis of in vivo tumorigenicity studies.
This appeared to be related to a higher frequency of an EpCAM-negative subpopulation of CSCs.
Cytotoxic T cells can be effectively redirected against primary human pancreatic cancer cells by T-cell-engaging BiTE antibody MT110 including a subpopulation of highly tumorigenic CSCs.
PMID: 22095667
Decreased expression of Beclin 1 correlates with a metastatic phenotypic feature and adverse prognosis of gastric carcinomas.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Beclin 1 plays a critical role in the regulation of autophagy, apoptosis, differentiation and the development and progression of cancer.
The clinicopathological significance of Beclin 1 expression in patients with gastric carcinoma (GC) has not been yet elucidated.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed to investigate the Beclin 1 expression in GCs and normal mucosal tissues.
Receiver operating characteristic curve analysis, spearman's rank correlation, Kaplan-Meier plots and Cox proportional hazards regression model were used to analyze the data.
RESULTS: The highly expressed Beclin 1 was observed in 90/155 (58.1%) of GCs, in 24/60 (40.0%) adjacent mucosal tissues and in 13/30 (43.3%) of normal gastric mucosa tissues (P = 0.036).
Decreased expression of Beclin 1 in cancer cells was significantly correlated with poor differentiation, nodal and distant metastasis, advanced TNM stage, and tumor relapse.
More importantly, Decreased expression of Beclin 1 was associated with shorter survival as evidenced by univariate and multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide a basis for the concept that decreased expression of Beclin 1 in GC may be important in the acquisition of a metastatic phenotype, suggesting that decreased Beclin 1 expression, as examined by IHC, is an independent biomarker for poor prognosis of patients with GC.
J.
Surg.
Oncol © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22095426
Metabolite detection of pancreatic carcinoma by in vivo proton MR spectroscopy at 3T: initial results.
PURPOSE: The authors sought to identify metabolic features of pancreatic carcinoma by in vivo proton magnetic resonance (MR) spectroscopy at 3 Tesla.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Forty healthy volunteers and 40 patients with pancreatic carcinoma confirmed by histopathology underwent T2-weighted imaging for localisation of the single voxel.
Respiration-triggered (1)H MR spectroscopy was used to detect metabolites in normal pancreas and cancerous tissue.
All spectral data were processed with SAGE software.
Unsuppressed water at 4.7 ppm was used as an internal reference to determine metabolite concentrations.
Each ratio among the different peak areas was statistically evaluated between normal pancreas and pancreatic carcinoma.
RESULTS: The following five groups of spectra were detected: unsaturated fatty acids (-CH = CH-) at 5.4 ppm; residual water at 4.7 ppm; choline metabolites at 3.2 ppm; unsaturated fatty acids (-CH2-CH = CH-) or a combination of N-acetylaspartate (NAA), N-acetylaspartylglutamate (NAAG), glutamine, glutamate, macromolecules and unsaturated fatty acids (-CH2-CH = CH-) at 2.0 ppm and lipids at 1.3 ppm.
Ratio of lipids to unsuppressed water in normal pancreas was statistically greater than that in pancreatic cancer (p=0.004).
Ratio of choline to unsuppressed water in normal pancreas was statistically greater than that in pancreatic cancer (p=0.0001).
Ratio of fatty acids (-CH = CH-) to lipids in normal pancreas was statistically lower than that in pancreatic cancer (p=0.006).
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with normal pancreas, pancreatic carcinoma has a higher ratio of fatty acids (-CH = CH-) to lipids and lower ratios of lipids to unsuppressed water and choline to unsuppressed water at 3T.
PMID: 22095073
Myofibroblast-induced tumorigenicity of pancreatic ductal epithelial cells is L1CAM dependent.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and chronic pancreatitis, representing one risk factor for PDAC, are characterized by a marked desmoplasia enriched of pancreatic myofibroblasts (PMFs).
Thus, PMFs are thought to essentially promote pancreatic tumorigenesis.
We recently demonstrated that the adhesion molecule L1CAM is involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transition of PMF-cocultured H6c7 human ductal epithelial cells and that L1CAM is expressed already in ductal structures of chronic pancreatitis with even higher elevation in primary tumors and metastases of PDAC patients.
This study aimed at investigating whether PMFs and L1CAM drive malignant transformation of pancreatic ductal epithelial cells by enhancing their tumorigenic potential.
Cell culture experiments demonstrated that in the presence of PMFs, H6c7 cells exhibit a profound resistance against death ligand-induced apoptosis.
This apoptosis protection was similarly observed in H6c7 cells stably overexpressing L1CAM.
Intrapancreatic inoculation of H6c7 cells together with PMFs (H6c7co) resulted in tumor formation in 7/8 and liver metastases in 6/8 severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice, whereas no tumors and metastases were detectable after inoculation of H6c7 cells alone.
Likewise, tumor outgrowth and metastases resulted from inoculation of L1CAM-overexpressing H6c7 cells in 5/7 and 3/7 SCID mice, respectively, but not from inoculation of mock-transfected H6c7 cells.
Treatment of H6c7co tumor-bearing mice with the L1CAM antibody L1-9.3/2a inhibited tumor formation and liver metastasis in 100 and 50%, respectively, of the treated animals.
Overall, these data provide new insights into the mechanisms of how PMFs and L1CAM contribute to malignant transformation of pancreatic ductal epithelial cells in early stages of pancreatic tumorigenesis.
PMID: 22094930
Partial pancreatic resection for pancreatic malignancy is associated with sustained pancreatic exocrine failure and reduced quality of life: a prospective study.
Objectives: Pancreatic resection for cancer may produce pancreatic exocrine insufficiency (PEI), which is poorly understood.
This study examined the coefficient of fat absorption (CFA), symptoms, quality of life (QoL) and the accuracy of faecal elastase-1 (FE-1) measurement to predict PEI.
Methods: Forty patients were analysed following resection for pancreatic malignancy.
The primary endpoint was PEI diagnosis defined by CFA <93%; secondary endpoints were PEI diagnosis using FE-1 <200 μg/g, body mass index (BMI), and symptom and QoL analysis.
Interventions were 3-day stool collection, EORTC QLQ-C30 (version 1) questionnaire and patient's diary, at 6 weeks and 3, 6 and 12 months after surgery.
Results: CFA <93% was present in 67% of patients at 6 weeks and in 55% at 12 months.
PEI using FE-1 was present in 77 and 83% of patients, respectively.
No significant changes between time-points were observed.
Sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV and accuracy for FE-1 in detecting CFA <93% were 91, 35, 70, 71 and 70%, respectively.
CFA and FE-1 levels were uncorrelated.
Overall, QoL increased at 6 (p = 0.0212) and 12 (p < 0.0001) months after surgery, mainly driven by physical, role and social functioning, and by appetite.
Importantly, however, BMI and symptoms were unaffected by PEI, which suggests a subclinical presentation; such patients had attributes indicating poorer QoL (notably insomnia, p = 0.0012).
Conclusions: PEI was common and sustained following resection and not associated with significant symptoms.
These patients had a tendency toward poorer QoL.
FE-1 is a poor surrogate for diagnosing impaired fat absorption.
Postoperative pancreatic enzyme replacement should be considered more routinely.
and IAP.
PMID: 22091441
Morphological analysis of optical coherence tomography images for automated classification of gastrointestinal tissues.
The impact of digestive diseases, which include disorders affecting the oropharynx and alimentary canal, ranges from the inconvenience of a transient diarrhoea to dreaded conditions such as pancreatic cancer, which are usually fatal.
Currently, the major limitation for the diagnosis of such diseases is sampling error because, even in the cases of rigorous adherence to biopsy protocols, only a tiny fraction of the surface of the involved gastrointestinal tract is sampled.
Optical coherence tomography (OCT), which is an interferometric imaging technique for the minimally invasive measurement of biological samples, could decrease sampling error, increase yield, and even eliminate the need for tissue sampling provided that an automated, quick and reproducible tissue classification system is developed.
Segmentation and quantification of ophthalmologic pathologies using OCT traditionally rely on the extraction of thickness and size measures from the OCT images, but layers are often not observed in nonopthalmic OCT imaging.
Distinct mathematical methods, namely Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and textural analyses including both spatial textural analysis derived from the two-dimensional discrete Fourier transform (DFT) and statistical texture analysis obtained independently from center-symmetric autocorrelation (CSAC) and spatial grey-level dependency matrices (SGLDM), have been previously reported to overcome this problem.
We propose an alternative approach consisting of a region segmentation according to the intensity variation along the vertical axis and a pure statistical technique for feature quantification, i.e.
morphological analysis.
Qualitative and quantitative comparisons with traditional approaches are accomplished in the discrimination of freshly-excised specimens of gastrointestinal tissues to exhibit the feasibility of the proposed method for computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) in the clinical setting.
PMID: 22091389
The application of a three-step proteome analysis for identification of new biomarkers of pancreatic cancer.
We searched for novel tumor markers of pancreatic cancer by three-step serum proteome analysis.
Twelve serum abundant proteins were depleted using immunoaffinity columns followed by fractionation by reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography.
Proteins in each fraction were separated by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis.
Then the gel was stained by Coomassie Brilliant Blue.
Protein spots in which the expression levels were significantly different between cancer and normal control were identified by LC-MS/MS.
One hundred and two spots were upregulated, and 84 spots were downregulated in serum samples obtained from patients with pancreatic cancers, and 58 proteins were identified by mass spectrometry.
These candidate proteins were validated using western blot analysis and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
As a result of these validation process, we could confirm that the serum levels of apolipoprotein A-IV, vitamin D-binding protein, plasma retinol-binding protein 4, and tetranectin were significantly decreased in patients with pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22089952
Outcomes of primary surveillance for intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm.
Limited data are available regarding the natural history of patients undergoing primary surveillance for intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN).
We hypothesize that symptoms, radiologic characteristics, and cytopathology will predict cancer risk during surveillance.
Between March 2002 and March 2010, 522 patients were diagnosed with IPMN at a single, high-volume institution.
Low versus high oncologic risk was stratified prospectively.
Patients with under 3 months of surveillance were excluded.
Two hundred ninety-two patients underwent primary surveillance for IPMN.
Two hundred forty-four (84%) were classified as low-risk IPMN.
Mean surveillance duration was 35 (4-99) months.
Thirty (12%) patients initially stratified as low-risk developed a new indication for pancreatic resection.
Only 28 underwent resection, and pathologic tissue analysis revealed 27 (96%) low-grade IPMN and one (4%) high-grade dysplastic IPMN.
Overall, two (1%) patients initially determined to be low-risk developed invasive cancer.
Forty-eight (16%) patients stratified as high-risk IPMN were initially managed nonoperatively.
Of the 13 (27%) high-risk patients that died during follow-up, two (15%) died from pancreatic cancer.
Progression to pancreatic cancer during surveillance for low-risk IPMN was rare.
Current indications for resection did not forecast malignancy.
Poor operative candidates with high-risk IPMN progressed to invasive cancer more commonly, though a substantial portion succumbed to non-IPMN-related death.
PMID: 22089363
Physical activity benefits and risks on the gastrointestinal system.
This review evaluates the current understanding of the benefits and risks of physical activity and exercise on the gastrointestinal system.
A significant portion of endurance athletes are affected by gastrointestinal symptoms, but most symptoms are transient and do not have long-term consequences.
Conversely, physical activity may have a protective effect on the gastrointestinal system.
There is convincing evidence that physical activity reduces the risk of colon cancer.
The evidence is less convincing for gastric and pancreatic cancers, gastroesophageal reflux disease, peptic ulcer disease, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, cholelithiasis, diverticular disease, irritable bowel syndrome, and constipation.
Physical activity may reduce the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and inflammatory bowel disease, although this has not been proven unequivocally.
This article provides a critical review of the evidence-based literature concerning exercise and physical activity effects on the gastrointestinal system and provides physicians with a better understanding of the evidence behind exercise prescriptions for patients with gastrointestinal disorders.
Well-designed prospective randomized trials evaluating the risks and benefits of exercise and physical activity on gastrointestinal disorders are recommended for future research.
PMID: 22088817
The outcome of resected cystic pancreatic endocrine neoplasms: A case-matched analysis.
INTRODUCTION: Cystic pancreatic endocrine neoplasms (CPENs) are uncommon tumors with uncertain disease biology and ill-defined diagnostic features.
METHODS: A prospectively maintained pancreatic cyst registry was queried, and 31 cases of CPEN that were resected between 1995 and 2010 were identified.
Patient and lesion characteristics were detailed and compared with resected non-PEN cystic lesions.
Recurrence and survival outcome were compared with 31 noncystic PENs matched for functional status, differentiation, size, World Health Organization classification, grade, and presence of metastases.
RESULTS: During the study period, CPENs accounted for 7% of resected pancreatic cysts (31/469) and 12% of resected PENs (31/255).
CPENs were primarily sporadic (94%), solitary (87%), nonfunctioning (100%), and incidentally discovered (68%).
The median diameter was 2.1 cm (range, 0.9-6.2 cm), and preoperative imaging identified septations in 29%, a solid component in 26%, and cyst wall enhancement or a characteristic hypervascular rim in 45% of cases.
Preoperative imaging and/or cytology suggested the diagnosis of CPEN in 61%.
Compared with resected nonendocrine cystic lesions, CPEN were less frequently symptomatic, less likely to contain septations, and smaller.
Compared with matched noncystic PENs, CPENs had comparable demographic, radiologic, and pathologic features and statistically similar long-term outcome (5-year disease-free survival: CPEN: 100% vs PEN: 86%, P = .947).
CONCLUSION: In this study, CPENs were primarily asymptomatic small lesions that could be characterized in the majority of cases by cyst wall enhancement on preoperative imaging and/or cytologic assessment.
No significant difference in recurrence or survival outcome was identified between cystic and noncystic PENs.
PMID: 22088810
Is celiac axis resection justified for T4 pancreatic body cancer?
The clinical impact of the distal pancreatectomy with en-bloc celiac axis resection for locally advanced pancreatic body cancer remains unclear.
We reviewed the records of 13 patients who underwent distal pancreatectomy-celiac axis resection between 1991 and 2009, 58 patients who underwent distal pancreatectomy for pancreatic body cancer involving major vessels, the extrapancreatic neural plexus or other organs (T4 according to the Japanese stage classification) between 1991 and 2009, and 24 patients with unresectable locally advanced pancreatic cancer without distant metastases (unresectable group) between 2001 and 2009.
The clinicopathologic factors and overall survival among the 3 groups were compared.
The distal pancreatectomy-celiac axis resection group was associated with a significantly higher incidence of morbidity (92% vs 60%, P = .03) and positive surgical margins (69% vs 26%, P = .003) than the distal pancreatectomy group; however, no survival difference was found between the 2 groups.
No survivor has lived more than 3 years after operation in the distal pancreatectomy-celiac axis resection group.
The distal pancreatectomy-celiac axis resection group had a significantly better prognosis than the unresectable group (median survival time, 20.8 vs 9.8 months; P = .01).
Aggressive resection for T4 pancreatic body cancer by distal pancreatectomy-celiac axis resection can be justified for otherwise unresectable tumors.
The surgical indication should be evaluated carefully because of the higher incidence of morbidity and lower incidence of curability compared with distal pancreatectomy, as well as because there have been no long-term survivors so far.
PMID: 22087285
Hedgehog signaling antagonist GDC-0449 (Vismodegib) inhibits pancreatic cancer stem cell characteristics: molecular mechanisms.
Recent evidence from in vitro and in vivo studies has demonstrated that aberrant reactivation of the Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway regulates genes that promote cellular proliferation in various human cancer stem cells (CSCs).
Therefore, the chemotherapeutic agents that inhibit activation of Gli transcription factors have emerged as promising novel therapeutic drugs for pancreatic cancer.
GDC-0449 (Vismodegib), orally administrable molecule belonging to the 2-arylpyridine class, inhibits SHH signaling pathway by blocking the activities of Smoothened.
The objectives of this study were to examine the molecular mechanisms by which GDC-0449 regulates human pancreatic CSC characteristics in vitro.
GDC-0499 inhibited cell viability and induced apoptosis in three pancreatic cancer cell lines and pancreatic CSCs.
This inhibitor also suppressed cell viability, Gli-DNA binding and transcriptional activities, and induced apoptosis through caspase-3 activation and PARP cleavage in pancreatic CSCs.
GDC-0449-induced apoptosis in CSCs showed increased Fas expression and decreased expression of PDGFRα.
Furthermore, Bcl-2 was down-regulated whereas TRAIL-R1/DR4 and TRAIL-R2/DR5 expression was increased following the treatment of CSCs with GDC-0449.
Suppression of both Gli1 plus Gli2 by shRNA mimicked the changes in cell viability, spheroid formation, apoptosis and gene expression observed in GDC-0449-treated pancreatic CSCs.
Thus, activated Gli genes repress DRs and Fas expressions, up-regulate the expressions of Bcl-2 and PDGFRα and facilitate cell survival.
These data suggest that GDC-0499 can be used for the management of pancreatic cancer by targeting pancreatic CSCs.
PMID: 22087246
High glucose promotes pancreatic cancer cell proliferation via the induction of EGF expression and transactivation of EGFR.
Multiple lines of evidence suggest that a large portion of pancreatic cancer patients suffer from either hyperglycemia or diabetes, both of which are characterized by high blood glucose level.
However, the underlying biological mechanism of this phenomenon is largely unknown.
In the present study, we demonstrated that the proliferative ability of two human pancreatic cancer cell lines, BxPC-3 and Panc-1, was upregulated by high glucose in a concentration-dependent manner.
Furthermore, the promoting effect of high glucose levels on EGF transcription and secretion but not its receptors in these PC cell lines was detected by using an EGF-neutralizing antibody and RT-PCR.
In addition, the EGFR transactivation is induced by high glucose levels in concentration- and time-dependent manners in PC cells in the presence of the EGF-neutralizing antibody.
These results suggest that high glucose promotes pancreatic cancer cell proliferation via the induction of EGF expression and transactivation of EGFR.
Our findings may provide new insight on the links between high glucose level and PC in terms of the molecular mechanism and reveal a novel therapeutic strategy for PC patients who simultaneously suffer from either diabetes or hyperglycemia.
PMID: 22086925
Wogonin and related natural flavones overcome tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) protein resistance of tumors by down-regulation of c-FLIP protein and up-regulation of TRAIL receptor 2 expression.
Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) is a promising anticancer agent that kills various tumor cells without damaging normal tissues.
However, many cancers remain resistant to TRAIL.
To overcome TRAIL resistance, combination therapies using sensitizers of the TRAIL pathway would be an efficacious approach.
To investigate potential sensitizers of TRAIL-induced apoptosis, we used TRAIL-resistant human T cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1)-associated adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL) cells as a model system.
So far, HTLV-1-associated ATL is incurable by presently known therapies.
Here, we show that wogonin and the structurally related natural flavones apigenin and chrysin break TRAIL resistance in HTLV-1-associated ATL by transcriptional down-regulation of c-FLIP, a key inhibitor of death receptor signaling, and by up-regulation of TRAIL receptor 2 (TRAIL-R2).
This effect is mediated through transcriptional inhibition of the p53 antagonist murine double minute 2 (Mdm2), leading to an increase in p53 levels and, consequently, to up-regulation of the p53 target gene TRAIL-R2.
We also show that these flavones can sensitize to TNFα- and CD95-mediated cell death.
Furthermore, we show that wogonin, apigenin, and chrysin also enhance TRAIL-mediated apoptosis in other human cancer cell lines including breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231, colon cancer cell line HT-29, hepatocellular carcinoma cell line HepG2, melanoma cell line SK-MEL-37, and pancreatic carcinoma cell line Capan-1 by the same mechanism.
Thus, our study suggests the potential use of these flavones as an adjuvant for TRAIL-mediated anticancer therapy.
PMID: 22086883
Plasma 25-hydroxyvitamin D and risk of pancreatic cancer.
Laboratory studies suggest that vitamin D may inhibit pancreatic cancer cell growth.
However, epidemiologic studies of vitamin D and pancreatic cancer risk have been conflicting.
To determine whether prediagnostic levels of plasma 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25[OH]D; IDS Inc.; enzyme immunoassay) were associated with risk of pancreatic cancer, we conducted a pooled analysis of nested case-control studies with 451 cases and 1,167 controls from five cohorts through 2008.
Median follow-up among controls was 14.1 years in Health Professionals Follow-Up Study (HPFS), 18.3 years in Nurses' Health Study (NHS), 25.3 years in Physicians' Health Study (PHS), 12.2 years in Women's Health Initiative-Observational Study (WHI), and 14.4 years in Women's Health Study (WHS).
Logistic regression was used to compare the odds of pancreatic cancer by plasma level of 25(OH)D.
Mean plasma 25(OH)D was lower in cases versus controls (61.3 vs.
64.5 nmol/L, P = 0.005).
In logistic regression models, plasma 25(OH)D was inversely associated with odds of pancreatic cancer.
Participants in quintiles two through five had multivariable-adjusted ORs (95% confidence intervals) of 0.79 (0.56-1.10), 0.75 (0.53-1.06), 0.68 (0.48-0.97), and 0.67 (0.46-0.97; P(trend) = 0.03), respectively, compared with the bottom quintile.
Compared with those with insufficient levels [25[OH]D, <50 nmol/L], ORs were 0.75 (0.58-0.98) for subjects with relative insufficiency [25[OH]D, 50 to <75 nmol/L] and 0.71 (0.52-0.97) for those with sufficient levels [25[OH]D, ≥ 75 nmol/L].
No increased risk was noted in subjects with 25(OH)D ≥100 nmol/L, as suggested in a prior study.
In subgroup analyses, ORs for the top versus bottom quartile of 25(OH)D were 0.72 (0.48-1.08) for women, 0.73 (0.40-1.31) for men, and 0.73 (0.51-1.03) for Whites.
Among participants in five large prospective cohorts, higher plasma levels of 25(OH)D were associated with a lower risk for pancreatic cancer.
Low circulating 25(OH)D may predispose individuals to the development of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22086851
GLI1 inhibition promotes epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in pancreatic cancer cells.
The Hedgehog (HH) pathway has been identified as an important deregulated signal transduction pathway in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), a cancer type characterized by a highly metastatic phenotype.
In PDAC, the canonical HH pathway activity is restricted to the stromal compartment while HH signaling in the tumor cells is reduced as a consequence of constitutive KRAS activation.
Here, we report that in the tumor compartment of PDAC the HH pathway effector transcription factor GLI1 regulates epithelial differentiation.
RNAi-mediated knockdown of GLI1 abolished characteristics of epithelial differentiation, increased cell motility, and synergized with TGFβ to induce an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT).
Notably, EMT conversion in PDAC cells occurred in the absence of induction of SNAIL or SLUG, two canonical inducers of EMT in many other settings.
Further mechanistic analysis revealed that GLI1 directly regulated the transcription of E-cadherin, a key determinant of epithelial tissue organization.
Collectively, our findings identify GLI1 as an important positive regulator of epithelial differentiation, and they offer an explanation for how decreased levels of GLI1 are likely to contribute to the highly metastatic phenotype of PDAC.
PMID: 22086681
Metformin Inhibits Cell Proliferation, Migration and Invasion by Attenuating CSC Function Mediated by Deregulating miRNAs in Pancreatic Cancer Cells.
Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the United States, which is, in part, due to intrinsic (de novo) and extrinsic (acquired) resistance to conventional therapeutics, suggesting that innovative treatment strategies are required for overcoming therapeutic resistance to improve overall survival of patients.
Oral administration of metformin in patients with diabetes mellitus has been reported to be associated with reduced risk of pancreatic cancer and that metformin has been reported to kill cancer stem cells (CSC); however, the exact molecular mechanism(s) has not been fully elucidated.
In the current study, we examined the effect of metformin on cell proliferation, cell migration and invasion, and self-renewal capacity of CSCs and further assessed the expression of CSC marker genes and microRNAs (miRNA) in human pancreatic cancer cells.
We found that metformin significantly decreased cell survival, clonogenicity, wound-healing capacity, sphere-forming capacity (pancreatospheres), and increased disintegration of pancreatospheres in both gemcitabine-sensitive and gemcitabine-resistant pancreatic cancer cells.
Metformin also decreased the expression of CSC markers,CD44, EpCAM,EZH2, Notch-1, Nanog and Oct4, and caused reexpression of miRNAs (let-7a,let-7b, miR-26a, miR-101, miR-200b, and miR-200c) that are typically lost in pancreatic cancer and especially in pancreatospheres.
We also found that reexpression of miR-26a by transfection led to decreased expression of EZH2 and EpCAM in pancreatic cancer cells.
These results clearly suggest that the biologic effects of metformin are mediated through reexpression of miRNAs and decreased expression of CSC-specific genes, suggesting that metformin could be useful for overcoming therapeutic resistance of pancreatic cancer cells.
Cancer Prev Res; 1-10.
©2011 AACR.
PMID: 22086503
Epidermal growth factor receptor and insulinlike growth factor 1 receptor expression predict poor survival in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to evaluate the expression of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and insulinlike growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R) proteins and IGF-1R gene copy numbers in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma in relation to patients' characteristics and prognosis.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining was performed on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue derived from tumor specimens recovered during surgery.
Slides were evaluated for membranous EGFR and IGF-1R staining using both the HercepTest and the semiquantitative H-score systems.
Chromogenic in situ hybridization was performed to quantify IGF-1R gene copy number.
The primary outcome was the association between EGFR expression, IGF-1R expression-in both neoplastic epithelial and stromal cells-or IGF-1R gene copy number and overall survival.
Secondary outcomes included associations between EFGR and IGF-1R expression and pathologic variables.
RESULTS: A total of 105 patients were included.
EGFR expression was present in 30.4% of cases and was associated with lymph node metastasis (P = .038).
IGF-1R was overexpressed in 53% of tumors and correlated with higher tumor grade (P = .033).
High membranous expression of EGFR (P < .001) and/or IGF-1R (P = .004), the cytoplasmic detection of EGFR (P = .027), and high expression levels of IGF-1R in the tumoral stroma (P < .001) were all associated with shorter overall survival, being significantly better in patients who simultaneously do not express membranous EGFR or stromal IGF-1R.
CONCLUSIONS: EGFR and IGF-1R expression, in neoplastic and stromal cells, seems to be an important prognostic factor.
Cancer 2011;.
© 2011 American Cancer Society.
PMID: 22086192
Pancreatic cancer is not noble.
PMID: 22084165
Targeting interleukin-4 receptor α with hybrid peptide for effective cancer therapy.
Interleukin-4 receptor α (IL-4Rα) chain is highly expressed on the surface of various human solid tumors.
We designed a novel hybrid peptide termed IL-4Rα-lytic peptide that targets the IL-4Rα chain.
The IL-4Rα-lytic peptide contains a target moiety to bind to IL-4Rα and a cellular toxic lytic peptide that selectively kills cancer cells.
The anticancer activity of the IL-4Rα-lytic peptide was evaluated in vitro and in vivo.
It was found that the IL-4Rα-lytic peptide has cytotoxic activity in cancer cell lines expressing IL-4Rα, determined by quantitative real-time PCR.
The IC(50) ratios of the lytic peptide to the IL-4Rα-lytic peptide correlated well with the expression levels of IL-4Rα on cancer cells (r = 0.80).
In addition, IL-4Rα-lytic peptide administered either intratumoraly or intravenously significantly inhibited tumor growth in xenograft model of human pancreatic cancer (BXPC-3) in mice.
These results indicate that the IL-4Rα-lytic peptide generated in this study has a potent and selective anticancer potential against IL-4Rα-positive solid cancers.
PMID: 22084065
Imaging guided trials of the angiogenesis inhibitor sunitinib in mouse models predict efficacy in pancreatic neuroendocrine but not ductal carcinoma.
Preclinical trials in mice represent a critical step in the evaluation of experimental therapeutics.
Genetically engineered mouse models (GEMMs) represent a promising platform for the evaluation of drugs, particularly those targeting the tumor microenvironment.
We evaluated sunitinib, an angiogenesis inhibitor that targets VEGF and PDGF receptor signaling, in two GEMMs of pancreatic cancer.
Sunitinib did not reduce tumor burden in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), whereas tumor burden was reduced in the pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor (PNET) model, the latter results confirming and extending previous studies.
To explore the basis for the lack of pathologic response in PDAC, we used noninvasive microbubble contrast-enhanced ultrasound imaging, which revealed that sunitinib reduced blood flow both in PDAC and in PNET, concomitant with a reduction in vessel density; nevertheless, PDAC tumors continued to grow, whereas PNET were growth impaired.
These results parallel the response in humans, where sunitinib recently garnered FDA and European approval in PNET, whereas two antiangiogenic drugs failed to demonstrate efficacy in PDAC clinical trials.
The demonstration of on-target activity but with discordant benefit in the PDAC and PNET GEMMs illustrates the potential value of linked preclinical and clinical trials.
PMID: 22083596
Stool DNA testing for the detection of pancreatic cancer: Assessment of methylation marker candidates.
BACKGROUND: Pancreatic cancer (PanC) presents at late stage with high mortality.
Effective early detection methods are needed.
Aberrantly methylated genes are unexplored as markers for noninvasive detection by stool testing.
The authors aimed to select discriminant methylated genes and to assess accuracy of these and mutant KRAS in stool to detect PanC.
METHODS: Nine target genes were assayed by real-time methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) in bisulfite-treated DNA from microdissected frozen specimens of 24 PanC cases and 30 normal colon controls.
Archived stools from 58 PanC cases and 65 controls matched on sex, age, and smoking were analyzed.
Target genes from fecal supernatants were enriched by hybrid capture, bisulfite-treated, and assayed by MSP.
KRAS mutations were assayed using the QuARTS technique.
RESULTS: Areas under the receiver operating characteristics curves (AUCs) for tissue BMP3, NDRG4, EYA4, UCHL1, MDFI, Vimentin, CNTNAP2, SFRP2, and TFPI2 were 0.90, 0.79, 0.78, 0.78, 0.77, 0.77, 0.69, 0.67, and 0.66, respectively.
The top 4 markers and mutant KRAS were evaluated in stool.
BMP3 was the most discriminant methylation marker in stool.
At 90% specificity, methylated BMP3 alone detected 51% of PanCs, mutant KRAS detected 50%, and combination detected 67%.
AUCs for methylated BMP3, mutant KRAS, and combination in stool were 0.73, 0.75, and 0.85, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that stool assay of a methylated gene marker can detect PanC.
Among candidate methylated markers discriminant in tissue, BMP3 alone performed well in stool.
Combining methylated BMP3 and mutant KRAS increased stool detection over either marker alone.
Cancer 2011;.
© 2011 American Cancer Society.
PMID: 22083517
Pancreaticoduodenectomy for invasive pancreatic cancer (with video).
Pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) is the only treatment option that potentially provides a cure for pancreatic head cancer.
Various arrangements and modifications have been proposed to achieve pathological margin negative (R0) resection safely.
In this article, we introduce a standard procedure for PD, including pancreaticogastrostomy with invagination and mattress sutures (video clip provided), for invasive ductal carcinoma of the pancreatic head, with a description of the need-to-know pitfalls for Board-certified HBP surgeons in Japan.
The important points in performing PD for pancreatic cancer are: (1) While dissecting connective tissue and nerve plexus as well as lymph nodes, maintain a dissection plane to expose the surfaces of vessels or other organs to be preserved to achieve R0 resection: i.e., while dissecting the anterior surface of the inferior vena cava and the right side of the superior mesenteric artery, these vessels should be completely exposed with the connective tissue and nerve plexuses being attached to the resection side.
(2) There should be early interruption of the afferent blood supply via the inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery to reduce blood loss by avoiding congestion of the pancreatic head and to increase the operative safety (video clip provided).
(3) Eligibility for PD should be carefully evaluated because there are many "resectable" but not many "curable" cases.
In addition, the clinical significance of various modifications of the surgical techniques used for PD are also discussed.
PMID: 22082608
The prevalence of pancreatic acinar differentiation in gastric adenocarcinoma: report of a case and immunohistochemical study of 111 additional cases.
Although pancreatic acinar metaplasia in the gastric mucosa is well recognized in chronic gastritis, gastric carcinoma with acinar differentiation is very rare.
We encountered a case of gastric adenocarcinoma with prominent histologic and immunohistochemical features of pancreatic acinar differentiation in the absence of identifiable heterotopic pancreatic tissue.
Distinct glandular and diffuse patterns of adenocarcinoma were also present, and there was focal mucin production.
The tumor strongly expressed pancreatic exocrine enzymes trypsin and chymotrypsin, and focal neuroendocrine staining was also present.
To investigate the prevalence of acinar differentiation in histologically typical gastric cancers, we performed immunohistochemical staining for trypsin and chymotrypsin on a tissue microarray containing 111 conventional gastric adenocarcinomas (60 intestinal, 28 mixed, 22 diffuse type, and 1 undifferentiated).
No obvious morphologic evidence of acinar differentiation was identified in any of the 111 cases.
Although some cases showed equivocal staining for at least 1 pancreatic exocrine enzyme on the initial tissue microarray sections, repeat immunohistochemical staining on representative whole-tissue sections failed to reproduce positive staining.
Thus, acinar differentiation is rare in gastric adenocarcinomas, other than in histologically unusual cases such as the one we report, and in others from the literature, which are reviewed.
PMID: 22082604
Vascular invasion in infiltrating ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas can mimic pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia: a histopathologic study of 209 cases.
Although vascular invasion is a well-established indicator of poor prognosis for patients with infiltrating ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas (PDAC), the histopathologic characteristics of vascular invasion are not well described.
Hematoxylin and eosin-stained slides from 209 surgically resected infiltrating PDACs were systematically evaluated for the presence or absence of microscopic vascular invasion.
For the cases with vascular invasion, we further categorized the histologic pattern of invasion into conventional and pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia-like (PanIN-like).
In addition, several histopathologic factors in the surrounding blood vessels, including lymphocytic infiltration and luminal fibrosis, were carefully assessed.
Data were compared with clinicopathologic variables, including patient survival.
Microscopic vascular invasion was observed in 136 of the 209 PDACs (65.1%).
Vascular invasion mimicking pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN-like invasion) was observed in 94 of the 136 cases (69.1%) with vascular invasion.
Microscopic vascular invasion was associated with increased tumor size (P=0.04), higher pT classification (P=0.003), lymph node metastasis (P<0.0001), and perineural invasion (P=0.005).
Vascular invasion was inversely correlated with neo-adjuvant therapy (P<0.0001).
Examination of adjacent blood vessels revealed that peritumoral blood vessels with intimal lymphocytes (P=0.002), intimal (P=0.007) and medial (P=0.001) fibrosis, and cancer cells in vascular wall (P<0.0001) were all highly associated with the intraluminal vascular invasion.
In univariate analysis, patients whose cancers had microscopic vascular invasion (median survival, 15.3 mo) had a significantly worse survival than did patients with carcinomas without vascular invasion (25.1 mo; P=0.01, log-rank test).
Microscopic vascular invasion is a poor prognostic indicator and can histologically mimic PanIN.
PMID: 22082308
The Expression and Clinical Significance of pSTAT3, VEGF and VEGF-C in Pancreatic Adenocarcinoma.
<p>Signal transducers and activators of transcription 3 (STAT3) is a central cytoplasmic transcription factor and regulates a number of pathways important in tumorigenesis including cell cycle progression, apoptosis, tumor angiogenesis, invasion and metastasis.This study aims to investigate the expression of pSTAT3, VEGF and VEGF-C in pancreatic adenocarcinoma and their relations to the clinicopathological features, tumor angiogenesis and prognosis.
In the present study, the expression of pSTAT3, VEGF and VEGF-C and microvascular density (MVD) were examined via immunohistochemistry.
The clinicopathological information was collected and patients were regularly followed up.
The relationship between the parameters and the clinicopathological features were analyzed, and the univariate and multivariate prognostic factors were also analyzed.
The expression of pSTAT3 in tumor tissues was significantly higher in contrast to that in normal tissues, and pSTAT3 was related to VEGF and VEGF-C expression, MVD, tumor size, lymphogenous status and TNM staging (P<0.05).
</p><p>Survival analysis suggested that tumor size, TNM staging, pSTAT3 and VEGF expression were risk factors of prognosis, but no independent factors were found.
We concluded that pSTAT3, which was a risk factor of prognosis, was abnormally expressed in pancreatic adenocarcinoma and related to tumor size, TNM staging and lymphatic metastasis.
pSTAT3 may promote tumor angiogenesis via up-regulating VEGF on protein and even gene levels, and enhance the early lymphatic metastasis through VEGF-C.
Better understanding of STAT3 signaling pathways in angiogenesis may contribute to the development of novel therapeutic strategies in angiogenesis and metastasis of pancreatic cancer.</p> Keywords: Pancreatic adenocarcinoma; pSTAT3; VEGF; VEGF-C; Angiogenesis.
PMID: 22081925
Pre- and intraoperative variables affecting early outcomes in elderly patients undergoing pancreaticoduodenectomy.
Conflicting data exist regarding the safety of pancreatic resections in elderly patients.
In this study we compared early complication and mortality rates between patients younger and older than 80 years of age who underwent pancreaticoduodenectomy using a validated national database.
The National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP) database for 2005-2009 was used for this retrospective analysis.
The primary outcome measures for our analysis were 30-day postoperative mortality, major complication rate and overall complication rate.
A total of 6293 patients who underwent PD for any cause were included in the analysis.
Of these, 9.4% were aged ≥80 years.
The incidence of 30-day mortality was significantly higher in patients aged ≥80 years (6.3%) than in those aged <80 years (2.7%).
Older patients were also noted to have higher rates of overall complications and serious complications.
On multivariate analysis, age, ASA (American Society of Anesthesiologists) classification, reduced functional status, history of dyspnoea, and need for intraoperative transfusion were risk factors associated with the occurrence of overall complications, serious complications and postoperative mortality.
This study shows that age among other factors is a determinant of postoperative morbidity and mortality following PD.
PMID: 22081923
Conditional survival in pancreatic cancer: better than expected.
Traditional survival estimates after resection for pancreatic cancer are based on clinicopathological variables at the time of diagnosis.
Estimates have not reflected time survived after resection, as investigated for other malignancies.
The aim of the present study was to understand how survival estimates change after pancreatic resection for cancer based on time already survived (conditional survival).
Pancreatectomies performed for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) between 2001 and 2010 were reviewed.
Clinicopathological variables were evaluated to identify predictors of survival.
Expected survival according to a validated nomogram for pancreatic cancer as well as conditional survival estimates and actual survival were calculated.
In all, 186 patients underwent pancreatic resection for PDAC [154 (82.8%) Whipple, 26 (14.0%) distal and 6 (3.2%) total].
Median (range) survival was 22 (3.4-107.3) months.
Predictors of overall survival were: absence of nodal disease [odds ratio (OR) 8.8], age <67 years (OR 8.4) and lower stage (OR 4.3).
Expected survival according to the nomogram was 70% (1 year), 39.5% (2 years) and 24% (3 years).
As time passed, and overall and expected survival decreased, conditional survival increased.
The available prognostic system for PDAC underestimated survival compared with actual survival in the present study.
Conditional survival estimates, based on accrued lifespan, were better than either predicted or actual survival, suggesting that survival is a dynamic, rather than static, concept.
Conditional survival may, therefore, be a useful tool to allow patients and clinicians to project subsequent survival based on time accrued since resection.
PMID: 22081857
[Progression of diagnostic technic for pancreas cancer].
PMID: 22081856
[New pathological classification of pancreatic cancer-WHO 2010-].
PMID: 22081855
[Liver, pancreas, biliary tract cancer-2011 update].
PMID: 22081483
Proteome of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and lymph node metastases.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a major cause of cancer-related death, largely due to metastatic disease.
To better understand PDAC metastatic spread and identify novel therapeutic targets, we analysed the proteome of primary tumours and matched lymph node (LN) metastases.
As frozen specimens of metastatic lesions are scarce, we examined formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues.
This poses technical challenges because of the cross-linkages induced by fixation.
Using laser capture microdissection (PALM system), we isolated malignant epithelia from seven FFPE primary PDAC tumours and matched LN metastases.
Following dissection, samples were analysed in duplicate using Multidimensional Protein Identification Technology (MudPIT); this resulted in the identification of 1504 proteins, 854 of which were common to all samples analysed.
Comparison of the obtained proteins with data from previous proteomics studies on pancreatic tissue, pancreatic juice, serum, and urine resulted in a less than 30% overlap, indicating that our study has substantially expanded the current database of proteins expressed in this malignancy.
Statistical analysis further showed that 115/854 proteins (13.5%) were significantly differentially expressed (g-value ≥ 3.8).
Two proteins, S100P and 14-3-3 sigma, with highly significant g-values were confirmed to be significantly differentially expressed (S100P: p = 0.05 and 14-3-3 sigma: p < 0.001) in a larger series of 55 cases of matched primary PDAC and LN metastases using immunohistochemistry.
Thus, laser capture microdissection of FFPE tissue coupled with downstream proteomic analysis is a valid approach for the investigation of metastatic PDAC.
This is the first study to establish and compare the protein composition of primary PDAC and matched LN metastases, and has resulted in the identification of several potential epithelial-specific therapeutic targets, including 14-3-3 sigma and S100P.
Copyright © 2012 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
PMID: 22081011
PCR in Helicobacter spp. diagnostic in extragastric malignancies of digestive system.
Recognition of Helicobacter pylori as an important factor in genesis of gastric adenocarcinoma lead to a large number of studies concerning potential role of Helicobacter spp.
in the development of extragastric digestive malignancies.
The serological studies indicated possible localizations in the digestive system being from interest in enlightening Helicobacter spp.
carcinogenic potential.
The PCR obtruded itself as a gold standard in proving existence of actual correlation.
In this review, the authors have examined studies conducted in the last 10 years examining Helicobacter spp.
correlation with extragastric digestive carcinogenesis.
Studies have been observed in four groups referring to hepatic carcinoma, bile duct cancer, pancreatic cancer, and colon cancer.
The results of these researches have shown that there is a strong correlation between Helicobacter spp.
colonization and primary liver tumors as well as bile duct tumors, whereas conclusions made by authors examining pancreatic cancer are contradictory and demands further investigation.
No correlation between Helicobacter spp.
and colon cancer have been proven.
The PCR subtype most widely used in studies included in this review was nested PCR, whereas genes targeted most frequently for amplification are 16S rDNA of Helicobacter spp.
and UreA gene or cagA gene of H.
pylori.
During the last 10 years PCR has proven itself as a sovereign method for Helicobacter spp.
diagnostic in extragastric organs in the digestive system.
Knowledge and experiences obtained in this domain could be encouraging for researchers in analogous fields of interest.
PMID: 22080942
Neuroendocrine tumors of the pancreas.
Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PNETs) are rare tumors, with an incidence of one per 100, 000 individuals per year, and they account for 1-2% of all pancreatic neoplasms.
PNETs are a heterogeneous group with varying clinical presentation, tumor biology and prognosis.
This article reviews the current diagnostic strategy and treatment armamentarium for PNETs.
Special attention is paid to recent and ongoing developments in treatment, particularly with regards to multimodality treatment and newer systemic therapies for unresectable disease.
There has been significant progress in the genetic understanding of hereditary syndromes in regards to PNETs, as well as in the diagnosis and treatment of resectable and nonresectable PNETs.
Whereas surgical therapy remains the most advisable therapy for resectable neuroendocrine tumors of the pancreas, there have been significant recent advances in systemic therapy for those with unresectable disease.
Results from recent clinical trials examining mammalian target of rapamycin inhibitors and tyrosine kinase inhibitors for unresectable disease are promising in expanding treatment options for metastatic PNETs.
Neuroendocrine tumors of the pancreas are a heterogeneous group of tumors with varying clinical presentation, tumor biology and prognosis.
Clinicians must be aware of the variety of manifestations of this disease, as well as the role of systemic chemotherapy in treatment of unresectable disease.
PMID: 22080849
Natural history of gastro-entero-pancreatic and thoracic neuroendocrine tumors. Data from a large prospective and retrospective Italian Epidemiological study: THE NET MANAGEMENT STUDY.
Background: The few epidemiological data available in literature on neuroendocrine tumors (NET)s are mainly based on Registry databases, missing therefore details on their clinical and natural history.
Aim: To investigate epidemiology, clinical presentation and natural history of NETs Design & Setting: A large national retrospective survey was conducted in 13 Italian referral centers.
Among 1203 NETs, 820 originating in the thorax (T-NET), in the gastro-enteropancreatic tract (GEP-NET) or metastatic NET of unknown primary origin (U-NET) were enrolled in the study.
Results: 93% had a sporadic and 7% a MEN1 associated tumor.
63% were GEP-NET, 33% T-NET, 4% U-NET.
Pancreas and lung were the commonest primary sites.
Poorly differentiated carcinomas were <10%, all sporadic.
The incidence of NET had a linear increase from 1990 to 2007 in all the centers.
The mean age at diagnosis was 60.0±16.4 yrs, significantly anticipated in MEN1 patients (47.7±16.5 yrs).
Association with Cigarette smoking and other non-NET cancer were more prevalent than in the general Italian population.
The first symptoms of the disease were related to tumor burden in 46%, endocrine syndrome in 23%, while the diagnosis was fortuity in 29%.
Insulin (37%) and serotonin (35%) were the most common hormonal hypersecretions.
An advanced tumor stage was found in 42%, more frequently in the gut and thymus.
No differences in the overall survival was observed between TNET and GEP-NET and between sporadic and MEN-1 associated tumors at ten years from diagnosis, while survival probability was dramatically reduced in U-NET.
Conclusions: The data obtained from this study furnish relevant information on epidemiology, natural history and clinico-pathological features of NET, not available from the few published Register studies.
PMID: 22080430
Phase 1 clinical trial of the novel proteasome inhibitor marizomib with the histone deacetylase inhibitor vorinostat in patients with melanoma, pancreatic and lung cancer based on in vitro assessments of the combination.
Purpose Combining proteasome and histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition has been seen to provide synergistic anti-tumor activity, with complementary effects on a number of signaling pathways.
The novel bi-cyclic structure of marizomib with its unique proteasome inhibition, toxicology and efficacy profiles, suggested utility in combining it with an HDAC inhibitor such as vorinostat.
Thus, in this study in vitro studies assessed the potential utility of combining marizomib and vorinostat, followed by a clinical trial with the objectives of assessing the recommended phase 2 dose (RP2D), pharmacokinetics (PK), pharmacodynamics (PD), safety and preliminary anti-tumor activity of the combination in patients.
Experimental Design Combinations of marizomib and vorinostat were assessed in vitro.
Subsequently, in a Phase 1 clinical trial patients with melanoma, pancreatic carcinoma or Non-small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) were given escalating doses of weekly marizomib in combination with vorinostat 300 mg daily for 16 days in 28 day cycles.
In addition to standard safety studies, proteasome inhibition and pharmacokinetics were assayed.
Results Marked synergy of marizomib and vorinostat was seen in tumor cell lines derived from patients with NSCLC, melanoma and pancreatic carcinoma.
In the clinical trial, 22 patients were enrolled.
Increased toxicity was not seen with the combination.
Co-administration did not appear to affect the PK or PD of either drug in comparison to historical data.
Although no responses were demonstrated using RECIST criteria, 61% of evaluable patients demonstrated stable disease with 39% having decreases in tumor measurements.
Conclusions Treatment of multiple tumor cell lines with marizomib and vorinostat resulted in a highly synergistic antitumor activity.
The combination of full dose marizomib with vorinostat is tolerable in patients with safety findings consistent with either drug alone.
PMID: 22079848
Pancreatic stump-closed pancreaticojejunostomy can be performed safely in normal soft pancreas cases.
Pancreatic anastomotic failure remains the main reason for morbidity and mortality after pancreaticoduodenectomy, and there is no existing flawless pancreaticojejunal reconstruction approach to this date, especially for the normal soft pancreas cases.
We compared a pancreatic stump-closed pancreaticojejunostomy technique (group B; n = 33) with conventional duct-to-mucosa fashion (group A; n = 30) retrospectively in 63 normal soft pancreatic texture cases.
Some operative related data including postoperative complications, anastomosis time, hospital stay days, mortality rate, and relaparotomy rate were analyzed.
There was no difference concerning the incidences of postoperative morbidity, including pancreatic fistula, postpancreatectomy hemorrhage, delayed gastric emptying, intra-abdominal abscess, and remnant pancreatitis between two groups.
The differences of anastomosis time, hospitalization days, relaparotomy rate, and mortality rate were also not significant.
However, group B patients had a shorter duration (d) for healing of postoperative pancreatic fistula than group A (15.3 ± 8.5 versus 33.0 ± 14.1 d, P < 0.05).
For the normal soft pancreas cases, pancreatic stump-closed pancreaticojejunostomy technique is quite safe and convenient according to our experience; ideal clinical results could be achieved with its application in the future.
PMID: 22079845
A Decision Model of Therapy for Potentially Resectable Pancreatic Cancer.
BACKGROUND: Optimal treatment for potentially resectable pancreatic cancer is controversial.
Resection is considered the only curative treatment, but neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy may offer significant advantages.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We developed a decision model for potentially resectable pancreatic cancer.
Initial therapeutic choices were surgery, neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy, or no treatment; subsequent decisions offered a second intervention if not prohibited by complications or death.
Payoffs were calculated as the median expected survival.
We gathered evidence for this model through a comprehensive MEDLINE search.
One-way sensitivity analyses were performed.
RESULTS: Neoadjuvant chemoradiation is favored over initial surgery, with expected values of 18.6 and 17.7 mo, respectively.
The decision is sensitive to the probabilities of treatment mortality and tumor resectability.
Threshold probabilities are 7.0% mortality of neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy, 69.2% resectability on imaging after neoadjuvant therapy, and 73.7% resectability at exploration after neoadjuvant therapy, 92.2% resectability at initial resection, and 9.9% surgical mortality following chemoradiotherapy.
The decision is sensitive to the utility of time spent in chemoradiotherapy, with surgery favored for utilities less than 0.3 and -0.8, for uncomplicated and complicated chemoradiotherapy, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The ideal treatment for potentially resectable pancreatic cancer remains controversial, but recent evidence supports a slight benefit for neoadjuvant therapy.
Our model shows that the decision is sensitive to the probability of tumor resectability and chemoradiation mortality, but not to rates of other treatment complications.
With minimal benefit of one treatment over another based on survival alone, patient preferences will likely play an important role in determining best treatment.
PMID: 22079596
Restricted Heterochromatin Formation Links NFATc2 Repressor Activity With Growth Promotion in Pancreatic Cancer.
Transcriptional silencing of the p15(INK4b) tumor suppressor pathway overcomes cellular protection against unrestrained proliferation in cancer.
Here we show a novel pathway involving the oncogenic transcription factor nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) c2 targeting a p15(INK4b)-mediated failsafe mechanism to promote pancreatic cancer tumor growth.
Immunohistochemistry, real-time polymerase chain reaction, immunoblotting, and immunofluorescence microscopy were used for expression studies.
Cancer growth was assessed in vitro by [(3)H]thymidine incorporation, colony formation assays, and in vivo using xenograft tumor models.
Protein-protein interactions, promoter regulation, and local histone modifications were analyzed by immunoprecipitation, DNA pull-down, reporter, and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays.
Our study uncovered induction of NFATc2 in late-stage pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia lesions with increased expression in tumor cell nuclei of advanced cancers.
In the nucleus, NFATc2 targets the p15(INK4b) promoter for inducible heterochromatin formation and silencing.
NFATc2 binding to its cognate promoter site induces stepwise recruitment of the histone methyltransferase Suv39H1, causes local H3K9 trimethylation, and allows docking of heterochromatin protein HP1γ to the repressor complex.
Conversely, inactivation of NFATc2 disrupts this repressor complex assembly and local heterochromatin formation, resulting in restoration of p15(INK4b) expression and inhibition of pancreatic cancer growth in vitro and in vivo.
Here we describe a novel mechanism for NFATc2-mediated gene regulation and identify a functional link among its repressor activity, the silencing of the suppressor pathway p15(INK4b), and its pancreatic cancer growth regulatory functions.
Thus, we provide evidence that inactivation of oncogenic NFATc2 might be an attractive strategy in treatment of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22078386
Long noncoding intronic RNAs are differentially expressed in primary and metastatic pancreatic cancer.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is known by its aggressiveness and lack of effective therapeutic options.
Thus, improvement in current knowledge of molecular changes associated with pancreatic cancer is urgently needed to explore novel venues of diagnostics and treatment of this dismal disease.
While there is mounting evidence that long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) transcribed from intronic and intergenic regions of the human genome may play different roles in the regulation of gene expression in normal and cancer cells, their expression pattern and biological relevance in pancreatic cancer is currently unknown.
In the present work we investigated the relative abundance of a collection of lncRNAs in patients' pancreatic tissue samples aiming at identifying gene expression profiles correlated to pancreatic cancer and metastasis.
Custom 3,355-element spotted cDNA microarray interrogating protein-coding genes and putative lncRNA were used to obtain expression profiles from 38 clinical samples of tumor and non-tumor pancreatic tissues.
Bioinformatics analyses were performed to characterize structure and conservation of lncRNAs expressed in pancreatic tissues, as well as to identify expression signatures correlated to tissue histology.
Strand-specific reverse transcription followed by PCR and qRT-PCR were employed to determine strandedness of lncRNAs and to validate microarray results, respectively.
We show that subsets of intronic/intergenic lncRNAs are expressed across tumor and non-tumor pancreatic tissue samples.
Enrichment of promoter-associated chromatin marks and over-representation of conserved DNA elements and stable secondary structure predictions suggest that these transcripts are generated from independent transcriptional units and that at least a fraction is under evolutionary selection, and thus potentially functional.Statistically significant expression signatures comprising protein-coding mRNAs and lncRNAs that correlate to PDAC or to pancreatic cancer metastasis were identified.
Interestingly, loci harboring intronic lncRNAs differentially expressed in PDAC metastases were enriched in genes associated to the MAPK pathway.
Orientation-specific RT-PCR documented that intronic transcripts are expressed in sense, antisense or both orientations relative to protein-coding mRNAs.
Differential expression of a subset of intronic lncRNAs (PPP3CB, MAP3K14 and DAPK1 loci) in metastatic samples was confirmed by Real-Time PCR.
Our findings reveal sets of intronic lncRNAs expressed in pancreatic tissues whose abundance is correlated to PDAC or metastasis, thus pointing to the potential relevance of this class of transcripts in biological processes related to malignant transformation and metastasis in pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22076904
Sister Mary Joseph's nodule showing adenocarcinoma of pancreas.
PMID: 22076670
Left hepatectomy or left trisectionectomy with resection of the caudate lobe and extrahepatic bile duct for hilar cholangiocarcinoma (with video).
PURPOSE: Although left-sided hepatectomy, such as a left hepatectomy or left trisectionectomy with resection of the caudate lobe and extrahepatic bile duct, is used to treat hilar cholangiocarcinoma predominantly involving the left side of the hepatic hilum, it is associated with several difficult technical points.
The important points during left-sided hepatectomy are described here.
TECHNIQUES: There are anatomical variations of the sectional artery and bile duct.
It is essential to understand the individual intrahepatic and hilar anatomy preoperatively.
Surgical procedures consist of lymph node clearance, dissection of the distal bile duct, skeletonization resection of the hepatoduodenal ligament, mobilization of the liver and liver resection, dissection of the intrahepatic bile ducts, and biliary reconstruction.
During lymph node dissection and skeletonization resection of the hepatoduodenal ligament, the nerve plexus around the hepatic artery is dissected, and its adventitia is exposed with great care to avoid injuring the hepatic artery.
Mobilization of the caudate lobe is performed only from the left side.
There is no clear landmark between the caudate lobe and the right posterior section during liver resection.
In the final step of liver resection, it progresses toward the right edge of the inferior vena cava.
When dividing intrahepatic bile ducts, extreme care should be used to avoid injury to the corresponding hepatic arteries, especially the anomalous supraportal posterior sectional artery.
CONCLUSIONS: Left-sided hepatectomy for hilar cholangiocarcinoma should be considered a more complicated and technically demanding procedure than right-sided hepatectomy.
Surgeons need to pay close attention to anatomical variations in order to perform a left-sided hepatectomy safely and successfully.
PMID: 22076669
Important technical remarks on distal pancreatectomy with en-bloc celiac axis resection for locally advanced pancreatic body cancer (with video).
We have already reported the feasibility, safety, and excellent long-term results of distal pancreatectomy with en-bloc celiac axis resection (DP-CAR) for locally advanced pancreatic body cancer.
An international standard for the surgical technique of DP-CAR has yet to be established.
DP-CAR was carefully performed in 42 patients in Hokkaido University Hospital from 1998 to July 2007.
Arterial blood flow alteration and collateral flow development toward the liver and stomach was obtained following preoperative routine transcatheter arterial embolization of the common hepatic artery.
The right-sided approach to the superior mesenteric artery and celiac artery, and the preservation of the inferior pancreatoduodenal artery during the dissection of the plexus around the pancreatic head, are the key techniques in DP-CAR.
The operative morbidity and mortality were 43 and 4.8%, respectively.
R0 resection could be done in 39 (93%) patients.
Median operation time and intraoperative blood loss were 478 min and 1030 ml, respectively.
Ischemic gastropathy was complicated in 5 (12%) patients, but liver abscess was found in only one patient and no liver failure was encountered.
We emphasize again the feasibility and safety of DP-CAR; it should be a treatment of choice for locally advanced pancreatic body cancer.
PMID: 22076667
Distal pancreatectomy (with video).
Distal pancreatectomy is indicated for lesions in the pancreatic body and tail.
Understanding of the anatomical structure of the pancreas and its surroundings is required in various situations in left upper abdominal surgery including the laparoscopic approach.
Spleen-preserving distal pancreatectomy is indicated for lesions confined to the pancreas.
Two major spleen-preserving procedures reported are the Warshaw procedure that conserves the spleen by blood flow from the short gastric vessels and the Kimura procedure that preserves the spleen with splenic vessels.
Considering the laparoscopic approach, the surgeon may preserve splenic vessels from the median toward the splenic hilum without mobilization of the spleen.
A standard distal pancreatectomy using the medial approach is presented on video.
The intraoperative complications of distal pancreatectomy can be minimized by avoiding splenic capsule injury, by careful differentiation of the splenic artery from the common hepatic artery, and by secure closure of the splenic vein stump.
The incidence of postoperative pancreatic fistula following distal pancreatectomy is reported to be 13% in a nationwide pancreatic cancer registry.
Based on the results of an international randomized trial of hand-sewn and staple closure of the pancreatic stump, the closure method of the pancreatic stump can be the surgeon's choice.
PMID: 22076666
Portal vein resection in pancreaticoduodenectomy (with video).
Superior mesenteric vein (SMV) resection during pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) for pancreatic cancer was first reported by Moore in 1951.
In Japan, utilization of portal vein resection (PVR) became popular beginning in the late 1970s and has resulted in an improved resection rate for pancreatic cancer.
Outcomes of PVR differ according to the reported year and institution.
In a recent report of meta-analysis, there was no difference in outcomes after PVR if R0 (negative surgical margins) resection was possible.
Pancreatic surgery including vascular resection must be re-evaluated in light of recent advances in diagnostic imaging and surgical techniques, lower mortality and morbidity after PVR, and improvements in adjuvant and neo-adjuvant therapy.
Isolated portal vein involvement should not be a contraindication to resection.
Portal vein resection should be considered after appropriate patient selection based on an accurate diagnosis, provided that safe R0 resection is possible.
We describe technical details and considerations for PVR during PD in this paper.
PMID: 22076649
Intrinsic gemcitabine resistance in a novel pancreatic cancer cell line is associated with cancer stem cell-like phenotype.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) remains one of the most lethal malignancies in the world, often diagnosed at an advanced stage, resistant to conventional chemotherapy and having high invasive and metastatic potential.
The mechanism of drug resistance of PDA is still not clear.
In the present study, we established two novel pancreatic cancer cell lines PAXC-002 and PAXC-003 from human primary xenograft models.
The cell lines were characterized by morphology, karyotype, pancreatic cancer marker and short tandem repeat (STR) analysis, and growth kinetics and tumorigenicity.
The in vitro anti-proliferation test revealed that PAXC-002 cell was intrinsically resistant to the standard of care chemotherapy-gemcitabine, compared with that of PAXC-003 and other widely used pancreatic cancer cell lines.
Interestingly, the gemcitabine resistant PAXC-002 cell line was more potent in forming colonies in 3-Dimensional matrigel culture conditions and had a higher percentage of CD133 positive cells, which is recognized as a cancer stem cell marker, compared to the gemcitabine-sensitive PAXC-003 cell line.
In this study, we present two novel pancreatic cancer cell lines which could be used for gemcitabine resistance investigation, mechanism identification of pancreatic cancer and anticancer drug screening.
The preliminary data indicate that the drug resistance of pancreatic carcinoma cells is associated with a cancer stem cell-like phenotype.
PMID: 22076564
Recurrences after surgical resection of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas: a single-center study of recurrence predictive factors.
The detection of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN) has increased over the last decade, but still, management remains controversial.
The main problems are their potential for malignancy and risk of recurrence.
The purpose of this study was to determine the predictive factors of recurrence after surgical resection.
All patients with IPMN who underwent pancreatectomy with curative intent were considered.
Data were collected from a prospective base.
From 1994 to 2009, 104 patients underwent pancreatectomy.
Twenty-one (20%) had recurrence, 15 on remnant pancreas (none on pancreatic cut surface) and 6 with distant metastases.
Twelve patients had total pancreatectomy (1 awaiting surgery).
Thirteen (38.2%) of 34 patients with invasive IPMN and 20 (25.9%) of 77 with main duct involvement (including combined type) had recurrence.
In univariate analysis, American Society of Anesthesiologist score and histological and duct type had a significant impact on recurrence rate.
In multivariate analysis, histological type (invasiveness) was the only significant predictive factor for recurrence.
The risk of recurrence of IPMN after resection depends on the histological type.
According to surgical margin, invasiveness, and the type of duct involved, we identified a high-risk group with invasive main duct lesion and a low-risk group with noninvasive branch duct lesion.
PMID: 22076497
Sesamol attenuates oxidative stress-mediated experimental acute pancreatitis in rats.
Acute pancreatitis is a potentially fatal disease with no known cure.
The initial events in acute pancreatitis may occur within the acinar cells.
We examined the effect of sesamol on (i) a cerulein-induced pancreatic acinar cancer cell line, AR42J, and (ii) cerulein-induced experimental acute pancreatitis in rats.
Sesamol inhibited amylase activity and increased cell survival.
It also inhibited medium lipid peroxidation and 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine in AR42J cells compared with the cerulein-alone groups.
In addition, in cerulein-treated rats, sesamol inhibited serum amylase and lipase levels, pancreatic edema, and lipid peroxidation, but it increased pancreatic glutathione and nitric oxide levels.
Thus, we hypothesize that sesamol attenuates cerulein-induced experimental acute pancreatitis by inhibiting the pancreatic acinar cell death associated with oxidative stress in rats.
PMID: 22076067
Comparison of International Consensus Guidelines versus 18-FDG PET in detecting malignancy of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas.
To assess the reliability of the International Consensus Guidelines (ICG) and 18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (PET) in distinguishing benign from malignant intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs) of the pancreas.
Since 2006 the ICG have been used to choose immediate surgery or surveillance for IPMN patients, but their low specificity increases the number of benign IPMNs that undergo resective surgery.
PET has proved highly sensitive and specific in detecting malignancy in cystic neoplasms of the pancreas, including IPMNs.
Patients suspected with IPMNs of the pancreas seen at our Department from January 1989 to July 2010 were identified and classified as cases of main duct, mixed type and branch type IPMN.
The indication for resection or surveillance was verified a posteriori for all patients according to the ICG.
PET was considered positive for a Standardized Uptake Value ≥2.5.
Surveillance included clinical examination, laboratory tests, CA 19-9 serum levels, and computed tomography and/or magnetic resonance and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography every 6 months for 2 years and yearly thereafter.
Endoscopic ultrasound was rarely performed.
PET was repeated in clinically or radiologically suspect cases, or if tumor markers increased.
Sixty-one main duct or mixed type and 101-branch type IPMNs were included in the study.
A histological diagnosis was available for 81 of 162 patients, missing for 1 locally advanced IPMN, whereas 62 patients are under surveillance and it proved impossible to contact 18.
Conservative surgery was performed in 16 of 68 patients with benign IPMNs.
The sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive value, and accuracy of the ICG in detecting malignancy were 93.2, 22.2, 59.4, 72.7, and 61.2, whereas for PET they were 83.3, 100, 100, 84.6, and 91.3.
PET is more accurate than the ICG in distinguishing benign from malignant (invasive and noninvasive) IPMNs.
Prophylactic IPMN resection in young patients fit for surgery should be guided by the ICG, whereas PET should be performed in older patients, cases at increased surgical risk, or when the feasibility of parenchyma-sparing surgery demands a reliable preoperative exclusion of malignancy.
PMID: 22075449
Treatment of locally advanced pancreatic cancer: the role of radiation therapy.
Pancreatic cancer remains associated with an extremely poor prognosis.
Surgical resection can be curative, but the majority of patients present with locally advanced or metastatic disease.
Treatment for patients with locally advanced disease is controversial.
Therapeutic options include systemic therapy alone, concurrent chemoradiation, or induction chemotherapy followed by chemoradiation.
We review the evidence to date regarding the treatment of locally advanced pancreatic cancer (LAPC), as well as evolving strategies including the emerging role of targeted therapies.
We propose that if radiation is used for patients with LAPC, it should be delivered with concurrent chemotherapy and following a period of induction chemotherapy.
PMID: 22075380
Synergistic antitumor effect of adenovirus-mediated hING4 gene therapy and (125)I radiation therapy on pancreatic cancer.
Pancreatic cancer has a poor prognosis, even with surgery.
ING4 is a member of the inhibitor of growth (ING) tumor suppressor family that has potent inhibitory effects on a variety of tumors; meanwhile, radiotherapy is a common adjunctive therapy for pancreatic cancer.
Prior to this study, the effectiveness of a combination of ING4 gene-therapy and radiotherapy against pancreatic cancer had been unknown.
In this study, we demonstrated that either ING4 or (125)I radiotherapy treatment could induce Panc-1 pancreatic cancer cell growth suppression and apoptosis in vitro.
Furthermore, both treatments inhibited tumor growth and angiogenesis of Panc-1 pancreatic cancer subcutaneously xenografted in vivo.
Moreover, the combination therapy had a synergistic effect.
PMID: 22074002
Predictive value of metabolic 18FDG-PET response on outcomes in patients with locally advanced pancreatic carcinoma treated with definitive concurrent chemoradiotherapy.
We aimed to study the predictive value of combined 18F-fluoro-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography and computerized tomography (FDG-PET-CT), on outcomes in locally advanced pancreatic carcinoma (LAPC) patients treated with concurrent chemoradiotherapy (C-CRT).
Thirty-two unresectable LAPC patients received 50.4 Gy (1.8 Gy/fr) of RT and concurrent 5-FU followed by 4 to 6 cycles of gemcitabine consolidation.
Response was evaluated by FDG-PET-CT at post-C-CRT 12-week.
Patients were stratified into two groups according to the median difference between pre- and post-treatment maximum standard uptake values (SUVmax) as an indicator of response for comparative analysis.
At a median follow-up of 16.1 months, 16 (50.0%) patients experienced local/regional failures, 6 of which were detected on the first follow-up FDG-PET-CT.
There were no marginal or isolated regional failures.
Median pre- and post-treatment SUVmax and median difference were 14.5, 3.9, and -63.7%, respectively.
Median overall survival (OS), progression-free survival (PFS), and local-regional progression-free survival (LRPFS) were 14.5, 7.3, and 10.3 months, respectively.
Median OS, PFS, and LRPFS for those with greater (N = 16) versus lesser (N = 16) SUVmax change were 17.0 versus 9.8 (p = 0.001), 8.4 versus 3.8 (p = 0.005), and 12.3 versus 6.9 months (p = 0.02), respectively.
On multivariate analysis, SUVmax difference was predictive of OS, PFS, and LRPFS, independent of existing covariates.
Significantly higher OS, PFS, and LRPFS in patients with greater SUVmax difference suggest that FDG-PET-CT-based metabolic response assessment is an independent predictor of clinical outcomes in LAPC patients treated with definitive C-CRT.
PMID: 22072879
Quantum dots affect expression of CD133 surface antigen in melanoma cells.
In novel treatment approaches, therapeutics should be designed to target cancer stem cells (CSCs).
Quantum dots (QDs) are a promising new tool in fighting against cancer.
However, little is known about accumulation and cytotoxicity of QDs in CSCs.
Accumulation and cytotoxicity of CdTe-MPA (mercaptopropionic acid) QDs in CSCs were assessed using flow cytometry and fluorescence-activated cell sorting techniques as well as a colorimetric cell viability assay.
We investigated the expression of two cell surface-associated glycoproteins, CD44 and CD133, in four different cancer cell lines (glioblastoma, melanoma, pancreatic, and prostate adenocarcinoma).
Only the melanoma cells were positive to both markers of CD44 and CD133, whereas the other cells were only CD44-positive.
The QDs accumulated to a similar extent in all subpopulations of the melanoma cells.
The phenotypical response after QD treatment was compared with the response after ionizing radiation treatment.
The percentage of the CD44(high-)CD133(high) subpopulation decreased from 72% to 55%-58% for both treatments.
The stem-like subpopulation CD44(high)CD133(low/-) increased from 26%-28% in the untreated melanoma cells to 36%-40% for both treatments.
Treatment of melanoma cells with QDs results in an increase of stem-like cell subpopulations.
The changes in phenotype distribution of the melanoma cells after the treatment with QDs are comparable with the changes after ionizing radiation.
PMID: 22072799
Shining the light on aurora-a kinase as a drug target in pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22072614
Regulation of pancreatic cancer by neuropsychological stress responses: a novel target for intervention.
Pancreatic cancer has a poor prognosis and is associated with high levels of psychological stress that may adversely affect clinical outcomes.
However, the potential influence of neuropsychological factors on pancreatic cancer has not been investigated to date.
Using a mouse model of social stress, we have tested the hypothesis that psychological stress promotes the progression of pancreatic cancer xenografts via neurotransmitter-induced activation of multiple pathways and that the inhibitory neurotransmitter γ-aminobutiric acid (GABA) inhibits these responses.
Sytemic and xenograft levels of noradrenalin, adrenalin, GABA, cortisol, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and cyclic adenosine 3', 5'-monophosphate (cAMP) were measured by immunoassays.
Xenograft expression of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) α3, α4, α5, α6 and α7 and β-adrenergic receptors 1 and 2 were assessed by real-time PCR and western blots.
Expression of glutamate decarboxylases GAD65 and GAD67 and phosphorylated and unphosphorylated signaling proteins of relevance to pancreatic cancer were determined in tumor tissue by western blots.
Psychological stress significantly promoted xenograft growth and increased systemic and tumor levels of noradrenalin, adrenalin, cortisol, VEGF and cAMP while GABA and GAD were suppressed.
Stress upregulated nAChR proteins but not RNAs and induced phosphorylated ERK, CREB, Src and AKT in xenografts.
Reduction of cAMP by treatment with GABA prevented tumor progression and activation of signaling proteins.
Our findings suggest that neurotransmitter responses to psychological stress negatively impact clinical outcomes of pancreatic cancer via the activation of multiple pathways and that replacement of the suppressed inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA prevents these effects.
PMID: 22072567
Radiosensitization of human pancreatic cancer cells by MLN4924, an investigational NEDD8-activating enzyme inhibitor.
Radiotherapy is used in locally advanced pancreatic cancers in which it can improve survival in combination with gemcitabine.
However, prognosis is still poor in this setting in which more effective therapies remain needed.
MLN4924 is an investigational small molecule currently in phase I clinical trials.
MLN4924 inhibits NAE (NEDD8 Activating Enzyme), a pivotal regulator of the E3 ubiquitin ligase SCF (SKP1, Cullins, and F-box protein), that has been implicated recently in DNA damage and repair.
In this study, we provide evidence that MLN4924 can be used as an effective radiosensitizer in pancreatic cancer.
Specifically, MLN4924 (20-100 nmol/L) effectively inhibited cullin neddylation and sensitized pancreatic cancer cells to ionizing radiation in vitro with a sensitivity enhancement ratio of approximately 1.5.
Mechanistically, MLN4924 treatment stimulated an accumulation of several SCF substrates, including CDT1, WEE1, and NOXA, in parallel with an enhancement of radiation-induced DNA damage, aneuploidy, G(2)/M phase cell-cycle arrest, and apoptosis.
RNAi-mediated knockdown of CDT1 and WEE1 partially abrogated MLN4924-induced aneuploidy, G(2)/M arrest, and radiosensitization, indicating a causal effect.
Furthermore, MLN4924 was an effective radiosensitizer in a mouse xenograft model of human pancreatic cancer.
Our findings offer proof-of-concept for use of MLN4924 as a novel class of radiosensitizer for the treatment of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22072251
Intrapancreatic accessory spleen: investigative dilemmas and role of EUS-guided FNA for diagnostic confirmation.
We submit a case of intrapancreatic accessory spleen.
A 33-year-old patient with history of dyspepsia underwent imaging studies suggestive of a neuroendocrine tumor.
After referral to our institute, endoscopic ultrasound guided fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) confirmed diagnosis as intrapancreatic accessory spleen.
An accessory spleen may develop from estranged mesenchymal cells due to fusion failure of the splenic anlage.
The prevalence of an accessory spleen is 10-30% with 80% of them present at the splenic hilum and 17% in the pancreatic tail.
Intrapancreatic accessory spleen is commonly misdiagnosed as a pancreatic tumor.
Since, the differential diagnosis includes pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors, additional investigation with EUS-FNA should be considered when radiological diagnosis is not definitive.
For diagnosis of intrapancreatic accessory spleen, radiographic imaging is useful, but lacks specificity without tissue diagnosis.
Diagnosis can be safely and reliably established with EUS-FNA, leading to a benign prognosis and avoidance of unnecessary surgical intervention.
PMID: 22072244
¹⁸F-FDG PET/CT imaging of the pancreas: spectrum of diseases.
Since the introduction of integrated positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET/CT), it has a great impact on the field of oncology.
Comparing to other conventional scanners, only PET/CT is capable of providing important information on accurate detecting, staging/restaging, and post-therapeutic monitoring of many cancers.
Many studies have demonstrated that PET/CT changes the management in approximately 30% of all cancer patients.
Because 2-((18)F)-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG) is a nonspecific tracer, understanding the PET/CT limitations and pitfalls for various pancreatic conditions can lead to more accurate interpretation of PET/CT images, which ultimately would impact patient care.
As a result, it is important for radiologists and other clinicians to familiarize themselves with a wide spectrum of pancreatic PET/CT findings simulating cancer from benign entities.
PMID: 22069448
A peptide of SPARC interferes with the interaction between caspase8 and Bcl2 to resensitize chemoresistant tumors and enhance their regression in vivo.
SPARC, a matricellular protein with tumor suppressor properties in certain human cancers, was initially identified in a genome-wide analysis of differentially expressed genes in chemotherapy resistance.
Its exciting new role as a potential chemosensitizer arises from its ability to augment the apoptotic cascade, although the exact mechanisms are unclear.
This study further examines the mechanism by which SPARC may be promoting apoptosis and identifies a smaller peptide analogue with greater chemosensitizing and tumor-regressing properties than the native protein.
We examined the possibility that the apoptosis-enhancing activity of SPARC could reside within one of its three biological domains (N-terminus (NT), the follistatin-like (FS), or extracellular (EC) domains), and identified the N-terminus as the region with its chemosensitizing properties.
These results were not only confirmed by studies utilizing stable cell lines overexpressing the different domains of SPARC, but as well, with a synthetic 51-aa peptide spanning the NT-domain.
It revealed that the NT-domain induced a significantly greater reduction in cell viability than SPARC, and that it enhanced the apoptotic cascade via its activation of caspase 8.
Moreover, in chemotherapy resistant human colon, breast and pancreatic cancer cells, its chemosensitizing properties also depended on its ability to dissociate Bcl2 from caspase 8.
These observations translated to clinically significant findings in that, in-vivo, mouse tumor xenografts overexpressing the NT-domain of SPARC had significantly greater sensitivity to chemotherapy and tumor regression, even when compared to the highly-sensitive SPARC-overexpressing tumors.
Our results identified an interplay between the NT-domain, Bcl2 and caspase 8 that helps augment apoptosis and as a consequence, a tumor's response to therapy.
This NT-domain of SPARC and its 51-aa peptide are highly efficacious in modulating and enhancing apoptosis, thereby conferring greater chemosensitivity to resistant tumors.
Our findings provide additional insight into mechanisms involved in chemotherapy resistance and a potential novel therapeutic that specifically targets this devastating phenomenon.
PMID: 22069305
Multifunctional mesoporous silica nanospheres with cleavable Gd(III) chelates as MRI contrast agents: synthesis, characterization, target-specificity, and renal clearance.
Mesoporous silica nanospheres (MSNs) are a promising material for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast agents.
In this paper multifunctional MSNs with cleavable Gd(III) chelates are synthesized and characterized, and their applicability as MRI contrast agents is demonstrated both in vitro and in vivo.
The MSNs contain Gd(III) chelates that are covalently linked via a redox-responsive disulfide moiety.
The MSNs are further functionalized with polyethylene glycol (PEG) and an anisamide ligand to improve their biocompatibility and target specificity.
The effectiveness of MSNs as an MRI imaging contrast agent and their targeting ability are successfully demonstrated in vitro using human colon adenocarcinoma and pancreatic cancer cells.
Finally, the capability of this platform as an in vivo MRI contrast agent is tested using a 3T scanner.
The Gd(III) chelate was quickly cleaved by the blood pool thiols and eliminated through the renal excretion pathway.
Further tuning of the Gd(III) chelate release kinetics is needed before the MSN system can be used as target-specific MRI contrast agents in vivo.
PMID: 22068680
Impact of microvessel density on lymph node metastasis and survival after curative resection of pancreatic cancer.
The roles of angiogenesis and the most prominent angiogenic vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in diseases of the pancreas remain controversial.
We compared microvessel density (MVD) and VEGF status in normal pancreatic, chronic pancreatic, and pancreatic cancer (PC) tissues to establish their prognostic relevance.
Eighty samples of PC tissue, 32 samples of normal pancreatic tissue, and 20 samples of chronic pancreatitis (cP) tissue were immunostained with monoclonal anti-CD31 and polyclonal anti-VEGF antibody.
The MVD was correlated with clinicopathological features and survival.
Microvessel density was higher in PC than in cP (P < 0.001).
Residual tumor status was highly predictive for survival (P < 0.001).
After stratification for residual tumor status, we identified lymph node metastasis (LNM) in more than two lymph nodes (P < 0.04) and high MVD (P < 0.03) as risk factors for mortality.
Multivariate analysis revealed only a high MVD (P = 0.03, odds ratio 0.441, 95% confidence interval 0.211-0.821) as an independent predictor of poor survival.
Vascular endothelial growth factor was found over stromal cells in cP and over ductal adenocarcinoma cells in PC.
Vascular endothelial growth factor expression status was not predictive of survival (P < 0.07).
This study confirms the role of angiogenesis in PC and identifies MVD as an independent prognostic factor in patients with curatively resected PC.
PMID: 22068672
Pancreaticoduodenectomy with resection of the splenic artery and splenectomy for pancreatic double cancers after total gastrectomy. Preservation of the pancreatic function via the blood supply from the posterior epiploic artery: report of a case.
The patient was a 56-year-old man who had previously undergone a total gastrectomy without splenectomy, and was diagnosed with pancreatic head and body cancers and primary solitary lung cancer.
The pancreas body tumor invaded the origin of the splenic artery, and if the origin of the splenic artery were resected there would be no blood flow to the pancreas tail, resulting in a need for total pancreatectomy.
However, we focused on the posterior epiploic artery (PEA), which is a less well known blood supply from the mesocolon to pancreatic body and tail, and planned to preserve the pancreatic tail as long as the resected margin of the pancreas was not malignant, considering his limited life expectancy.
We performed a pancreaticoduodenectomy with resection of the origin of the splenic artery and splenectomy, preserving the pancreatic tail and PEA.
The patient has been free from insulin therapy for blood sugar control, and has been well for 10 months after the surgery.
PMID: 22068173
Cadmium exposure and cancer mortality in the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey cohort.
This study examined prospective data from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III) cohort to investigate the relationship between cadmium exposure and cancer mortality, and the specific cancers associated with cadmium exposure, in the general population.
Vital status and cause of death through 31 December 2006 were obtained by the National Center for Health Statistics for NHANES III participants.
The cadmium concentration of spot urine samples was measured and corrected for urine creatinine (uCd).
Weighted Cox proportional hazards regression with age as the time metric was applied to estimate sex-specific adjusted HRs (aHRs) of mortality associated with uCd for all cancers and the cancers responsible for the most deaths in the USA.
Estimates were stratified by smoking history and adjusted for education, body mass index and race.
uCd was associated with cancer mortality (aHR per twofold higher uCd (95% CI), men: 1.26 (1.07 to 1.48); women: 1.21 (1.04 to 1.42)).
In men, mortality from lung cancer, pancreatic cancer and non-Hodgkin lymphoma was associated with uCd; an association with leukaemia mortality was suggested.
In women, associations were suggested with mortality due to lung cancer, leukaemia, ovarian and uterine cancer, but evidence was weaker than in men.
Cadmium appears to be associated with overall cancer mortality in men and women, but the specific cancers associated differ between men and women, suggesting avenues for future research.
Limitations of the study include the possibility of uncontrolled confounding by cigarette smoking or other factors, and the limited number of deaths due to some cancers.
PMID: 22068166
Detection of pancreatic cancer tumours and precursor lesions by cathepsin E activity in mouse models.
Background and AimsPancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the fourth leading cause of cancer death in the USA.
Surgical resection is the only effective treatment; however, only 20% of patients are candidates for surgery.
The ability to detect early PDAC would increase the availability of surgery and improve patient survival.
This study assessed the feasibility of using the enzymatic activity of cathepsin E (Cath E), a protease highly and specifically expressed in PDAC, as a novel biomarker for the detection of pancreas-bearing pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) lesions and PDAC.MethodsPancreas from normal, chronic pancreatitis and PDAC patients was assessed for Cath E expression by quantitative real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry.
Human PDAC xenografts and genetically engineered mouse models (GEMM) of PDAC were injected with a Cath E activity selective fluorescent probe and imaged using an optical imaging system.ResultsThe specificity of Cath E expression in PDAC patients and GEMM of pancreatic cancer was confirmed by quantitative real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry.
The novel probe for Cath E activity specifically detected PDAC in both human xenografts and GEMM in vivo.
The Cath E sensitive probe was also able to detect pancreas with PanIN lesions in GEMM before tumour formation.ConclusionsThe elevated Cath E expression in PanIN and pancreatic tumours allowed in-vivo detection of human PDAC xenografts and imaging of pancreas with PanIN and PDAC tumours in GEMM.
Our results support the usefulness of Cath E activity as a potential molecular target for PDAC and early detection imaging.
PMID: 22067729
HER3 overexpression as an independent indicator of poor prognosis for patients with curatively resected pancreatic cancer.
The association between human epidermal growth factor receptor 3 (HER3) overexpression and survival in patients with curatively resected pancreatic cancer was investigated.
Tissue samples from 126 pancreatic cancers without hematogenous or peritoneal metastases recovered from macroscopically curative resection were fixed with formalin, embedded in paraffin and subjected to immunohistochemical staining.
Semiquantitative scores of zero (no staining or staining in less than 10% of cancer cells), 1+, 2+, or 3+ were assigned to each sample based on the intensity of staining.
Scores of 2+ or 3+ were defined as HER3-positive staining, i.e., HER3 overexpression.
HER3 overexpression was observed in 52 of the 126 tissue samples (41.3%).
There were no associations between HER3 overexpression and clinicopathological factors, including tumor location, tumor size, tumor differentiation, T/N categories according to the International Union against Cancer, and serum carbohydrate antibody 19-9 level (CA19-9).
Univariate analysis demonstrated the median survival time of patients with HER3 overexpression was 37.2 months, while that of patients with HER3-negative samples was 58.6 months (p = 0.008).
HER3 overexpression, lymph node metastasis, and elevated serum CA19-9 level were independent predictors of poor prognosis based on multivariate survival analysis.
A new prognostic predictor, HER3 overexpression, was identified for resected pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22067332
Pax8 detection in well-differentiated pancreatic endocrine tumors: how reliable is it?
PMID: 22067331
Prox1 transcription factor as a marker for vascular tumors-evaluation of 314 vascular endothelial and 1086 nonvascular tumors.
Prox1, a transcription factor important in the regulation and maintenance of the lymphatic endothelial phenotype, is consistently expressed in lymphangiomas and Kaposi sarcoma and has also been reported in Kaposiform hemangioendothelioma.
However, information on its distribution in vascular tumors, such as angiosarcoma, is limited.
In this study, we examined selected normal tissues and 314 vascular endothelial and 1086 nonvascular tumors to get an insight into the biology of these tumors and on potential diagnostic use of Prox1 as an immunohistochemical marker.
In adult tissues, Prox1 was essentially restricted to lymphatic endothelia, with expression in subsets of pancreatic and gastrointestinal epithelia.
However, it was also detected in embryonic liver and heart.
Prox1 was consistently expressed in lymphangiomas, venous hemangiomas, Kaposi sarcoma, in endothelia of spindle cell hemangioma, Kaposiform hemangioendothelioma, and retiform hemangioendothelioma, and in half of epithelioid hemangioendotheliomas.
It was present in most cutaneous angiosarcomas from different sites but was less commonly expressed in deep soft tissue and visceral angiosarcomas.
In contrast, Prox1 was generally absent in capillary and cavernous hemangiomas.
In positive hemangiomas and angiosarcomas it was coexpressed with podoplanin, another marker of the lymphatic endothelial phenotype.
There was an inverse correlation with CD34 expression.
The expression in mesenchymal nonendothelial neoplasm was limited.
Prox1 was detected in 5 of 27 synovial sarcomas, specifically in the epithelia of biphasic tumors.
Four of 16 Ewing sarcomas and 5 of 15 paragangliomas were also positive.
All melanomas and undifferentiated sarcomas were negative.
Among epithelial neoplasms, Prox1 was detected in 18 of 38 colonic carcinomas and 10 of 15 cholangiocarcinomas and in a minority of pulmonary, prostatic, and endometrial adenocarcinomas.
The common Prox1 expression in angiosarcoma and its rare presence in nonvascular mesenchymal tumors make this marker suitable for the diagnosis of angiosarcoma and Kaposi sarcoma.
However, the presence of Prox1 in some malignant epithelial tumors necessitates caution in applying Prox1 as a marker for vascular tumors.
Common Prox1 expression in angiosarcoma may reflect the lymphatic endothelial phenotype in these tumors.
Its patterns of expression in hemangiomas and angiosarcoma may be diagnostically useful and offer a new parameter in the biological classification of vascular tumors.
PMID: 22066783
PEG-detachable cationic polyaspartamide derivatives bearing stearoyl moieties for systemic siRNA delivery toward subcutaneous BxPC3 pancreatic tumor.
For systemic siRNA delivery into tumor tissues, a safe and efficient vehicle is strongly required.
Therefore, we designed a block copolymer of detachable poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) polycation bearing low pKa amines and hydrophobic moieties in the side chain to develop a smart siRNA complex possessing biocompatibility, high complex stability, and endosomal escaping functionality.
A disulfide linkage (-SS-) was inserted as a linker between PEG and a cationic polyaspartamide derivative, poly{N-[N-(2-aminoethyl)-2-aminoethyl]aspartamide} (PAsp(DET)), with a flanking stearoyl moiety, where PAsp(DET) segment provides the excellent ability of endosome destabilization by direct interaction with the membrane.
The resulting polymer, stearoyl PEG-SS-PAsp(DET), was confirmed to form the siRNA complex with an environment-responsive PEG palisade, which was detached from the complex surface under reductive conditions mimicking tumor tissues and cytoplasm because of the disulfide cleavage.
The smart siRNA complex allowed significant gene silencing against cultured pancreatic cancer cells without considerable cytotoxicity and erythrocyte disruption, whereas such significant gene silencing was not observed in a control siRNA complex without the disulfide linkage.
This enhanced gene silencing activity might be because of the enhanced cellular uptake and subsequent translocation of siRNA into cytoplasm facilitated by PEG detachment around and/or in the cancer cells.
Further, intravital real-time confocal laser scanning microscopic observation revealed the effect of hydrophobic stearoyl modification on the stabilization of the siRNA complex for longevity in the blood.
Significant in vivo gene silencing of the smart siRNA complex was achieved by systemic administration of vascular endothelial growth factor siRNA in a mouse model bearing a subcutaneous pancreatic tumor, leading to 40% regression in tumor growth.
These results demonstrate the strong potential of stearoyl PEG-SS-PAsp(DET) as a vehicle for systemic delivery of siRNA in cancer therapy.
PMID: 22066465
Urine metabolic signature of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma by (1)h nuclear magnetic resonance: identification, mapping, and evolution.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has a dismal prognosis and is highly chemoresistant.
Early detection is the only means to impact long-term survival, but screening methods are lacking.
Given the complex and heterogeneous nature of pancreatic cancer, unbiased analytical methods such as metabolomics by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy show promise to identify disease-specific molecular fingerprints.
NMR profiles constitute a fingerprint of the biofluid, reporting quantitatively on all detectable small biomolecules.
NMR spectroscopy was applied to investigate the urine metabolome of PDAC patients (n = 33) and to detect altered metabolic profiles in comparison with healthy matched controls (n = 54).
The spectral data were analyzed using multivariate statistical techniques.
Statistically significant differences were found between urine metabolomic profiles of PDAC and control individuals (p < 10(-5)).
Group discrimination was possible due to average concentration differences of several metabolite signals, pointing to a multimolecular signature of the disease.
The robustness of the determined statistical model is confirmed by its predictive performance (sensitivity = 75.8%, specificity = 90.7%).
Additionally, the method allowed for a neat separation between spectral profiles of individuals with intermediate and advanced pathologic staging, as well as for the discrimination of samples based on tumor localization.
NMR spectroscopy analysis of urinary metabolic profiles proved successful in identifying a complex molecular signature of PDAC.
Furthermore, results of a descriptive-level analysis show the possibility to follow disease evolution and to carry out tumor site mapping.
Given the high reproducibility and the noninvasive nature of the analytical procedure, the described method bears potential to impact large-scale screening programs.
PMID: 22066314
Exenatide and sitagliptin: pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer. Harms on the rise.
PMID: 22066125
Pancreatic serous cystadenocarcinoma with invasive growth into the colon and spleen.
Serous cystic neoplasms of the pancreas are almost always benign lesions.
However, there are some case reports of malignant serous neoplasms of the pancreas.
It is very difficult to distinguish malignant and benign tumors.
Indeed, only clinicopathologic findings of locoregional invasion and metastasis represent a malignancy.
We report a serous cystadenocarcinoma of the pancreas that was initially considered to be colon cancer.
Post-operatively, the tumor was confirmed to be a malignant serous cystic tumor of the pancreas.
One year later, the patient remains disease-free.
PMID: 22066019
Boswellic acid suppresses growth and metastasis of human pancreatic tumors in an orthotopic nude mouse model through modulation of multiple targets.
Pancreatic cancer (PaCa) is one of the most lethal cancers, with an estimated 5-year survival of <5% even when patients are given the best treatment available.
In addition, these treatments are often toxic and expensive, thus new agents which are safe, affordable and effective are urgently needed.
We describe here the results of our study with acetyl-11-keto-β-boswellic acid (AKBA), an agent obtained from an Ayurvedic medicine, gum resin of Boswellia serrata.
Whether AKBA has an activity against human PaCa, was examined in in vitro models and in an orthotopic nude mouse model of PaCa.
We found that AKBA inhibited the proliferation of four different PaCa cell lines (AsPC-1, PANC-28, and MIA PaCa-2 with K-Ras and p53 mutations, and BxPC-3 with wild-type K-Ras and p53 mutation).
These effects correlated with an inhibition of constitutively active NF-κB and suppression of NF-κB regulating gene expression.
AKBA also induced apoptosis, and sensitized the cells to apoptotic effects of gemcitabine.
In the orthotopic nude mouse model of PaCa, p.o.
administration of AKBA alone (100 mg/kg) significantly inhibited the tumor growth; this activity was enhanced by gemcitabine.
In addition, AKBA inhibited the metastasis of the PaCa to spleen, liver, and lungs.
This correlated with decreases in Ki-67, a biomarker of proliferation, and CD31, a biomarker of microvessel density, in the tumor tissue.
AKBA produced significant decreases in the expression of NF-κB regulating genes in the tissues.
Immunohistochemical analysis also showed AKBA downregulated the expression of COX-2, MMP-9, CXCR4, and VEGF in the tissues.
Overall these results demonstrate that AKBA can suppress the growth and metastasis of human pancreatic tumors in an orthotopic nude mouse model that correlates with modulation of multiple targets.
PMID: 22066010
Pathobiological implications of MUC16 expression in pancreatic cancer.
MUC16 (CA125) belongs to a family of high-molecular weight O-glycosylated proteins known as mucins.
While MUC16 is well known as a biomarker in ovarian cancer, its expression pattern in pancreatic cancer (PC), the fourth leading cause of cancer related deaths in the United States, remains unknown.
The aim of our study was to analyze the expression of MUC16 during the initiation, progression and metastasis of PC for possible implication in PC diagnosis, prognosis and therapy.
In this study, a microarray containing tissues from healthy and PC patients was used to investigate the differential protein expression of MUC16 in PC.
MUC16 mRNA levels were also measured by RT-PCR in the normal human pancreatic, pancreatitis, and PC tissues.
To investigate its expression pattern during PC metastasis, tissue samples from the primary pancreatic tumor and metastases (from the same patient) in the lymph nodes, liver, lung and omentum from Stage IV PC patients were analyzed.
To determine its association in the initiation of PC, tissues from PC patients containing pre-neoplastic lesions of varying grades were stained for MUC16.
Finally, MUC16 expression was analyzed in 18 human PC cell lines.
MUC16 is not expressed in the normal pancreatic ducts and is strongly upregulated in PC and detected in pancreatitis tissue.
It is first detected in the high-grade pre-neoplastic lesions preceding invasive adenocarcinoma, suggesting that its upregulation is a late event during the initiation of this disease.
MUC16 expression appears to be stronger in metastatic lesions when compared to the primary tumor, suggesting a role in PC metastasis.
We have also identified PC cell lines that express MUC16, which can be used in future studies to elucidate its functional role in PC.
Altogether, our results reveal that MUC16 expression is significantly increased in PC and could play a potential role in the progression of this disease.
PMID: 22065721
Use of multifunctional sigma-2 receptor ligand conjugates to trigger cancer-selective cell death signaling.
One major challenge in the development of cancer therapeutics is the selective delivery of the drugs to their cellular targets.
In the case of pancreatic cancer, the σ-2 receptor is a unique target that triggers apoptosis upon activation.
We have previously developed a series of chemical compounds with high affinity for the σ-2 receptor and showed rapid internalization of the ligands.
One particular specific ligand of the σ-2 receptor, SV119, binds to pancreatic cancer cells and induces target cell death in vitro and in vivo.
In this study, we characterized the ability of SV119 to selectively deliver other death-inducing cargos to augment the cytotoxic properties of SV119 itself.
When conjugated to SV119, small molecules that are known to interfere with intracellular prosurvival pathways retained their ability to induce cell death, the efficiency of which was enhanced by the combinatorial effect of SV119 delivered with its small molecule cargo.
Our findings define a simple platform technology to increase the tumor-selective delivery of small molecule therapeutics via σ-2 ligands, permitting chemotherapeutic synergy that can optimize efficacy and patient benefit.
PMID: 22065595
The relationship between tissue factor and cancer progression: insights from bench and bedside.
It is now widely recognized that a strong correlation exists between cancer and aberrant hemostasis.
Patients with various types of cancers, including pancreatic, colorectal, and gastric cancer, often develop thrombosis, a phenomenon commonly referred to as Trousseau syndrome.
Reciprocally, components from the coagulation cascade also influence cancer progression.
The primary initiator of coagulation, the transmembrane receptor tissue factor (TF), has gained considerable attention as a determinant of tumor progression.
On complex formation with its ligand, coagulation factor VIIa, TF influences protease-activated receptor-dependent tumor cell behavior, and regulates integrin function, which facilitate tumor angiogenesis both in vitro and in mouse models.
Furthermore, evidence exists that an alternatively spliced isoform of TF also affects tumor growth and tumor angiogenesis.
In patient material, TF expression and TF cytoplasmic domain phosphorylation correlate with disease outcome in many, but not in all, cancer subtypes, suggesting that TF-dependent signal transduction events are a potential target for therapeutic intervention in selected types of cancer.
In this review, we summarize our current understanding of the role of TF in tumor growth and metastasis, and speculate on anticancer therapy by targeting TF.
PMID: 22065319
A root-cause analysis of mortality following major pancreatectomy.
Although mortality rates from pancreatectomy have decreased worldwide, death remains an infrequent but profound event at an individual practice level.
Root-cause analysis is a retrospective method commonly employed to understand adverse events.
We evaluate whether emerging mortality risk assessment tools sufficiently predict and account for actual clinical events that are often identified by root-cause analysis.
We assembled a Pancreatic Surgery Mortality Study Group comprised of 36 pancreatic surgeons from 15 institutions in 4 countries.
Mortalities after pancreatectomy (30 and 90 days) were accrued from 2000 to 2010.
For root-cause analysis, each surgeon "deconstructed" the clinical events preceding a death to determine cause.
We next tested whether mortality risk assessment tools (ASA, POSSUM, Charlson, SOAR, and NSQIP) could predict those patients who would die (n = 218) and compared their prognostic accuracy against a cohort of resections in which no patient died (n = 1,177).
Two hundred eighteen deaths (184 Whipple's resection, 18 distal pancreatectomies, and 16 total pancreatectomies) were identified from 11,559 pancreatectomies performed by surgeons whose experience averaged 14.5 years.
Overall 30- and 90-day mortalities were 0.96% and 1.89%, respectively.
Individual surgeon rates ranged from 0% to 4.7%.
Only 5 patients died intraoperatively, while the other 213 succumbed at a median of 29 days.
Mean patient age was 70 years old (38% were >75 years old).
Malignancy was the indication in 90% of cases, mostly pancreatic cancer (57%).
Median operative time was 365 min and estimated blood loss was 700 cc (range, 100-16,000 cc).
Vascular repair or multivisceral resections were required for 19.7% and 15.1%, respectively.
Seventy-seven percent had a variety of major complications before death.
Eighty-seven percent required intensive care unit care, 55% were transfused, and 35% were reoperated upon.
Fifty percent died during the index admission, while another 11% died after a readmission.
Almost half (n = 107) expired between 31 and 90 days.
Only 11% had autopsies.
Operation-related complications contributed to 40% of deaths, with pancreatic fistula being the most evident (14%).
Technical errors (21%) and poor patient selection (15%) were cited by surgeons.
Of deaths, 5.5% had associated cancer progression-all occurring between 31 and 90 days.
Even after root-cause scrutiny, the ultimate cause of death could not be determined for a quarter of the patients-most often between 31 and 90 days.
While assorted risk models predicted mortality with variable discrimination from nonmortalities, they consistently underestimated the actual mortality events we report.
Root-cause analysis suggests that risk prediction should include, if not emphasize, operative factors related to pancreatectomy.
While risk models can distinguish between mortalities and nonmortalities in a collective fashion, they vastly miscalculate the actual chance of death on an individual basis.
This study reveals the contributions of both comorbidities and aggressive surgical decisions to mortality.
PMID: 22065318
Effect of neoadjuvant chemoradiation and surgical technique on recurrence of localized pancreatic cancer.
To determine the influence of neoadjuvant chemoradiation and standardized dissection of the superior mesenteric artery upon the oncologic outcome of patients with localized pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
One hundred ninety-four patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma who underwent pancreaticoduodenectomy between 2004 and 2008 were evaluated.
The retroperitoneal dissection was performed directly along the superior mesenteric artery in all cases.
A standard histopathologic protocol that measured the "superior mesenteric artery (SMA) margin distance" between cancer cells and the superior mesenteric artery was employed.
Seventy-six percent of patients received neoadjuvant chemoradiation.
The SMA margin was positive in 4% of patients but an additional 22% of patients with a negative margin had a SMA margin distance of ≤1 mm.
Preoperative CT images overestimated the SMA margin distance in 73% of cases.
Patients who received chemoradiation had longer SMA margin distances than those who did not.
Patients who received chemoradiation and had a SMA margin of >1 mm had the lowest recurrence rates.
Administration of neoadjuvant chemoradiation and lower estimated blood loss were independently associated with longer progression-free survival on multivariate analysis.
Preoperative chemoradiation and meticulous dissection of the superior mesenteric artery maximize the distance between cancer cells and the SMA margin and may influence locoregional control.
PMID: 22064683
Heterogeneity Mapping of Protein Expression in Tumors using Quantitative Immunofluorescence.
Morphologic heterogeneity within an individual tumor is well-recognized by histopathologists in surgical practice.
While this often takes the form of areas of distinct differentiation into recognized histological subtypes, or different pathological grade, often there are more subtle differences in phenotype which defy accurate classification (Figure 1).
Ultimately, since morphology is dictated by the underlying molecular phenotype, areas with visible differences are likely to be accompanied by differences in the expression of proteins which orchestrate cellular function and behavior, and therefore, appearance.
The significance of visible and invisible (molecular) heterogeneity for prognosis is unknown, but recent evidence suggests that, at least at the genetic level, heterogeneity exists in the primary tumor(1,2), and some of these sub-clones give rise to metastatic (and therefore lethal) disease.
Moreover, some proteins are measured as biomarkers because they are the targets of therapy (for instance ER and HER2 for tamoxifen and trastuzumab (Herceptin), respectively).
If these proteins show variable expression within a tumor then therapeutic responses may also be variable.
The widely used histopathologic scoring schemes for immunohistochemistry either ignore, or numerically homogenize the quantification of protein expression.
Similarly, in destructive techniques, where the tumor samples are homogenized (such as gene expression profiling), quantitative information can be elucidated, but spatial information is lost.
Genetic heterogeneity mapping approaches in pancreatic cancer have relied either on generation of a single cell suspension(3), or on macrodissection(4).
A recent study has used quantum dots in order to map morphologic and molecular heterogeneity in prostate cancer tissue(5), providing proof of principle that morphology and molecular mapping is feasible, but falling short of quantifying the heterogeneity.
Since immunohistochemistry is, at best, only semi-quantitative and subject to intra- and inter-observer bias, more sensitive and quantitative methodologies are required in order to accurately map and quantify tissue heterogeneity in situ.
We have developed and applied an experimental and statistical methodology in order to systematically quantify the heterogeneity of protein expression in whole tissue sections of tumors, based on the Automated QUantitative Analysis (AQUA) system(6).
Tissue sections are labeled with specific antibodies directed against cytokeratins and targets of interest, coupled to fluorophore-labeled secondary antibodies.
Slides are imaged using a whole-slide fluorescence scanner.
Images are subdivided into hundreds to thousands of tiles, and each tile is then assigned an AQUA score which is a measure of protein concentration within the epithelial (tumor) component of the tissue.
Heatmaps are generated to represent tissue expression of the proteins and a heterogeneity score assigned, using a statistical measure of heterogeneity originally used in ecology, based on the Simpson's biodiversity index(7).
To date there have been no attempts to systematically map and quantify this variability in tandem with protein expression, in histological preparations.
Here, we illustrate the first use of the method applied to ER and HER2 biomarker expression in ovarian cancer.
Using this method paves the way for analyzing heterogeneity as an independent variable in studies of biomarker expression in translational studies, in order to establish the significance of heterogeneity in prognosis and prediction of responses to therapy.
PMID: 22064652
MiR-126 acts as a tumor suppressor in pancreatic cancer cells via the regulation of ADAM9.
The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a critical step for pancreatic cancer cells as an entry of metastatic disease.
Wide variety of cytokines and signaling pathways are involved in this complex process while the entire picture is still cryptic.
Recently, miRNA was found to regulate cellular function including EMT by targeting multiple mRNAs.
We conducted comprehensive analysis of miRNA expression profiles in invasive ductal adenocarcinoma (IDA), intraductal papillary mucinous adenoma, intraductal papillary mucinous carcinoma, and human pancreatic cancer cell line to elucidate essential miRNAs which regulate invasive growth of pancreatic cancer cells.
Along with higher expression of miR-21 which has been shown to be highly expressed in IDA, reduced expression of miR-126 in IDA and pancreatic cancer cell line was detected.
The miR-126 was found to target ADAM9 (disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain-containing protein 9) which is highly expressed in pancreatic cancer.
The direct interaction between miR-126 and ADAM9 mRNA was confirmed by 3' untranslated region assay.
Reexpression of miR-126 and siRNA-based knockdown of ADAM9 in pancreatic cancer cells resulted in reduced cellular migration, invasion, and induction of epithelial marker E-cadherin.
We showed for the first time that the miR-126/ADAM9 axis plays essential role in the inhibition of invasive growth of pancreatic cancer cells.
PMID: 22064622
Arterial resection during pancreatectomy for pancreatic cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
The majority of pancreatic cancers are diagnosed at an advanced stage.
As surgical resection remains the only hope for cure, more aggressive surgical approaches have been advocated to increase resection rates.
Institutions have begun to release data on their experience with pancreatectomy and simultaneous arterial resection (AR), which has traditionally been considered a general contraindication to resection.
The aim of the present meta-analysis was to evaluate the perioperative and long-term outcomes of patients with AR during pancreatectomy for pancreatic cancer.
The Medline, Embase, and Cochrane Library and J-East databases were systematically searched to identify studies reporting outcome of patients who underwent pancreatectomy with AR for pancreatic cancer.
Studies that reported perioperative and/or long-term results after pancreatectomy with AR were eligible for inclusion.
Meta-analyses included comparative studies providing data on patients with and without AR and were performed using a random effects model.
The literature search identified 26 studies including 366 and 2243 patients who underwent pancreatectomy with and without AR.
All studies were retrospective cohort studies and the methodological quality was moderate to low.
Meta-analyses revealed AR to be associated with a significantly increased risk for perioperative mortality [Odds ratio (OR) = 5.04; 95% confidence interval (CI), 2.69-9.45; P < 0.0001; I² = 24%], poor survival at 1 year (OR = 0.49; 95% CI, 0.31-0.78; P = 0.002; I² = 35%) and 3 years (OR = 0.39; 95% CI, 0.17-0.86; P = 0.02; I² = 49%) compared with patients without AR.
The increased perioperative mortality (OR = 8.87; 95% CI, 3.40-23.13; P < 0.0001; I² = 5%) and lower survival rate at 1 year (OR = 0.50; 95% CI, 0.31-0.82; P = 0.006; I² = 40%) was confirmed in the comparison to patients undergoing venous resection.
Despite substantial perioperative mortality, pancreatectomy with AR was associated with more favorable survival compared with patients who did not undergo resection for locally advanced disease.
AR in patients undergoing pancreatectomy for pancreatic cancer is associated with a poor short and long-term outcome.
Pancreatectomy with AR may, however, be justified in highly selected patients owing to the potential survival benefit compared with patients without resection.
These patients should be treated within the bounds of clinical trials to assess outcomes after AR in the era of modern pancreatic surgery and multimodal therapy.
PMID: 22062654
Absolute immunoquantification of the expression of ABC transporters P-glycoprotein, breast cancer resistance protein and multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 in human liver and duodenum.
The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP), multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 (MRP2), and P-glycoprotein (Pgp) are important in the distribution and elimination of many drugs and endogenous metabolites.
Due to their membrane location and hydrophobicity it is difficult to generate purified protein standards to quantify these transporters in human tissues.
The present study generated transporter proteins fused with the S-peptide of ribonuclease for use as standards in immunoquantification in human liver and small intestine.
Quantification of the S•tag™, a 15 amino acid peptide, is based on the formation of a functional ribonuclease activity upon its high affinity reconstitution with ribonuclease S-protein.
S-tagged transporters were used as full-length protein standards in the immunoquantification of endogenous BCRP, MRP2, and Pgp levels in 14 duodenum and 13 liver human tissue samples.
Expression levels in the duodenum were 305±248 (BCRP), 66±70 (MRP2), and 275±205 (Pgp) fmoles per cm(2).
Hepatic levels were 2.6±0.9 (BCRP), 19.8±10.5 (MRP2), and 26.1±10.1 (total Pgp) pmoles per g of liver.
The mean hepatic scaling factor was 35.8mg crude membrane per g of liver, and the mean duodenal scaling factor was 1.3mg crude membrane per cm(2) mucosal lining.
Interindividual variability was greater in duodenal samples than liver samples.
It is hoped that this innovative method of quantifying these transporters (and other membrane proteins) will improve in vivo-in vitro extrapolation and in silico prediction of drug absorption and elimination, thus supporting drug development.
PMID: 22036026
Chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity of N-[N-[3-(3-hydroxy-4-methoxyphenyl) propyl]-α-aspartyl]-L-phenylalanine 1-methyl ester, monohydrate (advantame) in the rat.
Groups of 55 male and 55 female Han Wistar rats were administered advantame (98.9-99.8% purity) in the diet at concentrations of 0, 2000, 10,000, or 50,000 ppm for 104 weeks, following parental exposure to the same levels from prior to mating and throughout gestation.
Additional groups of 20 rats/sex and 10 rats/sex were dosed for a period of 52 weeks and constituted the toxicity and reversibility phases of the study.
Achieved doses of advantame over the carcinogenicity study were 0, 97, 488, and 2621 mg/kg body weight/day in males and 0, 125, 630, and 3454 mg/kg body weight/day in females, respectively.
A high incidence of a pale and swollen anus and changes in fecal composition were observed in the high-dose groups.
There was no effect of treatment on mortality.
Body weight gain in the high-dose males (50,000 ppm) was slightly reduced compared to controls after 52 and 104 weeks of treatment; the decrease was not considered to be of toxicological significance, but due to the non-nutritive nature of the high dietary concentration of advantame.
During the toxicity phase, food conversion efficiency was slightly decreased in both sexes, at the 50,000 ppm dose level.
Given the non-nutritive content of the diet, this finding was not considered biologically significant.
There were no relationships between treatment and the results of hematological or urinalysis investigations.
Clinical chemistry evaluations showed consistently lower plasma urea concentrations in both sexes treated at 50,000 ppm, which was reversed during the 6-week recovery phase following 52 weeks of treatment, indicating a lack of permanent effects.
Terminal investigations at both the 52 and 104-week revealed a number of intergroup differences in absolute and/or relative organ weights; however, the differences did not show dose-response relationships, were minor in nature, and/or occurred only in one sex, and were not associated with any pathological findings, and they were considered not to be treatment-related.
Evaluation of the histopathology of the carcinogenicity phase animals revealed an increased incidence of pancreatic islet cell carcinomas in males (incidence rates of 0/55, 1/55, 2/55, and 3/55 in the 0, 2000, 10,000, or 50,000 ppm groups, respectively) and of mammary gland adenomas in the high-dose females (incidence rates of 0 in the control through 10,000 ppm dose groups and 4/41 in the 50,000 ppm dose group).
The incidence rates of these tumors did not attain statistical significance and/or remained within background historical control values, and they were considered to be unrelated to advantame treatment.
The no-observed-adverse-effect level was considered to be 50,000 ppm in the diet, the highest concentration tested, equivalent to 2621 and 3454 mg/kg body weight/day in males and females, respectively.
Advantame was concluded to be without carcinogenic activity.
PMID: 22059154
Primary pancreatic lymphoma: a rare cause of massive upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage.
PMID: 22057918
Antibacterial activity and cytotoxicity of selected Egyptian medicinal plants.
Medicinal plants have been used as a source of remedies since ancient times in Egypt.
The present study was designed to investigate the antibacterial activity and the cytotoxicity of the organic extracts from 16 selected medicinal plants of Egypt.
The study was also extended to the isolation of the antiproliferative compound jaeschkeanadiol p-hydroxybenzoate (FH-25) from Ferula hermonis.
The microbroth dilution was used to determine the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) of the samples against twelve bacterial strains belonging to four species, Providencia stuartii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Escherichia coli, while a resazurin assay was used to assess the cytotoxicity of the extracts on the human pancreatic cancer cell line MiaPaCa-2, breast cancer cell line MCF-7, CCRF-CEM leukemia cells, and their multidrug resistant subline, CEM/ADR5000.
The results of the MIC determination indicated that all the studied crude extracts were able to inhibit the growth of at least one of the tested bacterial species, the best activity being recorded with the crude extracts from F.
hermonis and Vitis vinifera, whichwere active against 91.7% and 83.3% of the studied bacteria, respectively.
The lowest MIC value of 128 μg/mL was recorded against P.
stuartii ATCC 29916 and E.
coli ATCC 10536 with the extract from V.
vinifera and Commiphora molmol, respectively.
In the cytotoxicity study, IC50 values below 20 μg/mL were recorded for the crude extract of F.
hermonis on all four studied cancer cell lines.
FH-25 also showed good cytotoxicity against MCF-7 cells (IC50: 2.47 μg/mL).
Finally, the results of the present investigation provided supportive data for the possible use of the plant extracts investigated herein, mostly F.
hermonis and V.
vinifera in the treatment of bacterial infections and jaeschkeanadiol p-hydroxybenzoate in the control of cancer diseases.
PMID: 22057240
Levels of evidence in endoscopic ultrasonography: a systematic review.
A prolific trend currently designates endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) literature.
We aimed to record all EUS-studies published during the past decade and evaluate them in terms of scientific quality, creating a stratification based on levels of evidence (LE).
All articles on EUS published between January 2001 and December 2010 were retrieved using a Pubmed and Cochrane Library search.
Inclusion criteria were: original research papers (randomized controlled trials-RCTs, prospective and retrospective studies), meta-analyses, reviews and surveys pertinent to gastrointestinal EUS.
Levels of evidence (LE) were assessed using the North of England evidence-based guidelines.
Overall, 1,832 eligible articles were reviewed.
The majority (46.1%) of reports comprised retrospective descriptive studies (LE III).
Expert reviews and committee reports (LE IV) accounted for 28.9%, well-designed quasi-experimental studies (LE IIb) for 20.1%, RCTs (LE Ib) for 2.4%, prospective controlled trials (LE IIa) for 1.4%, and meta-analyses (LE Ia) for 1.1% of the total.
High LE (Ia-Ib) were assigned to loco-regional staging of luminal gastrointestinal cancers; mediastinal staging of lung cancer; diagnostic work-up of solid pancreatic tumors, suspected biliary obstruction and choledocholithiasis; celiac plexus neurolysis; and pancreatic pseudocysts drainage.
Intermediate to low LE (IIa-IV) were assigned to submucosal tumors, pancreatic cysts, chronic pancreatitis and novel therapeutic applications (pancreato-biliary drainage, tumor ablation).
Diagnostic and staging EUS has matured and has proven its clinical impact on patient management.
Therapeutic or interventional EUS is still evolving and more quality research and data are needed to establish EUS as the best next intervention to perform once firm evidence is available.
PMID: 22056954
Large duct type invasive adenocarcinoma of the pancreas with microcystic and papillary patterns: a potential microscopic mimic of non-invasive ductal neoplasia.
A morphological variant of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma forming large ductal elements, large duct type ductal adenocarcinoma, is documented and its clinicopathological features are studied.
These tumors may have microcystic and papillary growth patterns that closely mimic the non-invasive cystic and papillary pancreatic tumors such as: intraductal papillary-mucinous neoplasia, including the oncocytic variant, mucinous cystic neoplasms, and ducts involved by pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia.
In a review of 230 pancreatectomy specimens with ductal adenocarcinoma, 28 (8%) cases of large duct type ductal adenocarcinomas were identified according to following criteria: more than 50% of the tumor sections available for examination contained infiltrative ducts with a diameter larger than 0.5 mm or had a macroscopically identifiable microcystic pattern.
Overall characteristics of large duct type ductal adenocarcinomas were not too different than those of conventional ductal adenocarcinomas, except that there was a slight female predominance in the former (F/M=2.3).
The mean age was 67 (vs 63 in conventional ductal adenocarcinomas; P=0.015), and occurrence in the tail was slightly more common (40% vs 18% in conventional ductal adenocarcinomas; P=0.006).
Grossly, cysts measuring up to 1 cm was noted in 10 cases.
Microscopically, large duct type adenocarcinomas were characterized by irregularly distributed large ducts with jagged edges, lined by columnar mucinous cells often having deceptively bland cytological features and variable degrees of papillomatosis.
Stromal desmoplasia had a hypercellular quality (morphologically distinct from ovarian-like stroma) in four cases, and had a myxoid quality in others.
KRAS oncogene mutation was identified in 9 out of 11 cases.
Median, 1-year and 2-year survival rates were 16 months, 77% and 30%, respectively, as opposed to 12 months, 52% and 30%, respectively, in conventional ductal adenocarcinoma.
In conclusion, it should be recognized that, some (8%) pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas exhibit a large duct pattern that may microscopically mimic non-invasive pancreatic tumors characterized by cystic and papillary patterns.
They may be distinguished by the relatively smaller size of the cysts, irregularity of the duct contours, clustering of the ducts, presence of intraluminal neutrophils and granular debris, degree of cytological pleomorphism, and myxoid quality of the stroma.
Clinical behavior appears to be slightly better than that of conventional ductal adenocarcinoma, which may be accounted by the well-differentiated nature of these tumors.
PMID: 22056873
Antitumor alkyl-lysophospholipid analog edelfosine induces apoptosis in pancreatic cancer by targeting endoplasmic reticulum.
Pancreatic cancer remains as one of the most deadly cancers, and responds poorly to current therapies.
The prognosis is extremely poor, with a 5-year survival of less than 5%.
Therefore, search for new effective therapeutic drugs is of pivotal need and urgency to improve treatment of this incurable malignancy.
Synthetic alkyl-lysophospholipid analogs (ALPs) constitute a heterogeneous group of unnatural lipids that promote apoptosis in a wide variety of tumor cells.
In this study, we found that the anticancer drug edelfosine was the most potent ALP in killing human pancreatic cancer cells, targeting endoplasmic reticulum (ER).
Edelfosine was taken up in significant amounts by pancreatic cancer cells and induced caspase- and mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis.
Pancreatic cancer cells show a prominent ER and edelfosine accumulated in this subcellular structure, inducing a potent ER stress response, with caspase-4, BAP31 and c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK) activation, CHOP/GADD153 upregulation and phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 α-subunit that eventually led to cell death.
Oral administration of edelfosine in xenograft mouse models of pancreatic cancer induced a significant regression in tumor growth and an increase in apoptotic index, as assessed by TUNEL assay and caspase-3 activation in the tumor sections.
The ER stress-associated marker CHOP/GADD153 was visualized in the pancreatic tumor isolated from edelfosine-treated mice, indicating a strong in vivo ER stress response.
These results suggest that edelfosine exerts its pro-apoptotic action in pancreatic cancer cells, both in vitro and in vivo, through its accumulation in the ER, which leads to ER stress and apoptosis.
Thus, we propose that the ER could be a key target in pancreatic cancer, and edelfosine may constitute a prototype for the development of a new class of antitumor drugs targeting the ER.Oncogene advance online publication, 7 November 2011; doi:10.1038/onc.2011.446.
PMID: 22056382
Crosstalk between the canonical NF-κB and Notch signaling pathways inhibits Pparγ expression and promotes pancreatic cancer progression in mice.
The majority of human pancreatic cancers have activating mutations in the KRAS proto-oncogene.
These mutations result in increased activity of the NF-κB pathway and the subsequent constitutive production of proinflammatory cytokines.
Here, we show that inhibitor of κB kinase 2 (Ikk2), a component of the canonical NF-κB signaling pathway, synergizes with basal Notch signaling to upregulate transcription of primary Notch target genes, resulting in suppression of antiinflammatory protein expression and promotion of pancreatic carcinogenesis in mice.
We found that in the Kras(G12D)Pdx1-cre mouse model of pancreatic cancer, genetic deletion of Ikk2 in initiated pre-malignant epithelial cells substantially delayed pancreatic oncogenesis and resulted in downregulation of the classical Notch target genes Hes1 and Hey1.
Tnf-α stimulated canonical NF-κB signaling and, in collaboration with basal Notch signals, induced optimal expression of Notch targets.
Mechanistically, Tnf-α stimulation resulted in phosphorylation of histone H3 at the Hes1 promoter, and this signal was lost with Ikk2 deletion.
Hes1 suppresses expression of Pparg, which encodes the antiinflammatory nuclear receptor Pparγ.
Thus, crosstalk between Tnf-α/Ikk2 and Notch sustains the intrinsic inflammatory profile of transformed cells.
These findings reveal what we believe to be a novel interaction between oncogenic inflammation and a major cell fate pathway and show how these pathways can cooperate to promote cancer progression.
PMID: 22056140
Nodal/Activin signaling drives self-renewal and tumorigenicity of pancreatic cancer stem cells and provides a target for combined drug therapy.
Nodal and Activin belong to the TGF-β superfamily and are important regulators of embryonic stem cell fate.
Here we investigated whether Nodal and Activin regulate self-renewal of pancreatic cancer stem cells.
Nodal and Activin were hardly detectable in more differentiated pancreatic cancer cells, while cancer stem cells and stroma-derived pancreatic stellate cells markedly overexpressed Nodal and Activin, but not TGF-β.
Knockdown or pharmacological inhibition of the Nodal/Activin receptor Alk4/7 in cancer stem cells virtually abrogated their self-renewal capacity and in vivo tumorigenicity, and reversed the resistance of orthotopically engrafted cancer stem cells to gemcitabine.
However, engrafted primary human pancreatic cancer tissue with a substantial stroma showed no response due to limited drug delivery.
The addition of a stroma-targeting hedgehog pathway inhibitor enhanced delivery of the Nodal/Activin inhibitor and translated into long-term, progression-free survival.
Therefore, inhibition of the Alk4/7 pathway, if combined with hedgehog pathway inhibition and gemcitabine, provides a therapeutic strategy for targeting cancer stem cells.
PMID: 22056131
Nodal/Activin signaling: a novel target for pancreatic cancer stem cell therapy.
Targeting of cancer stem cells (CSCs) has the potential to address the recalcitrance of pancreatic cancer to chemotherapy.
In this issue of Cell Stem Cell, Lonardo et al.
(2011) demonstrate that Nodal/Activin signaling is crucial for the maintenance and tumor-initiating capacity of pancreatic CSCs.
PMID: 22055585
Management of patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma: national trends in patient selection, operative management, and use of adjuvant therapy.
Surgical resection remains the only potentially curative option for patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAC).
Advances in surgical technique and perioperative care have reduced perioperative mortality; however, temporal trends in perioperative morbidity and the use of adjuvant therapy on a population basis remain ill-defined.
Using Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results-Medicare data, 2,461 patients with resected PAC were identified from 1991 to 2005.
We examined trends in preoperative comorbidity indices, adjuvant treatment, type of pancreatic resection, and changes in morbidity and mortality during 4 time intervals (ie, 1991-1996, 1997-2000, 2001-2003, and 2003-2005).
The majority of patients underwent pancreaticoduodenectomy (n = 1,945; 79%).
There was a temporal increase in mean patient age (p < 0.05) and the number of patients with multiple preoperative comorbidities (Elixhauser comorbidities ≥3: 1991-1996, 10% vs 2003-2005, 26%; p < 0.001).
Perioperative morbidity (53%) did not, however, change over time (p = 0.97) and 30-day mortality decreased by half (1991-1996: 6% vs 2003-2005: 3%; p = 0.04).
Overall, 51% (n = 1,243) of patients received adjuvant therapy, with the majority receiving chemoradiation (n = 817; 33%).
Among patients who received adjuvant therapy, factors associated with receipt of adjuvant chemotherapy alone relative to chemoradiation included older patient age (odds ratio = 1.75; p < 0.001) and ≥3 medical comorbidities (odds ratio = 1.57; p = 0.007).
Receipt of adjuvant chemotherapy alone also increased over time (2003-2005 vs 1991-1996, odds ratio = 2.21; p < 0.001).
Perioperative 30-day mortality associated with resection for PAC decreased by one-half from 1991 to 2005.
Although patients undergoing resection for PAC were older and had more preoperative comorbidities, the incidence of perioperative complications remained stable.
The relative use of adjuvant chemotherapy alone vs chemoradiation therapy for PAC has increased in the United States during the 15 years examined.
PMID: 22054617
Factors influencing outcome in patients undergoing portal vein resection for adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.
Survival rates after surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) remain low.
Selected patients with portal/superior mesenteric vein (PV) involvement undergo PV resection at pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD).
This study analyses outcomes for PD with/without PV resection in patients with PDA.
A retrospective analysis of prospectively collected data on patients requiring PD for histologically proven adenocarcinoma between 1/1997 and 9/2009 identified 326 patients with PDA, with 51 requiring PD with PV resection.
Patients were analyzed in two groups: PD + PV resection vs.
PD alone.
Multivariate analysis was used to identify predictive variables influencing survival and the Kaplan-Meier method to estimate patient survival.
Mean age for patients with PV resection was 66.4 (range 46-80) years, 47% were male.
Both groups had similar patient demographics, perioperative and tumor characteristics.
Postoperative morbidity was similar for patients with and without PV resection (27.5 vs.
28.4%).
30-day mortality was significantly higher in patients with PV resection (13.7%) vs.
PD alone (5.1%).
Overall survival however was similar in both groups (median PD alone 14.8 months vs.
14.5 months PD + PV).
Multivariate analysis identified age, tumor grading, stay on the ICU and lack of chemotherapy as independent risk factors for reduced long-term survival.
In carefully selected patients, PV resection results in similar long-term survival compared to PD alone.
In selected patients, PV infiltration may be considered a sign of anatomical proximity of the tumor, rather than only a sign of increased tumor aggressiveness.
PMID: 22054349
Pure laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy with en bloc celiac axis resection.
Recent technological developments and improved endoscopic procedures have greatly enlarged the applications of laparoscopic pancreatic resection.
A 77-year-old female with invasive ductal cancer of the pancreatic body touching the common hepatic and splenic arteries underwent a pure laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy with en bloc celiac axis resection (DP-CAR).
The celiac axis, the celiac plexus and ganglions, the left gastric artery, the Gerota fascia, the left adrenal gland, and the retroperitoneal fat tissues above the left renal vein were removed en bloc.
The procedure took 245 minutes and there was minimal blood loss.
The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on the seventh postoperative day.
The surgical margins were histologically clear (R0 resection).
Pure laparoscopic DP-CAR is minimally invasive, safe and feasible, and can achieve R0 resection in selected patients with pancreatic invasive ductal adenocarcinoma.
PMID: 22053213
DeltaNp63alpha-mediated induction of epidermal growth factor receptor promotes pancreatic cancer cell growth and chemoresistance.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is highly resistant to current chemotherapy regimens, in part due to alterations in the p53 tumor suppressor pathway.
p53 homolog p63 is a transcription factor essential for the development and differentiation of epithelial surfaces.
However its function in cancer is controversial and its role in PDAC is not known.
We discovered that ΔNp63α was the predominantly expressed p63 variant in pancreatic cancer cell lines.
ΔNp63α protein and mRNA levels were high in T3M4, BxPC3 and COLO-357 pancreatic cancer cells and low in ASPC-1 and PANC-1 cells.
Overexpression of ΔNp63α in PANC-1 cells and shRNA-mediated knockdown in T3M4 cells indicated that ΔNp63α promoted anchorage-dependent and -independent growth, motility and invasion, and enhanced resistance to cisplatin-induced apoptosis.
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathways contribute to the biological aggressiveness of PDAC, and we found that the motogenic effects of ΔNp63α were augmented in presence of EGF.
Ectopic expression of ΔNp63α resulted in upregulation of EGFR and β1-integrin in PANC-1 cells.
Conversely, ΔNp63α knockdown had an opposite effect in T3M4 cells.
ΔNp63α potentiated EGF-mediated activation of ERK, Akt and JNK signaling.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation and functional reporter assays demonstrated that ΔNp63α activated EGFR transcription.
14-3-3σ transcription was also positively regulated by ΔNp63α and we have previously shown that 14-3-3σ contributes to chemoresistance in pancreatic cancer cell lines.
Conversely, shRNA-mediated knockdown of 14-3-3σ led to abrogation of the ΔNp63α effects on cell proliferation and invasion.
Thus, p53 homolog ΔNp63α enhances the oncogenic potential of pancreatic cancer cells through trans-activation of EGFR and 14-3-3σ.
PMID: 22052986
Proanthocyanidins and other flavonoids in relation to pancreatic cancer: a case-control study in Italy.
BACKGROUND: Four cohort studies have examined the relation between flavonoids and pancreatic cancer risk providing inconsistent results.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We conducted a case-control study between 1991 and 2008 in Northern Italy.
Subjects were 326 cases with incident pancreatic cancer and 652 frequency-matched controls (admitted to the same hospitals as cases for acute non-neoplastic conditions) who answered a reproducible and valid food-frequency questionnaire.
We computed odds ratios (ORs) using logistic regression models conditioned on gender, age and study center, and adjusted for education, history of diabetes, tobacco smoking, alcohol drinking and energy intake.
RESULTS: Proanthocyanidins with three or more mers were inversely related to pancreatic cancer risk.
The ORs were similar in all classes of polymers with three or more mers and in their combination (OR for the highest versus the lowest quintile of intake, 0.41; 95% confidence interval 0.24-0.69), and did not substantially change after adjustment for fruit and vegetable consumption, and for vitamin C and folate intakes.
Eating an additional portion of fruits rich in proanthocyanidins every day reduced the risk of pancreatic cancer by 25%.
CONCLUSION: Dietary proanthocyanidins-mostly present in apples, pears and pulses-may convey some protection against pancreatic cancer risk.
PMID: 22052311
A review of the chemopreventative effects of oral retinoids for internal neoplasms.
With the recent data showing that psoriasis patients are at higher risk for systemic malignancies, there is a growing awareness for the need to minimize cancer risks in psoriasis patients.
Retinoids as a class of medication have been widely studied as potential agents for cancer chemoprevention.
Since they act by inducing cell differentiation and maturation, they may help reverse the pathogenesis of malignancies.
Through an extensive literature review, this paper provides an update on the available data on retinoids and their systemic anti-cancer properties.
Retinoids appear to be beneficial in the prevention of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, acute promyelocytic leukemia, head and neck cancers, hepatocellular carcinoma, breast cancer and neuroblastoma.
So far the data does not support anti-cancer efficacy of retinoids in the prevention of prostate or pancreatic cancer and may possibly have harmful effects in the pathogenesis of lung cancer in smokers.
J Drugs Dermatol.
2011;10(11):1292-1298.
PMID: 22052107
AIB1 as an independent prognostic marker in hepatocellular carcinoma after hepatic resection.
Amplified in breast cancer 1 (AIB1) has been shown to promote growth and invasion in several types of human cancers and to have a prognostic role in some of cancers.
However, its prognostic significance in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remains unknown.
This study aimed to address the issue.
Immunohistochemical staining of AIB1 was performed for HCC and paired paratumorous liver (PTL) tissues from 139 patients.
Associations between AIB1 expression with clinicopathological variables and patient survival were evaluated.
The expression rate of AIB1 was significantly higher in HCC (71/139, 51.1%) than in PTL tissues (1/139, 0.72%, P < 0.001).
AIB1 expression in HCC was significantly associated with serum α-fetoprotein levels (P = 0.001) and Edmondson-Steiner grade (P = 0.038).
Higher AIB1 expression in HCC was associated with shorter cumulative overall survival of the patients.
Multivariate Cox regression analysis revealed that AIB1 was of independent prognostic significance for HCC.
AIB1 is independently associated with poor prognosis of HCC.
PMID: 22052106
RAGE gene deletion inhibits the development and progression of ductal neoplasia and prolongs survival in a murine model of pancreatic cancer.
The receptor for advanced glycation end-products (RAGE) is implicated in pancreatic tumorigenesis.
Activating Kras mutations and p16 inactivation are genetic abnormalities most commonly detected as pancreatic ductal epithelium progresses from intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) to adenocarcinoma (PDAC).
The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of RAGE (or AGER) deletion on the development of PanIN and PDAC in conditional Kras ( G12D ) mice.
Pdx1-Cre; LSL-Kras ( G12D/+) mice were crossed with RAGE (-/-) mice to generate Pdx1-Cre; LSL-Kras ( G12D/+) ; RAGE (-/-) mice.
Pdx1-Cre; LSL-Kras ( G12D/+); p16 ( Ink4a-/-) mice were crossed with RAGE (-/-) mice to generate Pdx1-Cre; LSL-Kras ( G12D/+); p16 ( Ink4a-/-); RAGE (-/-) mice.
Pancreatic ducts were scored and compared to the relevant RAGE (+/+) controls.
At 16 weeks of age, Pdx1-Cre; LSL-Kras ( G12D/+); RAGE (-/-) mice had significantly fewer high-grade PanIN lesions than Pdx1-Cre; LSL-Kras ( G12D/+); RAGE (+/+) controls.
At 12 weeks of age, none of the Pdx1-Cre; LSL-Kras ( G12D/+); p16 ( Ink4a-/-); RAGE (-/-) mice had PDAC compared to a 45.5% incidence of PDAC in Pdx1-Cre; LSL-Kras ( G12D/+); p16 ( Ink4a-/-); RAGE (+/+) controls.
Finally, Pdx1-Cre; LSL-Kras ( G12D/+); p16 ( Ink4a-/-); RAGE (-/-) mice also displayed markedly longer median survival.
Loss of RAGE function inhibited the development of PanIN and progression to PDAC and significantly prolonged survival in these mouse models.
Further work is needed to target the ligand-RAGE axis for possible early intervention and prophylaxis in patients at risk for developing pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22052063
Guidelines for the management of gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine (including carcinoid) tumours (NETs).
These guidelines update previous guidance published in 2005.
They have been revised by a group who are members of the UK and Ireland Neuroendocrine Tumour Society with endorsement from the clinical committees of the British Society of Gastroenterology, the Society for Endocrinology, the Association of Surgeons of Great Britain and Ireland (and its Surgical Specialty Associations), the British Society of Gastrointestinal and Abdominal Radiology and others.
The authorship represents leaders of the various groups in the UK and Ireland Neuroendocrine Tumour Society, but a large amount of work has been carried out by other specialists, many of whom attended a guidelines conference in May 2009.
We have attempted to represent this work in the acknowledgements section.
Over the past few years, there have been advances in the management of neuroendocrine tumours, which have included clearer characterisation, more specific and therapeutically relevant diagnosis, and improved treatments.
However, there remain few randomised trials in the field and the disease is uncommon, hence all evidence must be considered weak in comparison with other more common cancers.
PMID: 22051278
Positron emission tomography-computed tomography for postoperative surveillance in non-small cell lung cancer.
The role of positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) for the staging of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has been well documented, whereas its role for postoperative surveillance after the curative resection of this cancer has not.
We prospectively implemented PET-CT in our surveillance protocol for recurrence of NSCLC and investigated its effectiveness as compared with that of conventional methods.
The cohort for our study of PET-CT in detecting recurrence of NSCLC consisted of 358 patients who had undergone complete resection of NSCLC between January 2005 and June 2008.
After resection of their tumors, all of the patients were routinely examined at the thoracic surgical outpatient clinic at 3-month intervals for 2 years and after this at 6 month intervals for next 3 years.
Careful patient interviews, physical examinations, chest roentgenography, and measurements of the serum carcinoembryonic antigen level were done at each visit.
Contrast-enhanced chest CT was done at 6-month intervals, and PET-CT was done annually for 5 years after resection of NSCLC.
Recurrences were detected in 111 patients (31%).
In 60 of these patients, recurrence was detected with conventional methods, and in the remaining 51 patients recurrences were detected with simultaneous PET-CT and chest CT.
Among these latter patients, recurrence was evident in both the chest CT and PET-CT scans of 26 patients (51.0%), and in the PET-CT scans alone of 19 patients (37.3%).
Five lung lesions (2 small, 1 subpleural, 1 cavitary, and 1 nodule of ground-glass opacity) and 1 pancreatic metastasis were detected with chest CT only.
When the two methods were used simultaneously, PET-CT seemed superior to chest CT for detecting recurrences of NSCLC.
However, because PET-CT may fail to detect small or hypometabolic recurrences of NSCLC, we recommend that it be done on an annual basis along with low-dose chest CT.
PMID: 22050994
Network analysis of microRNAs and their regulation in human ovarian cancer.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNA molecules that repress the translation of messenger RNAs (mRNAs) or degrade mRNAs.
These functions of miRNAs allow them to control key cellular processes such as development, differentiation and apoptosis, and they have also been implicated in several cancers such as leukaemia, lung, pancreatic and ovarian cancer (OC).
Unfortunately, the specific machinery of miRNA regulation, involving transcription factors (TFs) and transcription co-factors (TcoFs), is not well understood.
In the present study we focus on computationally deciphering the underlying network of miRNAs, their targets, and their control mechanisms that have an influence on OC development.
We analysed experimentally verified data from multiple sources that describe miRNA influence on diseases, miRNA targeting of mRNAs, and on protein-protein interactions, and combined this data with ab initio transcription factor binding site predictions within miRNA promoter regions.
From these analyses, we derived a network that describes the influence of miRNAs and their regulation in human OC.
We developed a methodology to analyse the network in order to find the nodes that have the largest potential of influencing the network's behaviour (network hubs).
We further show the potentially most influential miRNAs, TFs and TcoFs, showing subnetworks illustrating the involved mechanisms as well as regulatory miRNA network motifs in OC.
We find an enrichment of miRNA targeted OC genes in the highly relevant pathways cell cycle regulation and apoptosis.
We combined several sources of interaction and association data to analyse and place miRNAs within regulatory pathways that influence human OC.
These results represent the first comprehensive miRNA regulatory network analysis for human OC.
This suggests that miRNAs and their regulation may play a major role in OC and that further directed research in this area is of utmost importance to enhance our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying human cancer development and OC in particular.
PMID: 22050964
Pathologic complete response to neoadjuvant therapy in patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is associated with a better prognosis.
In patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) who received neoadjuvant therapy and pancreatectomy, pathologic complete response (pCR) is rarely observed and the prognostic significance of pCR is not clear.
In this study, we identified 11 patients with pCR (2.5%) from 442 patients with PDA who received neoadjuvant treatment and pancreatectomy from 1995 to 2010.
There were 6 men and 5 women, with a median age of 61 years.
Four patients had either synchronous or history of extrapancreatic cancer.
Five patients received neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by chemoradiation, and 6 received chemoradiation alone.
Ten patients had pancreaticoduodenectomy, and 1 had distal pancreatectomy.
Scar and chronic pancreatitis consistent with therapy effect were present in all cases (100%).
Pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) 3/carcinoma in situ was present in 5 cases, and PanIN1 and PanIN2 in 5 cases.
However, no residual invasive carcinoma or lymph node metastasis was identified in all cases.
Follow-up information was available in 10 patients.
Follow-up time ranges from 6 to 194 months (median, 63 months).
During the follow-up, 3 patients died of other causes, and 1 developed a second primary PDA in the tail of the pancreas at 84 months after the initial pancreaticoduodenectomy and died at 105 months after the initial diagnosis of PDA.
The other 6 patients were alive with no evidence of disease.
Patients with pCR had a better survival than did those who had posttherapy stage I or IIA disease (P < .001).
Patients with PDA who received neoadjuvant therapy and had pCR in pancreatectomy are rare but have a better prognosis.
PMID: 22050663
Pancreatic cancer tumor initiating cells: the molecular regulation and therapeutic values.
Pancreatic cancer is an aggressive solid tumor characterized by its local invasion, early metastasis, and resistance to standard chemotherapy or radiation therapy.
Tumor initiating cells (TICs) are not only capable of self-renewal and differentiation, but also play an important role in multidrug resistance, and thus become a popular topic in cancer research especially in pancreatic cancer.
In this review, we summarize the current progress of TICs in tumorigenesis, various newly identified surface markers of pancreatic TICs, and the signaling pathways such as EMT, SHH and Notch that regulate TICs.
We also discuss the role which microRNA plays in TICs as well as its application in TICs-targeted therapy along with other approaches.
PMID: 22050456
Proteomic analysis reveals warburg effect and anomalous metabolism of glutamine in pancreatic cancer cells.
In this present work, we characterized the proteomes of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cell line PANC-1 and normal pancreatic duct cells by mass spectrometry using LTQ-Orbitrap and identified more than 1700 proteins from each sample.
On the basis of the spectra count label-free quantification approach, we identified a large number of differentially expressed metabolic enzymes and proteins involved in cytoskeleton, cell adhesion, transport, transcription, translation, and cell proliferation as well.
The data demonstrated that metabolic pathways were altered in PANC-1, consistent with the Warburg effect.
In addition, the comparative MS analysis unveiled anomalous metabolism of glutamine, suggesting that glutamine was largely consumed as a nitrogen donor in nucleotide and amino acid biosynthesis in PANC-1.
Our analysis provides a potentially comprehensive picture of metabolism in PANC-1, which may serve as the basis of new diagnostics and treatment of PDAC.
PMID: 22049925
Tumor suppressor p16(INK4a) controls oncogenic K-Ras function in human pancreatic cancer cells.
Pancreatic cancer is characterized by oncogenic activation of K-Ras and inactivation of the cell cycle inhibitor p16(INK4a) .
We previously demonstrated that reintroduction of p16(INK4a) reversed anoikis resistance and clonogenicity of human pancreatic cancer cells, properties commonly attributed to the transforming potential of oncogenic K-Ras.
Therefore, we aimed to determine the role of Ras after p16(INK4a) re-expression.
Here, we show that restitution of p16(INK4a) in pancreatic cancer cell lines elicits a profound suppression of K-Ras activity.
A more detailed analysis in p16(INK4a) reconstituted Capan-1 cells indicated selective reduction of both K-Ras activity and protein stability.
Re-expression of K-Ras in p16(INK4a) restituted Capan-1 cells reversed the anoikis-sensitive phenotype and increased colony formation, indicating that K-Ras suppression was required for p16(INK4a) -mediated reversion of the transformed phenotype.
Inducible expression of p16(INK4a) in DanG cells confirmed inhibition of K-Ras activity as well as an increase in anoikis susceptibility.
Thus, our results delineate a novel functional interaction with defined biological consequences for the two most frequent alterations observed in pancreatic cancer.
(Cancer Sci 2012; 103: 169-175).
PMID: 22049079
Two distinct sites in sonic Hedgehog combine for heparan sulfate interactions and cell signaling functions.
Hedgehog (Hh) proteins are morphogens that mediate many developmental processes.
Hh signaling is significant for many aspects of embryonic development, whereas dysregulation of this pathway is associated with several types of cancer.
Hh proteins require heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) for their normal distribution and signaling activity.
Here, we have used molecular modeling to examine the heparin-binding domain of sonic hedgehog (Shh).
In biochemical and cell biological assays, the importance of specific residues of the putative heparin-binding domain for signaling was assessed.
It was determined that key residues in human (h) Shh involved in heparin and HSPG syndecan-4 binding and biological activity included the well known cationic Cardin-Weintraub motif (lysines 32-38) but also a previously unidentified major role for lysine 178.
The activity of Shh mutated in these residues was tested by quantitation of alkaline phosphatase activity in C3H10T1/2 cells differentiating into osteoblasts and hShh-inducible gene expression in PANC1 human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cells.
Mutated hShhs such as K37S/K38S, K178S, and particularly K37S/K38S/K178S that could not interact with heparin efficiently had reduced signaling activity compared with wild type hShh or a control mutation (K74S).
In addition, the mutant hShh proteins supported reduced proliferation and invasion of PANC1 cells compared with control hShh proteins, following endogenous hShh depletion by RNAi knockdown.
The data correlated with reduced Shh multimerization where the Lys-37/38 and/or Lys-178 mutations were examined.
These studies provide a new insight into the functional roles of hShh interactions with HSPGs, which may allow targeting this aspect of hShh biology in, for example, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
PMID: 22049060
Loss of UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase (GNE) induces apoptotic processes in pancreatic carcinoma cells.
Early invasive growth and metastasis are features of pancreatic cancer that rely on its resistance to anoikis, an apoptosis program activated on loss of matrix anchorage.
How anoikis is regulated is unclear.
UDP-N-acetylglucosamine-2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine-kinase (GNE) was silenced, or p16 was overexpressed, in human pancreatic carcinoma cells.
Gene expression profiling, enzymatic assays, Western blotting, and cell cycle analysis were conducted.
Silencing of GNE, the key enzyme of sialic acid biosynthesis, sensitizes pancreatic cancer cells to anoikis.
Accordingly, we observed a loss of GNE enzyme activity in cells, which became anoikis susceptible after transfection with the tumor suppressor p16.
Similarly, studies of another cell line with low GNE activity revealed strong anoikis susceptibility, confirming the association of low GNE activity and anoikis susceptibility.
Gene expression profiling demonstrated that the loss of GNE triggered the transcriptional activation of the ATF4-ATF3-CHOP pathway, leading to apoptosis in the framework of the unfolded protein response.
In silico analysis showed that GNE up-regulation occurred predominantly in pancreatic cancer but also in other malignancies.
Delineation of GNE-dependent signaling pathways may provide targets that control anchorage dependence and/or restore drug efficacy, which is of utmost relevance for the treatment of pancreatic cancer.-Kemmner, W., Kessel, P., Sanchez-Ruderisch, H., Möller, H., Hinderlich, S., Schlag, P.
M., Detjen, K.
Loss of UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase (GNE) induces apoptotic processes in pancreatic carcinoma cells.
PMID: 22049042
Human pentastomiasis caused by Armillifer moniliformis in Malaysian Borneo.
We report a case of visceral pentastomiasis caused by Armillifer moniliformis in a 70-year-old aboriginal farmer from rural Malaysian Borneo.
The patient complained of upper abdominal pain, jaundice, and loss of weight.
Radiological investigations and subsequent histopathological examination revealed an adenocarcinoma of the pancreas with an adjacent liver nodule containing a nymph of A.
moniliformis.
This report constitutes the first documented human pentastomid infection in the whole of Malaysia after nearly 40 years, and it is the third description from Malaysian Borneo.
Cases of human and animal pentastomiasis in Malaysia are discussed.
PMID: 22048257
Pancreatic cancer stem cell biology and its therapeutic implications.
Pancreatic cancer remains one of the most difficult malignancies to treat.
Significant developments in our understanding of pancreatic cancer biology have occurred over the past decade.
One of the key advances has been the formulation of the cancer stem cell model of tumor growth and subsequent experimental proof of pancreatic cancer stem cell existence.
Cancer stem cells contribute to pancreatic tumor growth and progression and are at least partially responsible for the relative resistance of the tumor to systemic chemotherapy and radiation.
Significant questions remain about how the mutational profile of the tumor, the tumor microenvironment, and normal pancreatic developmental pathways contribute to pancreatic cancer stem cell biology.
Answers to these questions will likely yield new therapeutic approaches for this deadly disease.
PMID: 22047824
Survival in population-based pancreatic cancer patients: San Francisco Bay area, 1995-1999.
Patient vital status generally is passively obtained by cancer registries, and no previous population-based studies have used extensive active follow-up to compute a more accurate overall survival rate for pancreatic cancer.
Therefore, the authors used multiple active and passive follow-up methods to determine vital status and date of death for 1,954 pancreatic cancer patients diagnosed from 1995 to 1999 in a large population-based study in the San Francisco Bay Area, California.
Survival rates were estimated by using Kaplan-Meier methods.
Hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals were estimated by using multivariable Cox proportional-hazards models.
Vital status was confirmed for >99% of 1,954 patients.
The overall 5-year survival rate was 1.3% and was greater in patients who were younger and who had localized disease, well-differentiated tumors, and surgical resection.
Shorter survival was associated with older age at diagnosis, male sex, distant/metastatic disease, and poorly differentiated tumors.
Longer survival was observed for Asian/Pacific Islanders compared with non-Hispanic whites and for any active treatment regardless of tumor stage.
With an almost complete follow-up, the authors observed a low overall 5-year survival rate.
Although the results provide further evidence of poor survival among patients with pancreatic cancer, the data also suggest that within-stage-of-disease patients survived somewhat longer with therapy.
PMID: 22047595
A multidisciplinary survey on controversies in the use of EUS-guided FNA: assessing perspectives of surgeons, oncologists and gastroenterologists.
EUS-guided FNA can help diagnose and differentiate between various pancreatic and other lesions.The aim of this study was to compare approaches among involved/relevant physicians to the controversies surrounding the use of FNA in EUS.
A five-case survey was developed, piloted, and validated.
It was collected from a total of 101 physicians, who were all either gastroenterologists (GIs), surgeons or oncologists.
The survey compared the management strategies chosen by members of these relevant disciplines regarding EUS-guided FNA.
For CT operable T2NOM0 pancreatic tumors the research demonstrated variance as to whether to undertake EUS-guided FNA, at p < 0.05.
For inoperable pancreatic tumors 66.7% of oncologists, 62.2% of surgeons and 79.1% of GIs opted for FNA (p < 0.05).
For cystic pancreatic lesions, oncologists were more likely to send patients to surgery without FNA.
For stable simple pancreatic cysts (23 mm), most physicians (66.67%) did not recommend FNA.
For a submucosal gastric 19 mm lesion, 63.2% of surgeons recommended FNA, vs.
90.0% of oncologists (p < 0.05).
Controversies as to ideal application of EUS-FNA persist.
Optimal guidelines should reflect the needs and concerns of the multidisciplinary team who treat patients who need EUS-FNA.
Multi-specialty meetings assembled to manage patients with these disorders may be enlightening and may help develop consensus.
PMID: 22047375
Impact of leaf motion constraints on IMAT plan quality, deliver accuracy, and efficiency.
Intensity modulated arc therapy (IMAT) is a radiation therapy delivery technique that combines the efficiency of arc based delivery with the dose painting capabilities of intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT).
A key challenge in developing robust inverse planning solutions for IMAT is the need to account for the connectivity of the beam shapes as the gantry rotates from one beam angle to the next.
To overcome this challenge, inverse planning solutions typically impose a leaf motion constraint that defines the maximum distance a multileaf collimator (MLC) leaf can travel between adjacent control points.
The leaf motion constraint ensures the deliverability of the optimized plan, but it also impacts the plan quality, the delivery accuracy, and the delivery efficiency.
In this work, the authors have studied leaf motion constraints in detail and have developed recommendations for optimizing the balance between plan quality and delivery efficiency.
Two steps were used to generate optimized IMAT treatment plans.
The first was the direct machine parameter optimization (DMPO) inverse planning module in the Pinnacle(3) planning system.
Then, a home-grown arc sequencer was applied to convert the optimized intensity maps into deliverable IMAT arcs.
IMAT leaf motion constraints were imposed using limits of between 1 and 30 mm∕deg.
Dose distributions were calculated using the convolution∕superposition algorithm in the Pinnacle(3) planning system.
The IMAT plan dose calculation accuracy was examined using a finer sampling calculation and the quality assurance verification.
All plans were delivered on an Elekta Synergy with an 80-leaf MLC and were verified using an IBA MatriXX 2D ion chamber array inserted in a MultiCube solid water phantom.
The use of a more restrictive leaf motion constraint (less than 1-2 mm∕deg) results in inferior plan quality.
A less restrictive leaf motion constraint (greater than 5 mm∕deg) results in improved plan quality but can lead to less accurate dose distribution as evidenced by increasing discrepancies between the planned and the delivered doses.
For example, the results from our patient-specific quality assurance measurements demonstrated that the average gamma analysis passing rate decreased from 98% to 80% when the allowable leaf motion increased from 3 to 20 mm∕deg.
Larger leaf motion constraints also led to longer treatment delivery times (2 to 4 folds) due to the additional MLC leaf motion.
Leaf motion constraints significantly impact IMAT plans in terms of plan quality, delivery accuracy, and delivery efficiency with the impact magnified for more complex cases.
Our studies indicate that a leaf motion constraint of 2 to 3 mm∕deg of gantry rotation can provide an optimal balance between plan quality, delivery accuracy, and efficiency.
PMID: 22046413
Human RNA polymerase II-association factor 1 (hPaf1/PD2) regulates histone methylation and chromatin remodeling in pancreatic cancer.
Change in gene expression associated with pancreatic cancer could be attributed to the variation in histone posttranslational modifications leading to subsequent remodeling of the chromatin template during transcription.
However, the interconnected network of molecules involved in regulating such processes remains elusive.
hPaf1/PD2, a subunit of the human PAF-complex, involved in the regulation of transcriptional elongation has oncogenic potential.
Our study explores the possibility that regulation of histone methylation by hPaf1 can contribute towards alteration in gene expression by nucleosomal rearrangement.
Here, we show that knockdown of hPaf1/PD2 leads to decreased di- and tri-methylation at histone H3 lysine 4 residues in pancreatic cancer cells.
Interestingly, hPaf1/PD2 colocalizes with MLL1 (Mixed Lineage Leukemia 1), a histone methyltransferase that methylates H3K4 residues.
Also, a reduction in hPaf1 level resulted in reduced MLL1 expression and a corresponding decrease in the level of CHD1 (Chromohelicase DNA-binding protein 1), an ATPase dependent chromatin remodeling enzyme that specifically binds to H3K4 di and trimethyl marks.
hPaf1/PD2 was also found to interact and colocalize with CHD1 in both cytoplasmic and nuclear extracts of pancreatic cancer cells.
Further, reduced level of CHD1 localization in the nucleus in hPaf1/PD2 Knockdown cells could be rescued by ectopic expression of hPaf1/PD2.
Micrococcal nuclease digestion showed an altered chromatin structure in hPaf1/PD2-KD cells.
Overall, our results suggest that hPaf1/PD2 in association with MLL1 regulates methylation of H3K4 residues, as well as interacts and regulates nuclear shuttling of chromatin remodeling protein CHD1, facilitating its function in pancreatic cancer cells.
PMID: 22046095
Collagen-based biological glue after Appleby operation for advanced gastric cancer.
Pancreatic fistula is a common complication of distal pancreatectomy; although various surgical procedures have been proposed, no clear advantage is evident for a single technique.
We herein report the case of a 38-year-old patient affected by an advanced gastric carcinoma infiltrating the pancreas body, with extensive nodal metastases involving the celiac trunk, who underwent total gastrectomy with lymphadenectomy, distal pancreatectomy and resection en bloc of the celiac trunk (Appleby operation).
At the end of the demolitive phase, the pancreatic stump and the aorta at the level of the celiac ligature were covered with a layer of Tachosil(®), a horse collagen sponge made with human coagulation factors (fibrinogen and thrombin).
Presenting this case, we wish to highlight the possible sealing effect of this product and hypothesize a role in preventing pancreatic fistula and postoperative lymphorrhagia from extensive nodal dissection.
PMID: 22045909
Identification of cancer genomic markers via integrative sparse boosting.
In high-throughput cancer genomic studies, markers identified from the analysis of single data sets often suffer a lack of reproducibility because of the small sample sizes.
An ideal solution is to conduct large-scale prospective studies, which are extremely expensive and time consuming.
A cost-effective remedy is to pool data from multiple comparable studies and conduct integrative analysis.
Integrative analysis of multiple data sets is challenging because of the high dimensionality of genomic measurements and heterogeneity among studies.
In this article, we propose a sparse boosting approach for marker identification in integrative analysis of multiple heterogeneous cancer diagnosis studies with gene expression measurements.
The proposed approach can effectively accommodate the heterogeneity among multiple studies and identify markers with consistent effects across studies.
Simulation shows that the proposed approach has satisfactory identification results and outperforms alternatives including an intensity approach and meta-analysis.
The proposed approach is used to identify markers of pancreatic cancer and liver cancer.
PMID: 22045635
Abundant amyloid deposits in endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy of pancreatic endocrine neoplasms.
PMID: 22045191
A microRNA gene expression signature predicts response to erlotinib in epithelial cancer cell lines and targets EMT.
Treatment with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors can result in clinical response in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) for some unselected patients.
EGFR and KRAS mutation status, amplification of EGFR, or gene expression predictors of response can forecast sensitivity to EGFR inhibition.
Using an NSCLC cell line model system, we identified and characterised microRNA (miRNA) gene expression that predicts response to EGFR inhibition.
Expression of 13 miRNA genes predicts response to EGFR inhibition in cancer cell lines and tumours, and discriminates primary from metastatic tumours.
Signature genes target proteins that are enriched for epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) genes.
Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition predicts EGFR inhibitor resistance and metastatic behaviour.
The EMT transcription factor, ZEB1, shows altered expression in erlotinib-sensitive NSCLC and PDAC, where many signature miRNA genes are upregulated.
Ectopic expression of mir-200c alters expression of EMT proteins, sensitivity to erlotinib, and migration in lung cells.
Treatment with TGFβ1 changes expression of signature miRNA and EMT proteins and modulates migration in lung cells.
From these data, we hypothesise that the tumour microenvironment elicits TGFβ1 and stimulates a miRNA gene expression program that induces resistance to anti-EGFR therapy and drives lung tumour cells to EMT, invasion, and metastasis.
PMID: 22045190
Novel diagnostic value of circulating miR-18a in plasma of patients with pancreatic cancer.
Several recent studies have demonstrated that microRNAs (miRNAs) are stably detectable in the plasma/serum.
We hypothesised that miR-18a in the plasma is a potential biomarker in patients with pancreatic cancer.
miR-18a is located in the miR-17-92 cluster and reported to be highly expressed in pancreatic cancer tissues.
This study was divided into three parts: (1) Confirmation of higher miR-18a levels in primary pancreatic cancer tissues and cell lines than in normal pancreatic tissues and a human fibroblast cell line.
(2) Evaluation of the plasma miR-18a assay using quantitative RT-PCR by comparing plasma results obtained from 36 patients with pancreatic cancer and from 30 healthy volunteers.
(3) Evaluation of the assay for monitoring tumour dynamics in patients with pancreatic cancer.
(1) The expression of miR-18a was significantly higher in pancreatic cancer tissues (P=0.012) and pancreatic cancer cell lines (P=0.015) than in normal tissues and fibroblasts.
(2) Plasma concentrations of miR-18a were significantly higher in pancreatic cancer patients than in controls (P<0.0001).
The value of the area under the receiver-operating characteristic curve (AUC) was 0.9369.
(3) Plasma levels of miR-18a were significantly lower in postoperative samples than in preoperative samples (P=0.0077).
Circulating miR-18a might provide new complementary tumour markers for pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22044911
K-ras Mutations in the Plasma Correspond to Computed Tomographic Findings in Patients With Pancreatic Cancer.
PMID: 22044796
Parallel screening of FDA-approved antineoplastic drugs for identifying sensitizers of TRAIL-induced apoptosis in cancer cells.
Tumor Necrosis Factor-α Related Apoptosis Inducing Ligand (TRAIL) and agonistic antibodies to death receptor 4 and 5 are promising candidates for cancer therapy due to their ability to induce apoptosis selectively in a variety of human cancer cells, while demonstrating little cytotoxicity in normal cells.
Although TRAIL and agonistic antibodies to DR4 and DR5 are considered safe and promising candidates in cancer therapy, many malignant cells are resistant to DR-mediated, TRAIL-induced apoptosis.
In the current work, we screened a small library of fifty-five FDA and foreign-approved anti-neoplastic drugs in order to identify candidates that sensitized resistant prostate and pancreatic cancer cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis.
FDA-approved drugs were screened for their ability to sensitize TRAIL resistant prostate cancer cells to TRAIL using an MTT assay for cell viability.
Analysis of variance was used to identify drugs that exhibited synergy with TRAIL.
Drugs demonstrating the highest synergy were selected as leads and tested in different prostate and pancreatic cancer cell lines, and one immortalized human pancreatic epithelial cell line.
Sequential and simultaneous dosing modalities were investigated and the annexin V/propidium iodide assay, in concert with fluorescence microscopy, was employed to visualize cells undergoing apoptosis.
Fourteen drugs were identified as having synergy with TRAIL, including those whose TRAIL sensitization activities were previously unknown in either prostate or pancreatic cancer cells or both.
Five leads were tested in additional cancer cell lines of which, doxorubicin, mitoxantrone, and mithramycin demonstrated synergy in all lines.
In particular, mitoxantrone and mithramycin demonstrated significant synergy with TRAIL and led to reduction of cancer cell viability at concentrations lower than 1 μM.
At these low concentrations, mitoxantrone demonstrated selectivity toward malignant cells over normal pancreatic epithelial cells.
The identification of a number of FDA-approved drugs as TRAIL sensitizers can expand chemotherapeutic options for combination treatments in prostate and pancreatic cancer diseases.
PMID: 22044669
The Phosphatase PHLPP1 Regulates Akt2, Promotes Pancreatic Cancer Cell Death, and Inhibits Tumor Formation.
The kinase Akt mediates resistance of pancreatic cancer (PaCa) cells to death and is constitutively active (phosphorylated) in cancer cells.
Whereas the kinases that activate Akt are well characterized, less is known about phosphatases that dephosporylate and thereby inactivate it.
We investigated regulation of Akt activity and cell death by the phosphatases PHLPP1 and PHLPP2 in PaCa cells, mouse models of PaCa, and human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC).
We measured the effects of PHLPP overexpression or knockdown with small interfering RNAs on Akt activation and cell death.
We examined regulation of PHLPPs by growth factors and reactive oxygen species, as well as associations between PHLPPs and tumorigenesis.
PHLPP overexpression inactivated Akt, whereas PHLPP knockdown increased phosphorylation of Akt in PaCa cells.
Levels of PHLPPs were greatly reduced in human PDAC and in mouse genetic and xenograft models of PaCa.
PHLPP activities in PaCa cells were down-regulated by growth factors and Nox4 reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase.
PHLPP1 selectively dephosphorylated Akt2, whereas PHLPP2 selectively dephosphorylated Akt1.
Akt2, but not Akt1, was up-regulated in PDAC, and Akt2 levels correlated with mortality.
Consistent with these results, high levels of PHLPP1, which dephosphorylates Akt2 (but not PHLPP2, which dephosphorylates Akt1), correlated with longer survival times of patients with PDAC.
In mice, xenograft tumors derived from PaCa cells that overexpress PHLPP1 (but not PHLPP2) had inactivated Akt, greater extent of apoptosis, and smaller size.
PHLPP1 has tumor suppressive activity and might represent a therapeutic or diagnostic tool for PDAC.
PMID: 22043941
Role of the inflammatory protein serine protease inhibitor Kazal in preventing cytolytic granule granzyme A-mediated apoptosis.
Serine protease inhibitor Kazal (SPIK) is an inflammatory protein whose levels are elevated in numerous cancers.
However, the role of this protein in cancer development is unknown.
We have recently found that SPIK suppresses serine protease-dependent cell apoptosis.
Here, we report that anti-SPIK antibodies can co-immmunoprecipitate serine protease granzyme A (GzmA), a cytolytic granule secreted by cytotoxic T lymphocytes and natural killer cells during immune surveillance, and that SPIK suppresses GzmA-induced cell apoptosis.
Deletion studies show that the C3-C4 region of SPIK is critical for this suppression.
These studies suggest that over-expression of SPIK may prevent GzmA-mediated immune-killing, thereby establishing the tolerance of cancer cells to the body's immune surveillance system.
Suppression of over-expressed SPIK can restore the susceptibility of these cells to apoptotic death triggered by GzmA.
This finding implies that it is possible to overcome tolerance of cancer cells to the body's immune surveillance system and restore the GzmA-mediated immune-killing by suppressing the over-expression of SPIK.
PMID: 22043817
Milk stimulates growth of prostate cancer cells in culture.
Concern has been expressed about the fact that cows' milk contains estrogens and could stimulate the growth of hormone-sensitive tumors.
In this study, organic cows' milk and two commercial substitutes were digested in vitro and tested for their effects on the growth of cultures of prostate and breast cancer cells.
Cows' milk stimulated the growth of LNCaP prostate cancer cells in each of 14 separate experiments, producing an average increase in growth rate of over 30%.
In contrast, almond milk suppressed the growth of these cells by over 30%.
Neither cows' milk nor almond milk affected the growth of MCF-7 breast cancer cells or AsPC-1 pancreatic cancer cells significantly.
Soy milk increased the growth rate of the breast cancer cells.
These data indicate that prostate and breast cancer patients should be cautioned about the possible promotional effects of commercial dairy products and their substitutes.
PMID: 22043156
Pancreatic tumors: emphasis on CT findings and pathologic classification.
Pancreatic tumors can be classified by their morphologic features on CT.
The subtypes include solid tumors, mixed cystic and solid lesions, unilocular cysts, multilocular cystic lesions, and microcystic lesions.
Endoscopic US and MRI can provide detailed information for classifying pancreatic lesions.
Each subtype has different kinds of tumors and malignant potential, thus the classification can be useful for a better differential diagnosis and treatment planning.
For this purpose, we suggest an appropriate modified classification system by using the imaging features of pancreatic tumors with an emphasis on CT findings and illustrate various findings of typical and atypical manifestations.
PMID: 22042785
Acinar cell carcinoma of the pancreas: new genetic and treatment insights into a rare malignancy.
Acinar cell carcinoma (ACC) of the pancreas is a rare neoplasm, accounting for 1% of all pancreatic neoplasms.
There remains a lack of data regarding the use of systemic therapy in this disease.
We present a series of 40 consecutive cases of ACC of the pancreas treated at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, with an emphasis on evaluation of activity of new therapeutic agents.
Patients reviewed at our institution from January 2000 through January 2011 were identified from an institutional database with prior institutional review board approval.
Pathology was confirmed in all cases as ACC or a closely related entity.
Forty patients were identified; 29 were male (73%).
The median age at diagnosis was 65 years (range, 16-87 years).
The median overall survival (OS) time for patients with localized, resectable disease was 56.9 months and the OS time for patients with metastatic ACC (n = 18) was 19.6 months.
Six patients with metastatic or recurrent ACC had a partial response to chemotherapy and five patients had stable disease for ≥6 months on systemic chemotherapy.
Clinical observation was made of a patient with ACC and hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer and a patient with ACC and a BRCA1 germline mutation.
ACC is moderately chemoresponsive to agents that have activity in pancreatic adenocarcinoma and colorectal carcinoma.
A potential association between germline mutations in DNA mismatch repair genes and ACC warrants further evaluation.
PMID: 22042473
Hedgehog inhibition with the orally bioavailable Smo antagonist LDE225 represses tumor growth and prolongs survival in a transgenic mouse model of islet cell neoplasms.
This study was designed to evaluate the role of the hedgehog pathway in tumor progression of murine islet cell tumors.
Blockade of aberrant hedgehog activation has recently been proposed as a therapeutic target, but effects in models of islet cell tumors with a new orally bioavailable Smoothened (Smo) antagonist LDE225 have not been examined.
To assess in vivo effects, transgenic Rip1Tag2 mice, which develop islet cell neoplasms, were treated with vehicle or LDE225 (80 mg/kg/d) from week 5 until death.
The resected pancreata were evaluated macroscopically and microscopically by iummohistochemsistry.
Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction was performed for hedgehog target genes with RNA from islet, isolated from treated and untreated Rip1Tag2 mice.
LDE225 significantly reduced tumor volume by 95% compared with untreated control mice.
Hedgehog inhibition with LDE225 significantly prolonged median survival in the used transgenic mouse model (105 vs 116 days; P = 0.02).
Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction for downstream hedgehog target genes demonstrated significant downregulation in the islet cell tumors of Rip1Tag2 mice treated with LDE225, confirming the ability to achieve effective pharmacologic levels of LDE225 within the desired tissue site, in vivo.
This is the first study to show that the orally bioavailable Smo antagonist LDE225 may provide a new option for therapy of islet cell neoplasms.
PMID: 22042470
Additional resection of an intraoperative margin-positive proximal bile duct improves survival in patients with hilar cholangiocarcinoma.
To assess the survival benefit of additional resection of an intraoperative positive proximal bile duct margin (BD(Marg)) in patients undergoing hepatectomy for hilar cholangiocarcinoma (HCCA).
Intraoperative evidence of invasive cancer at the proximal (BD(Marg)) is associated with a dismal survival irrespective of whether a final negative (BD(Marg)) is achieved with an additional resection.
Clinicopathologic, operative, and survival data of consecutive patients undergone curative intent hepatectomy with bile duct resection (n = 75) for HCC (1989-2010) were analyzed.
Frozen-section examination of the proximal (BD(Marg)) revealed invasive cancer in 19 of the 67 patients.
After additional resection, which was possible in 18 cases, a secondary R0 (BD(Marg)) resection was achieved in 15 patients (83.3%), with 2 of these having, at final pathology, positive radial and distal margins.
Eventually, 8 patients were classified as R1 and 67 as R0 (54 primary R0 and 13 secondary R0).
Median survival of patients who had a secondary R0 resection (30.6 months) was similar to that of primarily R0-resected patients (29.3 months) and significantly better than that of R1 patients (14.9 months) (P = 0.026).
Median time to recurrence and site of recurrence were similar in R0 patients independently of the performance of an additional resection.
The incidence of biliary fistula was significantly increased (44.4% vs 17.5%; P = 0.02) in patients necessitating a margin re-resection.
Additional resection of a positive proximal (BD(Marg)) , albeit associated with an increased risk of biliary fistula, offers a significant survival benefit and should be attempted whenever possible.
PMID: 22042469
Selective targeting of genetically engineered mesenchymal stem cells to tumor stroma microenvironments using tissue-specific suicide gene expression suppresses growth of hepatocellular carcinoma.
The use of engineered mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) as therapeutic vehicles for the treatment of experimental pancreatic and breast cancer has been previously demonstrated.
The potential application of MSCs for the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has been controversial.
The general approach uses engineered MSCs to target different aspects of tumor biology, including angiogenesis or the fibroblast-like stromal compartment, through the use of tissue-specific expression of therapeutic transgenes.
The aim of the present study was (1) to evaluate the effect of exogenously added MSCs on the growth of HCC and (2) the establishment of an MSC-based suicide gene therapy for experimental HCC.
Mesenchymal stem cells were isolated from bone marrow of C57/Bl6 p53(-/-) mice.
The cells were injected into mice with HCC xenografts and the effect on tumor proliferation and angiogenesis was evaluated.
The cells were then stably transfected with red fluorescent protein (RFP) or Herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase (HSV-Tk) gene under control of the Tie2 promoter/enhancer or the CCL5 promoter.
Mesenchymal stem cells were injected intravenously into mice with orthotopically growing xenografts of HCC and treated with ganciclovir (GCV).
Ex vivo examination of hepatic tumors revealed tumor-specific recruitment, enhanced tumor growth, and increased microvessel density after nontherapeutic MSC injections.
After their homing to the hepatic xenografts, engineered MSCs demonstrated activation of the Tie2 or CCL5 promoter as shown by RFP expression.
Application of CCL5/HSV-TK transfected MSCs in combination with GCV significantly reduced tumor growth by 56.4% as compared with the control group and by 71.6% as compared with nontherapeutic MSC injections.
CCL5/HSV-TK(+) transfected MSCs proved more potent in tumor inhibition as compared with Tie2/HSV-TK(+) MSCs.
Exogenously added MSCs are recruited to growing HCC xenografts with concomitant activation of the CCL5 or Tie2 promoters within the MSCs.
Stem cell-mediated introduction of suicide genes into the tumor followed by prodrug administration was effective for treatment of experimental HCC and thus may help fill the existing gap in bridging therapies for patients suffering from advanced HCCs.
PMID: 22042466
A prognostic score to predict major complications after pancreaticoduodenectomy.
To develop and validate a simple prognostic score to predict major postoperative complications after pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD).
PD still carries a high rate of severe postoperative complications.
No specific score is currently available to stratify the patient's risk of major morbidity.
Between 2002 and 2010, preoperative, intraoperative, and outcome data from 700 consecutive patients undergoing PD in our institution were prospectively collected in an electronic database.
Major complications were defined as levels III to V of Clavien-Dindo classification.
On the basis of a multivariate regression model, the score was developed using a random two-thirds of the population (n = 469) and was validated on the remaining 231 patients.
Major complication rate was 16.7% (117/700).
Significant predictors included in the scoring system were: pancreas texture, pancreatic duct diameter, operative blood loss, and ASA score.
The mean risk of developing major postoperative complications was 7% in patients with score 0 to 3, 13% in patients with score 4 to 7, 23% in patients with score 8 to 11, and 36% in patients with score 12 to 15.
In the validation population, the predicted risk of major complications was 15.2% versus a 16.9% observed risk (C-statistic index = 0.743).
This new score may accurately predict a patient's postoperative outcome.
Early identification of high-risk patients could help the surgeon to adopt intraoperative and postoperative strategies tailored on individual basis.
PMID: 22042419
[MicroRNA expression pattern in intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm].
Background/Aims: Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN) are precursor lesions of fatal pancreatic cancer.
Physiological function of microRNA is to regulate the stability and translation of mRNA.
The aberrant microRNA expression is commonly observed in many cancers.
The aim of this study was to analyze the expression pattern of microRNA in IPMN and evaluate the role of the microRNA.Methods: Using two paraffin-embedded IPMN tissues, microRNA expression of normal tissue, IPMN adenoma and carcinoma were compared by cDNA-mediated annealing, selection, extension and ligation microarray assay.
Using real time PCR, expression levels of aberrantly up-regulated microRNAs were assessed in another 20 IPMNs, four pancreatic cancer cell lines (Panc1, MiaPaCa-2, XPA-3, BxPC-3) and immortalized pancreatic ductal cell line (HPNE).
Effect of suppressing highly over-expressed two microRNAs in pancreatic cancer cell lines with anti-microRNA inhibitors were evaluated using CCK-8 assay.Results: Among aberrantly expressed 122 microRNAs in IPMN, miR-552, miR-25*, miR-183, miR-1300, miR-196a, miR-182*, and miR-30c-1* were consistently increased more than 3-fold.
On average, miR-196a and miR-183 increased 10,824 folds and 26,519 folds in four pancreatic cancer cell lines compared with HPNE.
These two microRNAs were also over-expressed in 20 IPMNs compared with HPNE.
After applying anti-miRNA inhibitors, cell survival of four pancreatic cancer cell lines decreased by 24.5% with anti-miR-196a and by 14.2% with anti-miR-183 on average.Conclusions: Aberrant expression of 122 microRNAs was observed in IPMN.
Two microRNAs, miR-196a and miR-183-increased in IPMN and pancreatic cancer cell lines compared with immortalized dancreatic ductal cell line.
The inhibitions of these microRNAs repressed cell proliferation of pancreatic cancer cell lines.
(Korean J Gastroenterol 2011;58:190-200).
PMID: 22042244
Mucinous cystic neoplasms of the pancreas: definition of preoperative imaging criteria for high-risk lesions.
Pancreatic mucinous cystic neoplasms (MCN) are premalignant lesions whose natural history is poorly known.
Whether the dysplasia grade might be determined with precision by preoperative clinical and imaging criteria is not known.
We aimed to determine if CT scan data might be useful to predict the grade of dysplasia in a series of 60 histologically proven MCN.
All consecutive patients who were operated on with pathological confirmation of MCN were included.
Careful CT scan evaluation was reviewed without knowledge of pathological results.
Imaging and pathological results were correlated.
Sixty patients (59 females) were included.
Low- and intermediate-grade dysplasias were identified in 47 and 3 patients (benign MCN), respectively, and high-grade dysplasia and invasive carcinoma in 7 and 3 patients (malignant MCN), respectively.
Patients with benign lesions were significantly younger.
None of the studied clinical data were statistically different to distinguish benign and malignant MCN, except age (42 vs.
48 years, p < 0.05).
Only maximal diameter and mural nodules on CT scan were significantly more frequent in the malignant group.
No malignant MCN had a maximal diameter <40 mm.
At a 40-mm threshold, the sensitivity and specificity of the maximal diameter to diagnose malignant MCN were 100 and 54%, respectively.
Mural nodules seen on CT scan were confirmed in all cases but one upon pathological examination of the surgical specimen.
The sensitivity and specificity of the presence of a mural nodule seen on CT scan for the diagnosis of a malignant lesion were 100 and 98%, respectively.
Preoperative CT scan detection of a mural nodule within a cystic pancreatic neoplasm suggestive of MCN strongly suggests malignancy.
A diameter <40 mm is associated with no risk of malignancy.
PMID: 22042212
Preoperative tumor studies using MRI or CT in patients with clinically suspected insulinoma.
Insulinomas are rare tumors that originate from the islet cells of the pancreas.
The aims of this study were to localize insulinomas preoperatively using CT and/or MRI in correlation with postoperative pathological results.
Between December 2001 and June 2010, 27 consecutive patients with clinically suspected insulinoma were surgically treated in our university hospital.
Preoperative CT (14 of 27 patients) and MRI studies (14 of 27 patients, one patient had both MRI and CT), operation reports, intraoperative ultrasonography reports, and pathological diagnoses were analyzed retrospectively.
For each lesion, images were analyzed based on the presence of enhancement or the characteristics of signal intensities.
Pathologic correlation was available for all the lesions.
The female: male ratio was 2.9, with a mean age of 47.5 years (range 12-82) .
Preoperative tumor localization was achieved by means of MRI and CT.
A focal pancreatic lesion, which was hypointense on T(1)-weighted sequences, was detected on all the MR images (14 of 27 patients; 100%).
These lesions were isointense (4 cases) to slightly hyperintense (10 of 14 cases) on T(2)-weighted sequences.
In T(1)-weighted fat-suppressed contrast-enhanced sequences, there were two types of enhancement: homogeneously hyperintense lesions (in 10 of 14 cases) or peripherally hyper-, centrally isointense (in 4 of 14 cases).
On all the CT images (14 of 27 patients), there was no detectable lesion on precontrast series; on arterial series in 13 of 14 patients (arterial series has not been done in one patient), lesions enhanced hypervascular in contrast to the rest of the pancreas with a mean enhancement of 147 HU (range 113-248) and 95 HU (range 65-141), respectively.
On venous series in 13 of 14 patients (venous series has not been done in one patient), there was an enhanced lesion in contrast to the rest of the pancreas with a mean enhancement of 110 HU (range 91-151) and 86 HU (range 65-137), respectively.
Intraoperative ultrasonography was performed in 11 of 27 patients to localize the tumor, which correlated with the results of the mentioned preoperative studies.
Tumor size ranged from 9 × 11 to 31 × 37 mm.
Enucleation was carried out in 14 patients, Whipple in 5, segmental resection in 3 and left distal pancreatectomy in 5 patients.
The mortality rate was 0.
Pathological findings were insulinoma or neuroendocrine tumors in 26 of 27 cases.
One patient had a pathological finding of chronic pancreatic disease with intraepithelial neoplasia (grade 1A).
We conclude that the preoperative localization of insulinoma in clinically suspected patients can be made on the basis of MRI and/or CT studies.
A hallmark lesion is hypointense in T(1)-weighted sequences, homogeneously or peripherally hyperintense in T(1)-weighted fat-suppressed contrast-enhanced sequence using MRI (100% of cases) or/and a hypervascular enhanced lesion on arterial (100% of CT studies) and on venous series using CT (66.7% of CT studies).
PMID: 22041920
Glycogen synthase kinase 3β inhibition sensitizes pancreatic cancer cells to gemcitabine.
BACKGROUND: Pancreatic cancer is obstinate and resistant to gemcitabine, a standard chemotherapeutic agent for the disease.
We previously showed a therapeutic effect of glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK3β) inhibition against gastrointestinal cancer and glioblastoma.
Here, we investigated the effect of GSK3β inhibition on pancreatic cancer cell sensitivity to gemcitabine and the underlying molecular mechanism.
METHODS: Expression, phosphorylation, and activity of GSK3β in pancreatic cancer cells (PANC-1) were examined by Western immunoblotting and in vitro kinase assay.
The combined effect of gemcitabine and a GSK3β inhibitor (AR-A014418) against PANC-1 cells was examined by isobologram and PANC-1 xenografts in mice.
Changes in gene expression in PANC-1 cells following GSK3β inhibition were studied by cDNA microarray and reverse transcription (RT)-PCR.
RESULTS: PANC-1 cells showed increased GSK3β expression, phosphorylation at tyrosine 216 (active form), and activity compared with non-neoplastic HEK293 cells.
Administration of AR-A014418 at pharmacological doses attenuated proliferation of PANC-1 cells and xenografts, and significantly sensitized them to gemcitabine.
Isobologram analysis determined that the combined effect was synergistic.
DNA microarray analysis detected GSK3β inhibition-associated changes in gene expression in gemcitabine-treated PANC-1 cells.
Among these changes, RT-PCR and Western blotting showed that expression of tumor protein 53-induced nuclear protein 1, a gene regulating cell death and DNA repair, was increased by gemcitabine treatment and substantially decreased by GSK3β inhibition.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that GSK3β inhibition sensitizes pancreatic cancer cells to gemcitabine with altered expression of genes involved in DNA repair.
This study provides insight into the molecular mechanism of gemcitabine resistance and thus a new strategy for pancreatic cancer chemotherapy.
PMID: 22041919
Different subtypes of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm in the pancreas have distinct pathways to pancreatic cancer progression.
Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) is recognized as a precursor lesion to pancreatic cancer, a unique pathological entity.
IPMN has subtypes with different clinical characteristics.
However, the molecular mechanisms of cancer progression from IPMN remain largely unknown.
In this study we examined the differences in genetic alteration(s) among the IPMN subtypes.
Surgically resected IPMNs (n = 25) were classified into four subtypes by hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and mucin immunostaining.
Mutations in KRAS, BRAF, and PIK3CA genes and expression of CDKN2A, TP53, SMAD4, phospho-ERK, and phospho-SMAD1/5/8 proteins were examined.
There were 11 gastric, 11 intestinal, one pancreatobiliary, and two oncocytic types in this study.
We then compared the two major subtypes, gastric-type and intestinal-type IPMN.
Gastric-type IPMN showed a significantly higher incidence of KRAS mutations (9/11, 81.8%) compared with intestinal type (3/11, 27.3%; p < 0.05), although the intestinal type showed a higher grade of dysplasia than gastric type (p < 0.01).
All cases with KRAS mutations showed phospho-ERK immunostaining.
In contrast, intestinal type (9/11, 81.8%) showed more frequent SMAD1/5/8 phosphorylation compared with gastric-type IPMN (3/11, 27.3%; p < 0.05%).
There may be distinct mechanisms of pancreatic cancer progression in the different subtypes of IPMN.
In particular, KRAS mutation and bone morphogenetic protein-SMAD signaling status may be crucial diverging steps for the two representative pathways to pancreatic cancer in IPMN patients.
PMID: 22041584
Caveolin-1 promotes pancreatic cancer cell differentiation and restores membranous E-cadherin via suppression of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition.
Pancreatic cancer is one of the deadliest cancers due to early rapid metastasis and chemoresistance.
Recently, epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) was shown to play a key role in the pathogenesis of pancreatic cancer.
To understand the role of caveolin-1 (Cav-1) in EMT, we over-expressed Cav-1 in a pancreatic cancer cell line, Panc 10.05, that does not normally express Cav-1.
Here, we show that Cav-1 expression in pancreatic cancer cells induces an epithelial phenotype and promotes cell-cell contact, with increased expression of plasma membrane bound E-cadherin and beta-catenin.
Mechanistically, Cav-1 induces Snail downregulation and decreased activation of AKT, MAPK and TGF-beta-Smad signaling pathways.
In vitro, Cav-1 expression reduces cell migration and invasion, and attenuates doxorubicin-chemoresistance of pancreatic cancer cells.
Importantly, in vivo studies revealed that Cav-1 expression greatly suppresses tumor formation in a xenograft model.
Most interestingly, Panc/Cav-1 tumors displayed organized nests of differentiated cells that were totally absent in control tumors.
Confirming our in vitro results, these nests of differentiated cells showed reexpression of E-cadherin and beta-catenin at the cell membrane.
Thus, we provide evidence that Cav-1 functions as a crucial modulator of EMT and cell differentiation in pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22041510
Cytology adds value to imaging studies for risk assessment of malignancy in pancreatic mucinous cysts.
Evaluate the value of cytology relative to imaging features in risk assessment for malignancy as defined in the Sendai Guidelines.
The Sendai Guidelines list symptoms, cyst size >30 mm, dilated main pancreatic duct (MPD) >6 mm, mural nodule (MN) and "positive" cytology as high risk stigmata for malignancy warranting surgical triage.
We reviewed clinical, radiological and cytological data of 112 patients with histologically confirmed mucinous cysts of the pancreas evaluated in a single tertiary medical center.
Cytology slides were blindly re-reviewed and epithelial cells grouped as either benign or high-grade atypia (HGA) [≥high-grade dysplasia].
Histologically, neoplasms were grouped as benign (low-grade and moderate dysplasia) and malignant (in situ and invasive carcinoma).
Performance characteristics of cytology relative to other risk factors were evaluated.
Dilated MPD, MN, and HGA were independent predictors of malignancy (p < 0.0001), but not symptoms (p = 0.29) or cyst size >30 mm (p = 0.51).
HGA was the most sensitive predictor of malignancy in all cysts (72%) and in small (≤30 mm) branch-duct intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (BD IPMN; 67%), whereas also being specific (85 and 88%, respectively).
MN and dilated MPD were highly specific (>90%), but insensitive (39%-44%).
Cytology detected 30% more cancers in small cysts than dilated MPD or MN and half of the cancers without either of these high-risk imaging features.
Cytology adds value to the radiological assessment of predicting malignancy in mucinous cysts, particularly in small BD IPMN.
PMID: 22041170
Targeting pancreatic cancer with a G-quadruplex ligand.
The integrity of telomeres in most cancer cells is maintained by the action of the telomerase enzyme complex, which catalyzes the synthesis of telomeric DNA repeats in order to replace those lost during replication.
Telomerase is especially up-regulated in metastatic cancer and is thus emerging as a major therapeutic target.
One approach to telomerase inhibition involves the sequestration of the single-stranded 3' ends of telomeric DNA into higher-order quadruplex structures.
We have recently shown that tetra-substituted naphthalene diimide compounds are potent quadruplex-stabilizing molecules with telomerase inhibitory activity in cells.
We show here that one such compound, BMSG-SH-3, which has been optimized by computer modeling, has significant in vivo antitumor activity against a model for pancreatic cancer, a cancer that is especially resistant to current therapies.
A large reduction in telomerase activity in treated tumors was observed and the naphthalene diimide compound was found to be selectively localized in the treated tumors.
We find that the expression of the therapeutically important chaperone protein HSP90, a regulator of telomerase is also reduced in vivo by BMSG-SH-3 treatment.
The compound is a potent stabilizer of two G-quadruplex sequences found in the promoter region of the HSP90 gene, as well as a G-quadruplex from human telomeric DNA.
It is proposed that the simultaneous targeting of these quadruplexes may be an effective anti-tumor strategy.
PMID: 22040762
Bilateral kidney preservation by volumetric-modulated arc therapy (RapidArc) compared to conventional radiation therapy (3D-CRT) in pancreatic and bile duct malignancies.
To compare volumetric-modulated arc therapy plans with conventional radiation therapy (3D-CRT) plans in pancreatic and bile duct cancers, especially for bilateral kidney preservation.
A dosimetric analysis was performed in 21 patients who had undergone radiotherapy for pancreatic or bile duct carcinoma at our institution.
We compared 4-field 3D-CRT and 2 arcs RapidArc (RA) plans.
The treatment plan was designed to deliver a dose of 50.4 Gy to the planning target volume (PTV) based on the gross disease in a 1.8 Gy daily fraction, 5 days a week.
Planning objectives were 95% of the PTV receiving 95% of the prescribed dose and no more than 2% of the PTV receiving more than 107%.
Dose-volume histograms (DVH) for the target volume and the organs at risk (right and left kidneys, bowel tract, liver and healthy tissue) were compared.
Monitor units and delivery treatment time were also reported.
All plans achieved objectives, with 95% of the PTV receiving ≥ 95% of the dose (D95% for 3D-CRT = 48.9 Gy and for RA = 48.6 Gy).
RapidArc was shown to be superior to 3D-CRT in terms of organ at risk sparing except for contralateral kidney: for bowel tract, the mean dose was reduced by RA compared to 3D-CRT (16.7 vs 20.8 Gy, p = 0.0001).
Similar result was observed for homolateral kidney (mean dose of 4.7 Gy for RA vs 12.6 Gy for 3D-CRT, p < 0.0001), but 3D-CRT significantly reduced controlateral kidney dose with a mean dose of 1.8 Gy vs 3.9 Gy, p < 0.0007.
Compared to 3D-CRT, mean MUs for each fraction was significantly increased with RapidArc: 207 vs 589, (p < 0.0001) but the treatment time was not significantly different (2 and 2.66 minutes, p = ns).
RapidArc allows significant dose reduction, in particular for homolateral kidney and bowel, while maintaining target coverage.
This would have a promising impact on reducing toxicities.
PMID: 22040341
Haemangiosarcoma of the interventricular septum in a dog.
Abstract.
A 5-year-old male neutered Labrador Retriever Afghan crossbred dog was examined after collapsing.
The dog was recumbent, dyspnoeic and mildly tachypnoeic.
There was a tachyarrhythmia (300 beats per minute) and subcutaneous oedema of the ventral neck and right forelimb.
The dog had a sustained ventricular tachycardia originating in the right ventricle and on echocardiography a mass was identified in the interventricular septum.
Due to the poor prognosis the owners agreed to euthanasia of the dog.
PATHOLOGICAL FINDINGS: A reddish-grey mass was found in the interventricular septum and smaller red foci found scattered throughout the myocardium.
There was a single, raised, splenic nodule with several smaller red foci within the splenic parenchyma.
Hepatic congestion, pancreatic oedema, ascites and subcutaneous oedema of the right forelimb and neck were present.
Sections of the splenic nodule, interventricular septal mass and both ventricular-free walls showed neoplastic mesenchymal cells.
Haemangiosarcoma of the myocardium and spleen with right-sided congestive heart failure.
This case report describes an atypical location for haemangiosarcoma.
The investigation supports the use of echocardiography as a component of the protocol for staging haemangiosarcoma even in the absence of apericardial effusion.
It also provides further evidence for the inclusion of intracardiac neoplasia as a differential diagnosis for dogs with unexplained cardiac arrhythmias.
PMID: 22039326
Role of cyclooxygenase-2 gene polymorphisms in pancreatic carcinogenesis.
To evaluate the clinical significance of -765G/C and -1195G/A cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) gene polymorphisms in patients with pancreatic cancer (PC).
The study included 201 patients: 85 with PC and 116 healthy controls.
-765G/C and -1195G/A COX-2 gene polymorphisms were studied in DNA isolated from blood samples.
The associations of the analyzed genotypes and clinical data at diagnosis were evaluated.
We found an increased frequency of the homozygous -1195AA COX-2 genotype in patients with PC (53.7%) compared with the control group (21%) (P < 0.01).
In contrast, the distribution of genotype and allele frequencies of the -765G/C COX-2 polymorphism in the PC patients were not different from those in control groups.
A correlation between presence of homozygous -1195AA COX-2 genotype and tumor size > 3 cm was observed (P < 0.05).
Analyzed polymorphisms were unrelated to the patients' sex and age, nor to the presence of regional or distant metastases.
These preliminary results indicate that the -1195G/A COX-2 polymorphism may play an important role in PC prognosis and carcinogenesis.
PMID: 22039095
Cancer mortality among female and male workers occupationally exposed to inorganic lead in the printing industry.
Evaluation of the carcinogenicity of lead for humans has been based primarily on the results of studies on occupationally exposed men, although gender differences in lead metabolism have been reported.
In addition, most of the previous studies have been limited by a failure to identify and control for co-exposures to other known occupational carcinogens.
The present study follows an industrial cohort of workers, mostly women, with moderate lead exposure and no confounding by other occupational exposures.
Workers, employed at least 2 years between 1950 and 1978 in manual and mechanical (linotype) typesetting and type foundries in 27 printing plants in Moscow, were included in the cohort, which comprised 1423 men and 3102 women.
The cohort was followed up during 1979-2003 and contributed 93,682 person-years of observation.
Follow-up was 97.7% complete.
Standardised mortality ratios (SMRs) and 95% CIs, based on mortality rates of the Moscow general population and adjusted for gender, age and calendar time, were calculated for the total cohort as well as subcohorts stratified by various exposure parameters.
Among women, mortality from all causes, circulatory diseases and all cancers combined was lower than that in the Moscow general population and was similar across work groups.
Among men, there was excess overall mortality, mainly due to increased mortality from ischaemic heart disease.
For both sexes, no significant excess risk for any cancer site was observed, although some dose-response patterns were found.
In the overall cohort, mortality from cancers of the kidney and pancreas increased up to twofold in the highest tertile of cumulative lead exposure based on duration and a relative ranking of the three subcohorts (9 deaths; SMR=2.12, 95% CI 1.10 to 4.07) and (18 deaths; SMR=2.32, 95% CI 1.46 to 3.68), respectively.
Similar mortality trends for these two cancers were found in analyses by gender.
Consistencies by sex and exposure level make a strong case for a link between exposure to inorganic lead and cancers of the kidney and pancreas.
PMID: 22038627
The non-receptor tyrosine kinase c-Src mediates the PDGF-induced association between Furin and pro-MT1-MMP in HPAC pancreatic cells.
Furin is a member of the proprotein convertase family, which is capable of cleaving the precursors of a wide variety of substrates including membrane-type 1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP) proenzyme.
c-Src is activated by growth factors, and has been linked with a poor prognosis in pancreatic cancer (PCa).
Both c-Src and Furin play crucial roles in tumorigenesis, and the mechanism controlling their association is not understood.
Modulation of the association between Furin and pro-MT1-MMP by c-Src inhibitor PP2 was evaluated by western blotting, assay of in vitro enzyme, co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP), and confocal immunofluorescence microscopy.
Human platelet-derived growth factor BB (PDGF-BB) activated c-Src and induced c-Src-dependent association of Furin with pro-MT1-MMP in HPAC pancreatic cancer cells.
Co-IP and confocal immunofluorescence assays revealed that c-Src interacts with Furin in vivo.
The SH2 domain appeared to be important for c-Src interaction with Furin.
In addition, we showed that Furin protein is tyrosine phosphorylated.
Association between Furin and MT1-MMP is regulated by the tyrosine kinase c-Src.
PMID: 22038501
Standard versus extended lymphadenectomy in radical pancreatoduodenectomy for ductal adenocarcinoma of the head of the pancreas : Long-term results of a Japanese multicenter randomized controlled trial.
BACKGROUND: The value of pancreatoduodenectomy (PD) with extended lymphadenectomy for pancreatic cancer has been evaluated by many retrospective studies and 3 randomized controlled trials (RCT).
However, the protocols used and the results found in the 3 RCTs were diverse.
Therefore, a multicenter RCT was proposed in 1998 to evaluate the primary end point of long-term survival and the secondary end points of morbidity, mortality and quality of life of patients undergoing standard versus extended lymphadenectomy in radical PD for pancreatic cancer.
METHODS: From March 2000 to May 2003, 112 patients with potentially curable pancreatic head cancer were enrolled and intraoperatively randomized to a standard or extended lymphadenectomy group.
No resected patients received any adjuvant treatments.
RESULTS: A hundred and one eligible patients were analyzed.
Demographic and histopathological characteristics of the two groups were similar.
The mean operating time, intraoperative blood loss and number of retrieved lymph nodes were greater in the extended group, but the other operative results were comparable.
CONCLUSIONS: Although this multicenter RCT was conducted in a strict setting, extended lymphadenectomy in radical PD did not benefit long-term survival in patients with resectable pancreatic head cancer and led to levels of morbidity, mortality and quality of life comparable to those found after standard lymphadenectomy.
PMID: 22037658
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma with multiple eosinophilic extracellular deposits consistent with noncalcified psammoma bodies.
PMID: 22036936
High level of PTEN expression is associated with low-grade liver metastasis and satisfactory patient survival in pancreatic cancer.
We investigated PTEN expression in primary pancreatic cancer and pancreatic cancer liver metastasis in order to evaluate the interrelationship between PTEN expression and clinicopathological characteristics of pancreatic cancer patients with and without liver metastasis.
Eighty five primary pancreatic cancer specimens without liver metastasis were analyzed as controls.
Eighty seven pancreatic cancer specimens and homologous liver metastasis specimens were investigated immunohistochemically, and the correlation between immunohistochemical findings and clinicopathological factors was investigated.
A strong PTEN expression was observed in 52 (61.2%) specimens from patients without liver metastasis.
In contrast, only 26 (29.9%) specimens were observed in patients with liver metastasis.
A strong PTEN expression was apparently associated with low-grade lymph node metastasis (p <0.05) and TNM stage (p <0.05).
PTEN expression in patients without liver metastasis was apparently stronger than that with liver metastasis.
In addition, among patients with liver metastasis, the 5-year survival rate was markedly higher in patients with strong PTEN expression compared to those with weak PTEN expression.
Our results suggest that a high level of PTEN expression is associated with low-grade liver metastasis and satisfactory patient survival in pancreatic cancer.
The diagnostic evaluation of PTEN expression may provide valuable prognostic information to aid treatment strategies for pancreatic cancer patients.
PMID: 22036895
HMGA-targeted phosphorothioate DNA aptamers increase sensitivity to gemcitabine chemotherapy in human pancreatic cancer cell lines.
Elevated high mobility group A (HMGA) protein expression in pancreatic cancer cells is correlated with resistance to the chemotherapy agent gemcitabine.
Here, we demonstrate use of HMGA-targeted AT-rich phosphorothioate DNA (AT-sDNA) aptamers to suppress HMGA carcinogenic activity.
Cell growth of human pancreatic cancer cells (AsPC-1 and Miapaca-2) transfected with AT-sDNA were monitored after treatment with gemcitabine.
Significant increases in cell death in AT-sDNA transfected cells compared to non-AT-rich sDNA treated cells were observed in both cell lines.
The data indicate the potential use of HMGA targeted DNA aptamers to enhance chemotherapy efficacy in pancreatic cancer treatment.
PMID: 22036848
Pro- or anti-inflammatory properties of the adipokine dipeptidyl peptidase-4?
PMID: 22036782
An unusual cause of pancreatitis.
PMID: 22036462
[Pseudopapillary solid tumor of the pancreas: Report of 6 cases].
Solid pseudopapillary neoplasms (SPNs) are rare tumours of the exocrine pancreas.
Although they can develop metastasis, the prognosis is good.
The aim of this study was to describe the characteristics of these tumours attended in our hospital.
All cases of SPN in the database of the Pathology Department between 1991 and 2010 were included.
Age, sex, symptoms, type of surgery, pathologic and immunohistochemical characteristics, and clinical evolution were analyzed.
Six cases were identified; all of them were women with a median age of 27.5 years.
One patient presented haemoperitoneum, 2 abdominal pain and 3 were diagnosed incidentally.
The most frequent localization was the pancreatic tail (n=4) and the median size was 7.7cm.
Four tumours were benign and 2 carcinomas.
One of them had liver and lymph node metastases.
Ki-67 proliferation index was low (1-3%).
After a median follow-up of 33.5 months, all patients were alive and without evidence of relapse.
SPNs occur in young women.
In most cases surgical resection is curative.
A low mitotic index confers a good prognosis and a long survival.
PMID: 22036176
Complications after pancreaticoduodenectomy.
The most frequent complications after pancreaticoduodenectomy are analysed in this review.
These include, delayed gastric emptying, pancreatic fistula, post-operative bleeding, and the complications after vascular reconstruction in the cases of locally extended pancreatic cancer.
For this, randomised prospective studies, systematic meta-analyses and clinical guidelines on the definition, clinical severity grade and treatment of these complications have been evaluated.
PMID: 22035405
Dosimetric and motion analysis of margin-intensive therapy by stereotactic ablative radiotherapy for resectable pancreatic cancer.
The retroperitoneal margin is a common site of positive surgical margins in patients with resectable pancreatic cancer.
Preoperative margin-intensive therapy (MIT) involves delivery of a single high dose of ablative radiotherapy (30 Gy) focused on this surgically inaccessible margin, utilizing stereotactic techniques in an effort to reduce local failure following surgery.
In this study, we investigated the motion of regional organs at risk (OAR) utilizing 4DCT, evaluated the dosimetric effects of abdominal compression (AC) to reduce regional motion, and compared various planning techniques to optimize MIT.
10 patients were evaluated with 4DCT scans.
All 10 patients had scans using AC and seven of the 10 patients had scans both with and without AC.
The peak respiratory abdominal organ and major vessel centroid excursion was measured.
A "sub-GTV" region was defined by a radiation oncologist and surgical oncologist encompassing the retroperitoneal margin typically lateral and posterior to the superior mesenteric artery (SMA), and a 3-5 mm margin was added to constitute the PTV.
Identical 3D non-coplanar SABR (3DSABR) plans were designed for the average compression and non-compression scans.
Compression scans were planned with 3DSABR, coplanar IMRT (IMRT), and Cyberknife (CK) planning techniques.
Dose volume analysis was undertaken for various endpoints, comparing OAR doses with and without AC and for different planning methods.
The mean PTV size was 20.2 cm3.
Regional vessel motion of the SMA, celiac trunk, and renal vessels was small (< 5 mm) and not significantly impacted by AC.
Mean pancreatic motion was > 5 mm, so AC has been used in all patients enrolled thus far.
AC did not significantly increase OAR dose including the stomach and traverse colon.
There were several statistically significant differences in the doses to OARs as a function of the type of planning modality used.
AC does not significantly reduce the limited motion of structures in close proximity to the MIT target and does not significantly increase the dose to OARs that can be displaced by the compression plate.
The treatment planning techniques evaluated in this study have different advantages with no clearly superior method in our analysis.
Dose to adjacent vessels may be reduced with 3DSABR or IMRT techniques, while conformality is increased with IMRT or CK.
PMID: 22034634
Folate intake and risk of pancreatic cancer: pooled analysis of prospective cohort studies.
Epidemiological studies evaluating the association between folate intake and risk of pancreatic cancer have produced inconsistent results.
The statistical power to examine this association has been limited in previous studies partly because of small sample size and limited range of folate intake in some studies.
We analyzed primary data from 14 prospective cohort studies that included 319,716 men and 542,948 women to assess the association between folate intake and risk of pancreatic cancer.
Folate intake was assessed through a validated food-frequency questionnaire at baseline in each study.
Study-specific relative risks (RRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated using Cox proportional hazards models and then pooled using a random effects model.
All statistical tests were two-sided.
During 7-20 years of follow-up across studies, 2195 pancreatic cancers were identified.
No association was observed between folate intake and risk of pancreatic cancer in men and women (highest vs lowest quintile: dietary folate intake, pooled multivariable RR = 1.06, 95% CI = 0.90 to 1.25, P(trend) = .47; total folate intake [dietary folate and supplemental folic acid], pooled multivariable RR = 0.96, 95% CI = 0.80 to 1.16, P(trend) = .90).
No between-study heterogeneity was observed (for dietary folate, P(heterogeneity) = .15; for total folate, P(heterogeneity) = .22).
Folate intake was not associated with overall risk of pancreatic cancer in this large pooled analysis.
PMID: 22034543
Diagnostic accuracy and clinical significance of the fine needle aspiration Ki-67 labelling index in pancreatic endocrine tumours.
PMID: 22034435
BRCA1 tumor suppression depends on BRCT phosphoprotein binding, but not its E3 ligase activity.
Germline mutations of the breast cancer 1 (BRCA1) gene are a major cause of familial breast and ovarian cancer.
The BRCA1 protein displays E3 ubiquitin ligase activity, and this enzymatic function is thought to be required for tumor suppression.
To test this hypothesis, we generated mice that express an enzymatically defective Brca1.
We found that this mutant Brca1 prevents tumor formation to the same degree as does wild-type Brca1 in three different genetically engineered mouse (GEM) models of cancer.
In contrast, a mutation that ablates phosphoprotein recognition by the BRCA C terminus (BRCT) domains of BRCA1 elicits tumors in each of the three GEM models.
Thus, BRCT phosphoprotein recognition, but not the E3 ligase activity, is required for BRCA1 tumor suppression.
PMID: 22034420
Cancer. BRCA1, everything but the RING?
PMID: 22034181
Venous reconstruction based on virtual liver resection to avoid congestion in the liver remnant.
Hepatic vein (HV) reconstruction may prevent venous congestion following resection of liver tumours that encroach on major HVs.
This study aimed to identify criteria for venous reconstruction based on preoperative evaluation of venous congestion.
A volumetric analysis using image-processing software was performed in selected patients with liver tumours suspected on preoperative imaging of major HV invasion.
The size of the non-congested liver remnant (NCLR) was calculated by subtracting the congested area from the liver remnant.
Venous reconstruction was scheduled in patients who met the following criteria: normal liver function (indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min (ICGR(15) ) of less than 10 per cent) with a NCLR smaller than 40 per cent of total liver volume (TLV), or liver dysfunction (ICGR(15) 10-20 per cent) with a NCLR smaller than 50 per cent of TLV.
Surgical outcomes and liver regeneration were investigated.
A total of 55 patients with suspected HV invasion were enrolled.
Sacrifice of one or more HVs was deemed possible in 37 patients.
Venous reconstruction was scheduled in 18 patients.
At operation, there was seen to be no venous involvement in 11 patients.
The HV was sacrificed in 29 patients, and preserved or reconstructed in 24.
Volume restoration ratios at 3 months were similar in the sacrifice (88 per cent) and preserve (87 per cent) groups.
Operating time was shorter (465 min) and blood loss was lower (580 ml) in the sacrifice than in the preserve group (523 min and 815 ml respectively).
The HV can be sacrificed safely according to the proposed criteria, reducing surgical invasiveness without influencing the postoperative course.
PMID: 22033701
Surgical Apgar score predicts perioperative morbidity in patients undergoing pancreaticoduodenectomy at a high-volume center.
Pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) remains a procedure that carries considerable morbidity.
Numerous studies have evaluated factors to predict patients at risk.
The aim of this study was to determine whether the surgical Apgar score (SAS) predicts perioperative morbidity and mortality.
We examined 553 patients undergoing successful PD between January 2000 and December 2010.
Postoperative complications were graded using the Clavien scale, and the SAS (range, 0-10) was determined.
The Cochran-Armitage test for trend was used to determine the association between grouped SAS scores (0-2, 3-4, 5-6, 7-8, and 9-10) and each of the outcomes.
The average patient age was 64 years, and there was an even distribution of males and females.
There were 11 perioperative deaths (2%), 186 grade 2 or higher complications (34%), and 86 major complications (grades 3-5, 16%).
Additionally, 61 patients developed pancreatic fistulae (11%).
Statistical analysis determined that SAS was a significant predictor of grade 2 or higher complications (p < 0.0001), major morbidity (p = 0.01), and pancreatic fistula (p = 0.04) but not mortality (p = 0.20).
We demonstrate that the SAS is a significant predictor of perioperative morbidity for patients undergoing PD.
This score should be used to identify patients at higher risk in order to prioritize use of postoperative critical care beds and hospital resources.
PMID: 22030254
Combination of salinomycin and gemcitabine eliminates pancreatic cancer cells.
Previous research has documented that a subpopulation of pancreatic cancer cells, named cancer stem cells (CSCs), harbor stem cell-like properties.
Here, we examined the efficacy of combined treatments of salinomycin and gemcitabine in human pancreatic cancer cells.
Salinomycin inhibited the growth of CSCs, while gemcitabine suppressed the viability of non-CSCs.
Consistently, in vivo studies showed that salinomycin combined with gemcitabine could eliminate the engraftment of human pancreatic cancer more effectively than the individual agents.
These data indicated that administration of salinomycin, which targets CSCs, may constitute a potential therapeutic strategy for improving the efficacy of gemcitabine to eradicate pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22029859
Activation of the human immune system by chemotherapeutic or targeted agents combined with the oncolytic parvovirus H-1.
Parvovirus H-1 (H-1PV) infects and lyses human tumor cells including melanoma, hepatoma, gastric, colorectal, cervix and pancreatic cancers.
We assessed whether the beneficial effects of chemotherapeutic agents or targeted agents could be combined with the oncolytic and immunostimmulatory properties of H-1PV.
Using human ex vivo models we evaluated the biological and immunological effects of H-1PV-induced tumor cell lysis alone or in combination with chemotherapeutic or targeted agents in human melanoma cells +/- characterized human cytotoxic T-cells (CTL) and HLA-A2-restricted dendritic cells (DC).
H-1PV-infected MZ7-Mel cells showed a clear reduction in cell viability of >50%, which appeared to occur primarily through apoptosis.
This correlated with viral NS1 expression levels and was enhanced by combination with chemotherapeutic agents or sunitinib.
Tumor cell preparations were phagocytosed by DC whose maturation was measured according to the treatment administered.
Immature DC incubated with H-1PV-induced MZ7-Mel lysates significantly increased DC maturation compared with non-infected or necrotic MZ7-Mel cells.
Tumor necrosis factor-α and interleukin-6 release was clearly increased by DC incubated with H-1PV-induced SK29-Mel tumor cell lysates (TCL) and was also high with DC-CTL co-cultures incubated with H-1PV-induced TCL.
Similarly, DC co-cultures with TCL incubated with H-1PV combined with cytotoxic agents or sunitinib enhanced DC maturation to a greater extent than cytotoxic agents or sunitinib alone.
Again, these combinations increased pro-inflammatory responses in DC-CTL co-cultures compared with chemotherapy or sunitinib alone.
In our human models, chemotherapeutic or targeted agents did not only interfere with the pronounced immunomodulatory properties of H-1PV, but also reinforced drug-induced tumor cell killing.
H-1PV combined with cisplatin, vincristine or sunitinib induced effective immunostimulation via a pronounced DC maturation, better cytokine release and cytotoxic T-cell activation compared with agents alone.
Thus, the clinical assessment of H-1PV oncolytic tumor therapy not only alone but also in combination strategies is warranted.
PMID: 22028972
Lipoprotein lipase as a candidate target for cancer prevention/therapy.
Epidemiological studies have shown that serum triglyceride (TG) levels are linked with risk of development of cancer, including colorectal and pancreatic cancers, and their precancerous lesions.
Thus, it is assumed that serum TG plays an important role in carcinogenesis, and the key enzyme lipoprotein lipase (LPL), which catalyzes the hydrolysis of plasma TG, may therefore be involved.
Dysregulation of LPL has been reported to contribute to many human diseases, such as atherosclerosis, chylomicronaemia, obesity, and type 2 diabetes.
Recently, it has been reported that LPL gene deficiency, such as due to chromosome 8p22 loss, LPL gene polymorphism, and epigenetic changes in its promoter region gene, increases cancer risk, especially in the prostate.
In animal experiments, high serum TG levels seem to promote sporadic/carcinogen-induced genesis of colorectal and pancreatic cancers.
Interestingly, tumor suppressive effects of LPL inducers, such as PPAR ligands, NO-1886, and indomethacin, have been demonstrated in animal models.
Moreover, recent evidence that LPL plays important roles in inflammation and obesity implies that it is an appropriate general target for chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic agents.
PMID: 22028820
Oncolytic adenoviruses armed with thymidine kinase can be traced by PET imaging and show potent antitumoural effects by ganciclovir dosing.
Replication-competent adenoviruses armed with thymidine kinase (TK) combine the concepts of virotherapy and suicide gene therapy.
Moreover TK-activity can be detected by noninvasive positron emission-computed tomography (PET) imaging, what could potentially facilitate virus monitoring in vivo.
Here, we report the generation of a novel oncolytic adenovirus that incorporates the Tat8-TK gene under the control of the Major Late Promoter in a highly selective backbone thus providing selectivity by targeting the retinoblastoma pathway.
The selective oncolytic TK virus, termed ICOVIR5-TK-L, showed reduced potency compared to a non-selective counterpart.
However the combination of ICOVIR5-TK-L with ganciclovir (GCV) induced a potent antitumoural effect similar to that of wild type adenovirus in a preclinical model of pancreatic cancer.
Although the treatment with GCV provoked a reduction in the viral yield, both in vitro and in vivo, a two-cycle treatment of virus and GCV resulted in an enhanced antitumoral response that correlated with high TK-activity, based on microPET measurements.
Thus, TK-expressing oncolytic adenoviruses can be traced by PET imaging providing real time information on the activity of the virus and its antitumoral potency can be optimized by GCV dosing.
PMID: 22028818
Identification and characterization of mechanism of action of P61-E7, a novel phosphine catalysis-based inhibitor of geranylgeranyltransferase-I.
Small molecule inhibitors of protein geranylgeranyltransferase-I (GGTase-I) provide a promising type of anticancer drugs.
Here, we first report the identification of a novel tetrahydropyridine scaffold compound, P61-E7, and define effects of this compound on pancreatic cancer cells.
P61-E7 was identified from a library of allenoate-derived compounds made through phosphine-catalyzed annulation reactions.
P61-E7 inhibits protein geranylgeranylation and blocks membrane association of geranylgeranylated proteins.
P61-E7 is effective at inhibiting both cell proliferation and cell cycle progression, and it induces high p21(CIP1/WAF1) level in human cancer cells.
P61-E7 also increases p27(Kip1) protein level and inhibits phosphorylation of p27(Kip1) on Thr187.
We also report that P61-E7 treatment of Panc-1 cells causes cell rounding, disrupts actin cytoskeleton organization, abolishes focal adhesion assembly and inhibits anchorage independent growth.
Because the cellular effects observed pointed to the involvement of RhoA, a geranylgeranylated small GTPase protein shown to influence a number of cellular processes including actin stress fiber organization, cell adhesion and cell proliferation, we have evaluated the significance of the inhibition of RhoA geranylgeranylation on the cellular effects of inhibitors of GGTase-I (GGTIs).
Stable expression of farnesylated RhoA mutant (RhoA-F) results in partial resistance to the anti-proliferative effect of P61-E7 and prevents induction of p21(CIP1/WAF1) and p27(Kip1) by P61-E7 in Panc-1 cells.
Moreover, stable expression of RhoA-F rescues Panc-1 cells from cell rounding and inhibition of focal adhesion formation caused by P61-E7.
Taken together, these findings suggest that P61-E7 is a promising GGTI compound and that RhoA is an important target of P61-E7 in Panc-1 pancreatic cancer cells.
PMID: 22028623
Discrimination between circulating endothelial cells and blood cell populations with overlapping phenotype reveals distinct regulation and predictive potential in cancer therapy.
Circulating endothelial cells (CECs) have been proposed to predict patient response to antiangiogenic cancer therapy.
However, contradictory reports and inconsistency in the phenotypic identification of CECs have led us to compare three cell populations with partially overlapping phenotype in cancer patients receiving chemotherapy and the antiangiogenic agent bevacizumab.
Patients (n = 20) with locally advanced pancreatic cancer were monitored during 16 weeks of neoadjuvant treatment with gemcitabine and bevacizumab.
Detection of circulating cell populations was based on the marker combination CD45, CD31, and CD146; levels of viable and dead (7-aminoactinomycin D-positive) cells were evaluated by flow cytometry in 2-week intervals.
We were able to discriminate and concomitantly monitor three cell populations elevated in cancer patients.
Whereas CECs were defined as CD45(-) CD31(+) CD146(+), the distinct populations of CD45(-) CD31(-) CD146(+) and CD45(-) CD31(high) CD146(-) cells were partly positive for CD3 and CD41, respectively.
CECs and CD45(-) CD31(-) CD146(+) cells increased during therapy; the rise in dead cells was positively correlated with patient response or survival.
Conversely, CD45(-) CD31(high) CD146(-) cells decreased in neoadjuvant treatment.
A highly significant correlation was established for improved patient response and a minor decrease in viable cell counts.
Flow cytometric CEC analysis based on CD45, CD31, and CD146 requires careful discrimination between blood cell populations with overlapping phenotype showing hallmarks of activated T cells and large platelets.
However, these three cell populations show distinct regulation during cancer therapy, and their concomitant analysis may offer extended prognostic and predictive information.
PMID: 22028618
Ectopic overexpression of Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) induces stromal expansion and metaplasia in the adult murine pancreas.
Ligand-dependent activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has been implicated in both tumor initiation and metastasis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC).
Prior studies in genetically engineered mouse models (GEMMs) have assessed the role of Hh signaling by cell autonomous expression of a constitutively active Gli2 within epithelial cells.
On the contrary, aberrant pathway reactivation in the human exocrine pancreas occurs principally as a consequence of Sonic Hh ligand (Shh) overexpression from epithelial cells.
To recapitulate the cognate pathophysiology of Hh signaling observed in the human pancreas, we examined GEMM where Hh ligand is conditionally overexpressed within the mature exocrine pancreas using a tamoxifen-inducible Elastase-Cre promoter (Ela-CreERT2;LSL-mShh).
We also facilitated potential cell autonomous epithelial responsiveness to secreted Hh ligand by generating compound transgenic mice with concomitant expression of the Hh receptor Smoothened (Ela-CreERT2;LSL-mShh;LSL-mSmo).
Of interest, none of these mice developed intraductal precursor lesions or PDAC during the follow-up period of up to 12 months after tamoxifen induction.
Instead, all animals demonstrated marked expansion of stromal cells, consistent with the previously described epithelial-to-stromal paracrine Hh signaling.
Hh responsiveness was mirrored by the expression of primary cilia within the expanded mesenchymal compartment and the absence within mature acinar cells.
In the absence of cooperating mutations, Hh ligand overexpression in the mature exocrine pancreas is insufficient to induce neoplasia, even when epithelial cells coexpress the Smo receptor.
This autochthonous model serves as a platform for studying epithelial stromal interactions in pancreatic carcinogenesis.
PMID: 22028587
Separation and identification of HSP-associated protein complexes from pancreatic cancer cell lines using 2D CN/SDS-PAGE coupled with mass spectrometry.
Protein complexes are a cornerstone of many biological processes and together they form various types of molecular machinery.
A broad understanding of these protein complexes is crucial for revealing and building models of protein function and regulation.
Pancreatic cancer is a highly lethal disease which is difficult to diagnose at early stage and even more difficult to cure.
In this study, we applied a gradient clear native gel system combined with subsequent second-dimensional SDS-PAGE to separate protein complexes from cell lysates of SW1990 and PANC-1 pancreatic cancer cell lines with different degrees of differentiation.
Ten heat-shock-protein- (HSP-) associated protein complexes were separated and identified, and the differentially expressed proteins related to cancers were also found, such as HSP60, protein disulfide-isomerase A4 (ERp72), and transitional endoplasmic reticulum ATPase (TER ATPase).
PMID: 22028089
Histologic grading the extent of residual carcinoma following neoadjuvant chemoradiation in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma: A predictor for patient outcome.
BACKGROUND: Several grading schemes for the extent of residual tumor in posttreatment pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) specimens have been proposed.
However, the prognostic significance of these grading schemes is unknown.
METHODS: Histopathologic slides of 223 cases who received neoadjuvant chemoradiation and PD were reviewed.
The extent of residual tumor was graded using both the College of American Pathologists (CAP) and the Evans grading systems.
The grading results were correlated with clinicopathological parameters and survival.
RESULTS: Among the 223 patients, 6 patients (2.7%) showed pathologic complete response (pCR; CAP grade 0 or Evans grade IV), 36 cases (16.1%) had minimal residual tumor (CAP grade 1 or Evans grade III), 124 cases (55.6%) had moderate response (CAP grade 2 or Evans grade IIb), and 57 cases (25.6%) had poor response (CAP grade 3, where 18 had Evans grade I and 39 had Evans grade IIa response).
Patients with pCR or minimal residual tumor (response group 1) had better survival rates than those with moderate and poor response (response group 2).
Response group 1 patients had lower posttherapy tumor and American Joint Committee on Cancer stages and lower rates of lymph node metastasis, positive resection margin, and recurrence and/or metastasis.
Grading the extent of residual tumor is an independent prognostic factor for overall survival in multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: pCR or minimal residual tumor in posttreatment PD specimens correlate with better survival in patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma who received neoadjuvant therapy and PD.
Histologic grading of the extent of residual tumor in PD specimen is an important prognostic factor in patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma who received neoadjuvant therapies.
Cancer 2011;.
© 2011 American Cancer Society.
PMID: 22027695
A polymeric nanoparticle encapsulated small-molecule inhibitor of Hedgehog signaling (NanoHHI) bypasses secondary mutational resistance to Smoothened antagonists.
Aberrant activation of the hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is one of the most prevalent abnormalities in human cancer.
Tumors with cell autonomous Hh activation (e.g., medulloblastomas) can acquire secondary mutations at the Smoothened (Smo) antagonist binding pocket, which render them refractory to conventional Hh inhibitors.
A class of Hh pathway inhibitors (HPI) has been identified that block signaling downstream of Smo; one of these compounds, HPI-1, is a potent antagonist of the Hh transcription factor Gli1 and functions independent of upstream components in the pathway.
Systemic administration of HPI-1 is challenging due to its minimal aqueous solubility and poor bioavailability.
We engineered a polymeric nanoparticle from [poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid); (PLGA)] conjugated with polyethylene glycol (PEG), encapsulating HPI-1 (NanoHHI).
NanoHHI particles have an average diameter of approximately 60 nm, forms uniform aqueous suspension, and improved systemic bioavailability compared with the parent compound.
In contrast to the prototype targeted Smo antagonist, HhAntag (Genentech), NanoHHI markedly inhibits the growth of allografts derived from Ptch(-/+); Trp53(-/-) mouse medulloblastomas that harbor a Smo(D477G) binding site mutation (P < 0.001), which is accompanied by significant downregulation of mGli1 as well as bona fide Hh target genes (Akna, Cltb, and Olig2).
Notably, NanoHHI combined with gemcitabine also significantly impedes the growth of orthotopic Pa03C pancreatic cancer xenografts that have a ligand-dependent, paracrine mechanism of Hh activation when compared with gemcitabine alone.
No demonstrable hematologic or biochemical abnormalities were observed with NanoHHI administration.
NanoHHI should be amenable to clinical translation in settings where tumors acquire mutational resistance to current Smo antagonists.
PMID: 22027689
MUC13 mucin augments pancreatic tumorigenesis.
The high death rate of pancreatic cancer is attributed to the lack of reliable methods for early detection and underlying molecular mechanisms of its aggressive pathogenesis.
Although MUC13, a newly identified transmembrane mucin, is known to be aberrantly expressed in ovarian and gastro-intestinal cancers, its role in pancreatic cancer is unknown.
Herein, we investigated the expression profile and functions of MUC13 in pancreatic cancer progression.
The expression profile of MUC13 in pancreatic cancer was investigated using a recently generated monoclonal antibody (clone PPZ0020) and pancreatic tissue microarrays.
The expression of MUC13 was significantly (P < 0.005) higher in cancer samples compared with normal/nonneoplastic pancreatic tissues.
For functional analyses, full-length MUC13 was expressed in MUC13 null pancreatic cancer cell lines, MiaPaca and Panc1.
MUC13 overexpression caused a significant (P < 0.05) increase in cell motility, invasion, proliferation, and anchorage-dependent or -independent clonogenicity while decreasing cell-cell and cell-substratum adhesion.
Exogenous MUC13 expression significantly (P < 0.05) enhanced pancreatic tumor growth and reduced animal survival in a xenograft mouse model.
These tumorigenic characteristics correlated with the upregulation/phosphorylation of HER2, p21-activated kinase 1 (PAK1), extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), Akt, and metastasin (S100A4), and the suppression of p53.
Conversely, suppression of MUC13 in HPAFII pancreatic cancer cells by short hairpin RNA resulted in suppression of tumorigenic characteristics, repression of HER2, PAK1, ERK, and S100A4, and upregulation of p53.
MUC13 suppression also significantly (P < 0.05) reduced tumor growth and increased animal survival.
These results imply a role of MUC13 in pancreatic cancer and suggest its potential use as a diagnostic and therapeutic target.
PMID: 22026922
Association between DNA-repair polymorphisms and survival in pancreatic cancer patients treated with combination chemotherapy.
This multicenter study evaluated the association of 11 candidate polymorphisms in eight genes with outcome of pancreatic cancer patients treated with the equivalent polychemotherapeutic regimens: cisplatin/epirubicin/capecitabine/gemcitabine, cisplatin/docetaxel/capecitabine/gemcitabine and gemcitabine/capecitabine plus epirubicin/cisplatin intra-arterial infusion.
Towards this end, polymorphisms were assessed in DNA from 122 pancreatic cancer stage-III/IV patients, and their associations with toxicity/response and progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival were evaluated using Pearson-χ(2) and log-rank test.
Patients harboring XPD Gln751Gln, XPD Asp312Asn + Asn312Asn or XRCC1 Arg399Gln + Gln399Gln genotypes had a worse prognosis.
XPD Gln751Gln (hazard ratio: 1.9; p = 0.003), as well as a combination of over two risk genotypes (hazard ratio: 2.7; p < 0.001), emerged as independent predictors for death risk at multivariate analysis.
No correlations were observed with toxicity.
Conversely, XPD Gln751Gln was associated with shorter PFS, while the lack of association with overall survival/PFS in gemcitabine monotherapy-treated patients suggested its role only for platinum-based regimens.
Polymorphisms of DNA-repair genes appear to be candidate biomarkers of primary resistance to gemcitabine/cisplatin-based polychemotherapeutic regimens.
The relatively small sample size, coupled with the retrospective and exploratory design of the present study, imply that these results should be considered as hypothesis generators, and should be further evaluated in larger and adequately designed retrospective/prospective studies.
PMID: 22025561
Chemotherapeutic properties of phospho-nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, a new class of anticancer compounds.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID) exhibit antineoplastic properties, but conventional NSAIDs do not fully meet safety and efficacy criteria for use as anticancer agents.
In this study, we evaluated the chemotherapeutic efficacy of 5 novel phospho-NSAIDs, each of which includes in addition to the NSAID moiety a diethylphosphate linked through a butane moiety.
All 5 compounds inhibited the growth of human breast, colon, and pancreatic cancer cell lines with micromolar potency.
In vivo investigations confirmed the antitumor activity of phospho-aspirin (PA) and phospho-sulindac (PS) in inhibiting tumor growth in established human xenograft models, in which cell proliferation was suppressed and apoptosis enhanced in the absence of detectable animal toxicity.
Notably, all of the phospho-NSAIDs tested induced reactive oxygen and nitrogen species in cultured cells, with PA and PS inducing detectable levels of oxidative stress in vivo that were associated positively with apoptosis and negatively with proliferation.
Potentially explaining these effects, all of the phospho-NSAIDs tested also inhibited the thioredoxin system and the redox sensitive transcription factor NF-κB.
Taken together, our findings show the strong anticancer efficacy and promising safety of phospho-NSAIDs in preclinical models of breast, colon, and pancreatic cancer, suggesting further evaluation as anticancer agents.
PMID: 22025163
First-in-man clinical trial of the oral pan-AKT inhibitor MK-2206 in patients with advanced solid tumors.
AKT signaling is frequently deregulated in human cancers.
MK-2206 is a potent, oral allosteric inhibitor of all AKT isoforms with antitumor activity in preclinical models.
A phase I study of MK-2206 was conducted to investigate its safety, maximum-tolerated dose (MTD), pharmacokinetics (PKs), pharmacodynamics (PDs), and preliminary antitumor efficacy.
Patients with advanced solid tumors received MK-2206 on alternate days.
Paired tumor biopsies were mandated at the MTD for biomarker studies.
PD studies incorporated tumor and hair follicle analyses, and putative predictive biomarker studies included tumor somatic mutation analyses and immunohistochemistry for phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) loss.
Thirty-three patients received MK-2206 at 30, 60, 75, or 90 mg on alternate days.
Dose-limiting toxicities included skin rash and stomatitis, establishing the MTD at 60 mg.
Drug-related toxicities included skin rash (51.5%), nausea (36.4%), pruritus (24.2%), hyperglycemia (21.2%), and diarrhea (21.2%).
PKs (area under the concentration-time curve from 0 to 48 hours and maximum measured plasma concentration) were dose proportional.
Phosphorylated serine 473 AKT declined in all tumor biopsies assessed (P = .015), and phosphorylated threonine 246 proline-rich AKT substrate 40 was suppressed in hair follicles at 6 hours (P = .008), on days 7 (P = .028) and 15 (P = .025) with MK-2206; reversible hyperglycemia and increases in insulin c-peptide were also observed, confirming target modulation.
A patient with pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PTEN loss; KRAS G12D mutation) treated at 60 mg on alternate days experienced a decrease of approximately 60% in cancer antigen 19-9 levels and 23% shrinkage in tumor measurements.
Two patients with pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors had minor tumor responses.
MK-2206 was well tolerated, with evidence of AKT signaling blockade.
Rational combination trials are ongoing to maximize clinical benefit with this therapeutic strategy.
PMID: 22024988
Acinar-to-ductal metaplasia accompanies c-myc-induced exocrine pancreatic cancer progression in transgenic rodents.
Several important characteristics of exocrine pancreatic tumor pathogenesis remain incompletely defined, including identification of the cell of origin.
Most human pancreatic neoplasms are ductal adenocarcinomas.
However, acinar cells have been proposed as the source of some ductal neoplasms through a process of acinar-to-ductal metaplasia.
The oncogenic transcription factor c-myc is associated with human pancreatic neoplasms.
Transgenic mice overexpressing c-myc under control of acinar cell-specific elastase (Ela) gene regulatory elements not only develop acinar cell carcinomas but also mixed neoplasms that display both acinar-like neoplastic cells and duct-like neoplastic cells.
In this report, we demonstrate that, first, c-myc is sufficient to induce acinar hyperplasia, though neoplastic lesions develop focally.
Second, cell proliferation remains elevated in the neoplastic duct cell compartment of mixed neoplasms.
Third, the proliferation/apoptosis ratio in cells from all lesion types remains constant, suggesting that differential regulation of these processes is not a feature of cancer progression in this model.
Fourth, before the development of mixed neoplasms, there is transcriptional activation of the duct cell-specific cytokeratin-19 gene promoter in multicellular foci of amylase-positive acinar neoplasms.
This observation provides direct evidence for metaplasia as the mechanism underlying development of ductal neoplastic cells within the context of an acinar neoplasm and suggests that the stimulus for this transformation acts over a multicellular domain or field within a neoplasm.
Finally, focal ductal elements develop in some acinar cell carcinomas in Ela-c-myc transgenic rats, indicating that myc-associated acinar-to-ductal metaplasia is not restricted to the mouse.
PMID: 22024966
Inferior survival of advanced pancreatic cancer patients who received gemcitabine-based chemotherapy but did not participate in clinical trials.
Advanced pancreatic cancer, even when treated, is highly lethal.
The best choice of gemcitabine-based therapy and the prognostic factors affecting the success of treatment remain uncertain.
We identified 159 of 1,475 patients with pancreatic cancer diagnosed in our institution and receiving gemcitabine-based chemotherapy between January 1995 and June 2007.
Univariate and multivariate analyses were used to evaluate the prognostic significance of various clinical parameters for overall survival (OS).
The median survival after gemcitabine-based therapy was 5.4 months; 89.9% (n = 143) had ductal adenocarcinoma, 55.3% (n = 88) with stage IV.
Gemcitabine alone was given to 60 (38%) patients, and gemcitabine with high-dose infusional fluorouracil (5-FU) with (n = 25) or without (n = 39) oxaliplatin was given to 64 (40%) patients.
All regimens correlated with OS (p = 0.042) but not with the response rate (RR; p = 0.3).
The overall RR was 11.1%, and all responders had a good performance status (PS).
The RRs to gemcitabine with infusional 5-FU, and gemcitabine with oxaliplatin and infusional 5-FU were 5.3 and 20.8%, respectively.
In a multivariate analysis, old age, advanced stage, poor PS and no enrollment in clinical trials were associated with inferior survival.
The outcome for patients who did not participate in clinical trials, regardless of gemcitabine-based treatment, is still bleak.
PMID: 22024761
Sinistral portal hypertension: clinical features and surgical treatment of chronic splenic vein occlusion.
Sinistral, or left-sided, portal hypertension (SPH) is a rare cause of upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage.
This retrospective analysis summarizes the clinical features of SPH and the results of surgical treatment.
Between 2000 and 2009, patients from our hospital diagnosed with SPH were identified.
Diagnosis of SPH was based on evidence of isolated splenic vein thrombosis, splenomegaly, gastroesophageal varices and exclusion of other causes of portal hypertension.
Eight males and 5 females were included in the study, with a mean age of 43.5 ± 6.4 years (range: 31-68 years).
Liver function was normal in all patients.
Causes of SPH were chronic pancreatitis (n = 7), pancreatic cancer (n = 3), pancreatic cysts (n = 2) and neuroendocrine tumor (n = 1).
The main clinical manifestations were gastrointestinal hemorrhage in 7 cases (53.8%), upper abdominal pain in 10 (76.9%) and hypersplenism in 12 (92.3%).
All patients had splenomegaly and gastroesophageal varices.
Twelve patients underwent splenectomy and 1 received surgical removal of a pancreatic cyst.
No major gastrointestinal tract rebleed occurred after a mean follow-up of 46 months (±7 months).
Two patients died of pancreatic cancer and 1 of acute myocardial infarction during follow-up.
SPH should be suspected in patients with upper gastrointestinal varices as well as unexplained splenomegaly with normal liver function.
Surgical intervention such as splenectomy offers a good long-term outcome in symptomatic patients.
PMID: 22024742
Interferon γ improves the vaccination potential of oncolytic parvovirus H-1PV for the treatment of peritoneal carcinomatosis in pancreatic cancer.
Oncolytic viruses with their capacity to specifically replicate in and kill tumor cells emerged as a novel class of cancer therapeutics.
Rat oncolytic parvovirus (H-1PV) was used to treat different types of cancer in preclinical settings and was lately successfully combined with standard gemcitabine chemotherapy in treating pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) in rats.
Our previous work showed that the immune system and particularly the release of interferon-gamma (IFNγ) seem to mediate the anticancer effect of H-1PV in that model.
Therefore, we reasoned that the therapeutic properties of H-1PV can be boosted with IFNγ for the treatment of late incurable stages of PDAC like peritoneal carcinomatosis.
Rats bearing established orthotopic pancreatic carcinomas with peritoneal metastases were treated with a single intratumoral (i.t.) or intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of 5 x 10⁸ plaque forming units of H-1PV with or without concomitant IFNγ application.
Intratumoral injection proved to be more effective than the intraperitoneal route in controlling the growth of both the primary pancreatic tumors and peritoneal carcinomatosis, accompanied by migration of virus from primary to metastatic deposits.
Concomitant i.p.
treatment of H-1PV with recIFNγ resulted in improved therapeutic effect yielding an extended animal survival, compared with i.p.
treatment with H-1PV alone.
IFNγ application enhanced the H-1PV-induced peritoneal macrophage and splenocyte responses against tumor cells while causing a significant reduction in the titers of H1-PV-neutralising antibodies in ascitic fluid.
Thus, IFNγ co-application together with H-1PV might be considered as a novel therapeutic option to improve the survival of PDAC patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis.
PMID: 22024662
Well-differentiated papillary mesothelioma of the female peritoneum: a clinicopathologic study of 26 cases.
Well-differentiated papillary mesothelioma (WDPM) is an uncommon mesothelial tumor that occurs in the peritoneum of women over a wide age range.
Although considered a tumor of uncertain malignant potential, information about its biological behavior is still limited.
In this study, we present the clinicopathologic features of 26 cases of WDPM of the female peritoneum seen in our institution over a 20-year period (1990 to 2010).
Clinical information and pathology material were reviewed in all cases.
Patients ranged in age from 23 to 75 years (median, 47 y; mean, 48.6 y).
There was no history of asbestos exposure in any of our cases.
Ten patients had undergone surgery previously, and 6 had a history of endometriosis.
In 24 patients, the WDPM was an incidental finding during surgery for a benign or malignant lesion.
Only 2 patients presented with symptoms: 1 with an acute abdomen and the other with chronic pelvic pain.
The former had developed a small hemoperitoneum because of bleeding of 1 of the lesions of WDPM, whereas the latter had a 2-cm WDPM involving the distal fallopian tube.
The lesions were single or multiple (13 cases each) and ranged in size from 0.1 cm to 2 cm.
The following sites were involved: abdominal or pelvic peritoneum not otherwise specified (10 cases), omentum (7 cases), cul-de-sac (6 cases), colonic serosa (4 cases), small bowel mesentery (2 cases), uterine serosa (2 cases), stomach serosa (1 case), large bowel mesentery (1 case), fallopian tube (1 case), ovary (1 case), and inguinal hernia (1 case).
In all cases the lesions were excised.
Microscopically, all of our cases had the typical features described for WDPM (ie, a papillary architecture that may be accompanied by glandular/tubular patterns, nests of cells and individual cells, bland mesothelial cells, absent or rare mitotic figures).
The initial diagnosis in our cases was variable, including WDPM, mesothelial hyperplasia, malignant mesothelioma, serous tumor of low malignant potential of the peritoneum, papillary endosalpingiosis, and chronic xanthogranulomatous salpingiosis.
Follow-up was obtained for 25 patients, and it ranged from 4 to 192 months (mean, 47.5 mo; median, 32 mo); 22 patients are alive with no evidence of WDPM after a follow-up that ranged from 5 to 144 months.
One of these patients experienced recurrence of WDPM 46.5 months after initial diagnosis.
In this patient, WDPM was an incidental finding during a total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy for serous cystadenofibroma.
The recurrence was also an incidental finding during a colectomy for colonic adenocarcinoma.
This patient is alive with no other recurrences 73 months after initial diagnosis and 36 months after diagnosis of the recurrence.
Three patients died of other causes: pancreatic cancer at 4 months and 12 months and leukemia at 192 months.
Recognition of the histologic features of WDPM and proper clinical correlation allow for the correct diagnosis of this entity.
If necessary, immunohistochemical studies such as calretinin and keratin 5/6 facilitate the recognition of the mesothelial nature of this neoplasm.
Although no patient died of disease in this series, follow-up of patients with this diagnosis is warranted on the basis of possible recurrences or misdiagnosis of an undersampled malignant mesothelioma.
PMID: 22024222
Factors Predicting the Appearance of Neutropenia in Patients with Advanced Pancreatic Cancer Undergoing Gemcitabine Therapy.
Background/Aim: Factors predicting the appearance of neutropenia were evaluated in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer undergoing gemcitabine hydrochloride (GEM) therapy.
Methodology: The subjects were 92 patients who were diagnosed with unresectable advanced pancreatic cancer and underwent GEM therapy.
Mono- and multivariate analyses were performed concerning each evaluated factor.
The toxicity index (TI) was also prepared by combining the extracted predictive factors.
Results: Severe neutropenia occurred in 26 patients (28.2%).
As a result of multivariate analysis, the white blood cell count (WBC), CA19-9 and liver metastasis were extracted as factors independently and significantly contributing to the appearance of severe neutropenia (p<0.05).
The TI was prepared by combining these 3 factors and their regression coefficients: TI = 4.777-0.605xWBC (x103/microL)-0.511xlog (CA19-9)-1.285xliver metastasis.
Conclusions: The WBC, CA19-9 and liver metastasis before treatment were shown to be related to the appearance of severe neutropenia after GEM therapy.
PMID: 22005115
Therapeutic management of patients with gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumours.
Patients with neuroendocrine tumours (NETs) are best managed in a specialist centre as part of a multidisciplinary team comprising gastroenterologists, oncologists, endocrinologists, gastrointestinal and hepatopancreaticobiliary surgeons, pathologists, nuclear medicine physicians and technicians, radiologists, specialist nurses, pharmacists, biochemists and dieticians.
This should ideally be led by a clinician with experience and interest in NETs.
Although the number of medical treatments and clinical trials has increased in the decade, there is still a lack of prospective randomised trials; thus, management is mainly based on limited often single-centre studies, although there are now formal guidelines based on consensus expert opinion.
We have outlined the current optimal management of patients with NETs.
We have reviewed therapeutic options including surgery, somatostatin analogues and other biotherapies and peptide receptor-targeted therapy.
We have discussed the challenge in managing hepatic metastases including hepatic artery embolisation, ablation and orthotopic liver transplant.
In addition, we have briefly reviewed the emerging therapies such as the mammalian target of rapamycin and angiogenic inhibitors and the newer somatostatin analogues.
PMID: 22005114
Nuclear medicine techniques for the imaging and treatment of neuroendocrine tumours.
Nuclear medicine plays a pivotal role in the imaging and treatment of neuroendocrine tumours (NETs).
Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS) with [(111)In-DTPA(0)]octreotide has proven its role in the diagnosis and staging of gastroenteropancreatic NETs (GEP-NETs).
New techniques in somatostatin receptor imaging include the use of different radiolabelled somatostatin analogues with higher affinity and different affinity profiles to the somatostatin receptor subtypes.
Most of these analogues can also be labelled with positron-emitting radionuclides that are being used in positron emission tomography imaging.
The latter imaging modality, especially in the combination with computed tomography, is of interest because of encouraging results in terms of improved imaging quality and detection capabilities.
Considerable advances have been made in the imaging of NETs, but to find the ideal imaging method with increased sensitivity and better topographic localisation of the primary and metastatic disease remains the ultimate goal of research.
This review provides an overview of the currently used imaging modalities and ongoing developments in the imaging of NETs, with the emphasis on nuclear medicine and puts them in perspective of clinical practice.
The advantage of SRS over other imaging modalities in GEP-NETs is that it can be used to select patients with sufficient uptake for treatment with radiolabelled somatostatin analogues.
Peptide receptor radionuclide therapy (PRRT) is a promising new tool in the management of patients with inoperable or metastasised NETs as it can induce symptomatic improvement with all Indium-111, Yttrium-90 or Lutetium-177-labelled somatostatin analogues.
The results that were obtained with [(90)Y-DOTA(0),Tyr(3)]octreotide and [(177)Lu-DOTA(0),Tyr(3)]octreotate are even more encouraging in terms of objective tumour responses with tumour regression and documented prolonged time to progression.
In the largest group of patients receiving PRRT, treated with [(177)Lu-DOTA(0),Tyr(3)]octreotate, a survival benefit of several years compared with historical controls has been reported.
PMID: 22005113
Circulating biomarkers in gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumours.
PMID: 22005112
Classification and pathology of gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasms.
Gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasms (GEP-NENs) are composed of cells with a neuroendocrine phenotype.
The old and the new WHO classifications distinguish between well-differentiated and poorly differentiated neoplasms.
All well-differentiated neoplasms, regardless of whether they behave benignly or develop metastases, will be called neuroendocrine tumours (NETs), and graded G1 (Ki67 <2%) or G2 (Ki67 2-20%).
All poorly differentiated neoplasms will be termed neuroendocrine carcinomas (NECs) and graded G3 (Ki67 >20%).
To stratify the GEP-NETs and GEP-NECs regarding their prognosis, they are now further classified according to TNM-stage systems that were recently proposed by the European Neuroendocrine Tumour Society (ENETS) and the AJCC/UICC.
In the light of these criteria the pathology and biology of the various NETs and NECs of the gastrointestinal tract (including the oesophagus) and the pancreas are reviewed.
PMID: 22022519
Recruitment and activation of pancreatic stellate cells from the bone marrow in pancreatic cancer: a model of tumor-host interaction.
Chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer are characterised by extensive stellate cell mediated fibrosis, and current therapeutic development includes targeting pancreatic cancer stroma and tumor-host interactions.
Recent evidence has suggested that circulating bone marrow derived stem cells (BMDC) contribute to solid organs.
We aimed to define the role of circulating haematopoietic cells in the normal and diseased pancreas.
Whole bone marrow was harvested from male β-actin-EGFP donor mice and transplanted into irradiated female recipient C57/BL6 mice.
Chronic pancreatitis was induced with repeat injections of caerulein, while carcinogenesis was induced with an intrapancreatic injection of dimethylbenzanthracene (DMBA).
Phenotype of engrafted donor-derived cells within the pancreas was assessed by immunohistochemistry, immunofluorescence and in situ hybridisation.
GFP positive cells were visible in the exocrine pancreatic epithelia from 3 months post transplantation.
These exhibited acinar morphology and were positive for amylase and peanut agglutinin.
Mice administered caerulein developed chronic pancreatitis while DMBA mice exhibited precursor lesions and pancreatic cancer.
No acinar cells were identified to be donor-derived upon cessation of cerulein treatment, however rare occurrences of bone marrow-derived acinar cells were observed during pancreatic regeneration.
Increased recruitment of BMDC was observed within the desmoplastic stroma, contributing to the activated pancreatic stellate cell (PaSC) population in both diseases.
Expression of stellate cell markers CELSR3, PBX1 and GFAP was observed in BMD cancer-associated PaSCs, however cancer-associated, but not pancreatitis-associated BMD PaSCs, expressed the cancer PaSC specific marker CELSR3.
This study demonstrates that BMDC can incorporate into the pancreas and adopt the differentiated state of the exocrine compartment.
BMDC that contribute to the activated PaSC population in chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer have different phenotypes, and may play important roles in these diseases.
Further, bone marrow transplantation may provide a useful model for the study of tumor-host interactions in cancer and pancreatitis.
PMID: 22021552
Prevalence of small solid pseudopapillary tumors.
PMID: 22021518
Gallium-68-DOTA-NOC PET/CT of patients with gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors: a prospective single-center study.
The objective of this study was to evaluate the role of (68)Ga-labeled [1, 4, 7, 10-tetraazacyclododecane-1, 4, 7, 10-tetraacetic acid]-1-NaI(3)-octreotide (DOTA-NOC) PET/CT in the diagnosis and management of gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (NETs).
One hundred nine patients (median age, 50 years) with gastroenteropancreatic NETs underwent (68)Ga-DOTA-NOC PET/CT.
PET/CT was performed after injection of 132-222 MBq (4-6 mCi) of (68)Ga-DOTA-NOC.
Images were evaluated by two experienced nuclear medicine physicians both qualitatively as well as quantitatively (maximum standardized uptake value [SUV(max)]).
Results of PET/CT were compared with the results of conventional imaging.
Histopathology results, when available, and follow-up PET/CT or conventional imaging with biochemical markers were considered to be the reference standards.
Gallium-68-DOTA-NOC PET/CT showed sensitivity and specificity of 78.3% and 92.5%, respectively, for primary tumor and 97.4% and 100% for metastases.
It was better than a conventional imaging modality for the detection of both primary tumor (p < 0.001) and metastases (p < 0.0001).
It changed the management strategy in 21 patients (19%) and supported management decisions in 32 patients (29%).
Gallium-68-DOTA-NOC PET/CT appears to be a highly sensitive and specific modality for the detection of gastroenteropancreatic NET.
It is better than conventional imaging for the evaluation of gastroenteropancreatic NETs and can have a significant impact on patient management.
PMID: 22021503
Cyst-forming intraductal papillary neoplasm of the bile ducts: description of imaging and pathologic aspects.
Intraductal papillary neoplasm (IPN) of the bile duct is a newly described pathologic entity characterized by the presence of intraluminal tumors, which sometimes produce a large amount of mucin and form a cystic tumor.
Cystic IPN of the bile duct is different from biliary cystadenoma or cystadenocarcinoma in that the former produces intraductal microscopic and macroscopic papillary tumors without ovarian-like stroma, whereas the latter produce a mucin-containing septate cystic tumor without communication with bile duct and with ovarian-like stroma in the cyst wall.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the potential relationships between cyst-forming IPNs of the bile duct and peribiliary glands and also intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas.
From a cohort of 87 patients with surgically resected and pathologically proved IPN of the bile duct, 12 patients with cystic IPN of the bile duct who underwent CT (n = 12), MRCP (n = 3), ultrasound (n = 3), and ERCP (n = 4) were included.
Imaging findings were evaluated for the relationship of cystic tumors to the bile ducts; in particular, a diverticulum-like appearance was considered as suggestive of the peribiliary gland origin.
Pathologic examination was conducted, and both gross and microscopic findings were recorded.
Radiologic examination revealed aneurysm-like dilatation of the involved bile ducts in five patients and intrahepatic biliary cystic tumor in two patients.
Interestingly, the remaining five patients had diverticulum-like cystic tumor with or without communication; one patient had a cystic tumor laterally attached to the extrahepatic bile duct.
Histopathologically, cystic tumors are lined by atypical biliary epithelium showing intracystic papillary proliferation, with an appearance similar to that of pancreatic intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm.
This study suggests that cyst-forming IPN of the bile duct may be a biliary counterpart to pancreatic intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm.
In particular, at least some of the tumors seem to arise from peribiliary glands, and these cases might be a counterpart to branch-duct intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas, given the histologic similarity between peribiliary glands and pancreatic branch ducts.
PMID: 22020928
PPARγ potentiates anticancer effects of gemcitabine on human pancreatic cancer cells.
In order to improve the prognosis of patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer, there is an urgent need for enhancement of the anticancer effect of gemcitabine (Gem), a first-line drug for the disease.
Here, we demonstrated that ligands for peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ) such as pioglitazone (Pio) and rosiglitazone potentiated the cytotoxic action of Gem on human pancreatic cancer cells in a dosage-dependent manner.
Notably, the synergistic effect was PPARγ-dependent, since the effect was augmented by PPARγ overexpression and was attenuated by both a PPARγ inhibitor (GW9662) and PPARγ-specific siRNA.
To further increase the collaborative effect, the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor valproic acid (VPA), a known potentiator for PPARγ function, was added to the combinatorial treatment, robustly inducing apoptosis mediated by highly expressed death receptors, including Fas/CD95 and DR5.
In xenograft tumor experiments in nude mice, Gem plus Pio significantly suppressed tumor growth as compared with the control treatment, while Gem-only treatment did not.
Triple treatment with Gem, Pio, and VPA failed to demonstrate a significant antitumor effect when compared with Gem plus Pio in the current setting.
Considered together, Gem plus PPARγ ligands, including Pio, may have therapeutic advantage in the treatment of advanced pancreatic cancer.
Since Pio is widely used in the treatment of diabetes mellitus, it may become a feasible partner of Gem-based chemotherapy, fine-tuning the strength of the therapy in a dosage-dependent fashion.
PMID: 22020923
Long-term outcomes of neoadjuvant chemotherapy before chemoradiation for locally advanced pancreatic cancer.
BACKGROUND: Neoadjuvant chemotherapy before chemoradiation therapy (CRT) may improve outcomes for patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer, but optimal management remains controversial, and prior reports have limited follow-up.
METHODS: Seventy consecutive patients with unresectable (n = 46) or borderline resectable (n = 24) locally advanced pancreatic cancer were treated with CRT from 2005 to 2009.
Patients typically received 50.4 grays in 28 fractions (91%) with concurrent 5-fluorouracil (84%) or capecitabine (14%).
Forty patients received CRT alone, and 30 patients received neoadjuvant chemotherapy before CRT for a median of 4 months, typically gemcitabine (93%).
All patients without progression after neoadjuvant chemotherapy were offered CRT.
RESULTS: Median follow-up was 14.2 months (range, 3-57 months).
Fifty-three percent of patients in the CRT group versus 83% in the neoadjuvant chemotherapy before CRT group had unresectable tumors at diagnosis; after completion of CRT, 20% of patients in both groups underwent resection.
Compared with CRT alone, the neoadjuvant chemotherapy before CRT group demonstrated improved median overall survival (OS; 18.7 vs 12.4 months; P = .02) and progression-free survival (11.4 vs 6.7 months; P = .02).
On multivariate analysis, receipt of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (adjusted hazard ratio [HR], 0.49; 95% CI, 0.28-0.87; P = .02) and surgical resection (adjusted HR, 0.38; 95% CI, 0.17-0.85; P = .02) were associated with increased OS.
CONCLUSIONS: Gemcitabine-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy confers a significant OS advantage by allowing the selection of patients who will derive greatest benefit from CRT.
Median survival with this approach was similar to that seen with surgical resection.
Cancer 2011.
© 2011 American Cancer Society.
PMID: 22020918
The efficacy of a novel, dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor NVP-BEZ235 to enhance chemotherapy and antiangiogenic response in pancreatic cancer.
Gemcitabine has limited clinical benefits for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC).
The phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathways are frequently dysregulated in PDAC.
We investigated the effects of NVP-BEZ235, a novel dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, in combination with gemcitabine and endothelial monocyte activating polypeptide II (EMAP) in experimental PDAC.
Cell proliferation and protein expression were analyzed by WST-1 assay and Western blotting.
Animal survival experiments were performed in murine xenografts.
BEZ235 caused a decrease in phospho-AKT and phospho-mTOR expression in PDAC (AsPC-1), endothelial (HUVECs), and fibroblast (WI-38) cells.
BEZ235 inhibited in vitro proliferation of all four PDAC cell lines tested.
Additive effects on proliferation inhibition were observed in the BEZ235-gemcitabine combination in PDAC cells and in combination of BEZ235 or EMAP with gemcitabine in HUVECs and WI-38 cells.
BEZ235, alone or in combination with gemcitabine and EMAP, induced apoptosis in AsPC-1, HUVECs, and WI-38 cells as observed by increased expression of cleaved poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) and caspase-3 proteins.
Compared to controls (median survival: 16 days), animal survival increased after BEZ235 and EMAP therapy alone (both 21 days) and gemcitabine monotherapy (28 days).
Further increases in survival occurred in combination therapy groups BEZ235 + gemcitabine (30 days, P = 0.007), BEZ235 + EMAP (27 days, P = 0.02), gemcitabine + EMAP (31 days, P = 0.001), and BEZ235 + gemcitabine + EMAP (33 days, P = 0.004).
BEZ235 has experimental PDAC antitumor activity in vitro and in vivo that is further enhanced by combination of gemcitabine and EMAP.
These findings demonstrate advantages of combination therapy strategies targeting multiple pathways in pancreatic cancer treatment.
PMID: 22020914
Quantitative RT-PCR Analysis of MMR Genes on EUS-Guided FNA Samples From Focal Pancreatic Lesions.
Background/Aims: Pancreatic cancer is characterized by a variety of molecular alterations.
Mismatch Excision Repair (MMR) is a DNA repair system that eliminates mismatched base pairs and it plays an important role in the maintaining of genomic integrity.
The aim of the study was to assess the role of several MMR genes in the diagnosis of pancreatic cancer in samples collected by EUS-FNA procedure.
Methodology: The prospective study included 44 consecutive patients with pancreatic cancer (n=24) and chronic pseudotumoral pancreatitis (n=20).
EUS-FNA was performed in all the patients.
Gene analysis was performed by extracting the mRNA and by determining the expression of DNA repair genes (MLH1, MLH3, MSH6) using a standard algorithm.
Results: Total RNA was successfully isolated from all the EUS-FNA pancreatic samples.
We analyzed ROC curves to assess the significance of determining the expression of analyzed genes in EUS-FNA samples, obtaining a cut-off value of 476621mRNA copies/mL for MSH6, and sensitivity and specificity of 75.0% and 100%, respectively.
For MLH1 and MLH3, sensitivity and specificity were only satisfactory (64.65% and 76.11%, and 75.0% and 63.64%, respectively).
Conclusions: The quality and amount of cellular sampling using pancreatic EUS-FNA allow the extraction of sufficient quantities of RNA to perform qRT-PCR analysis.
The use of MMR genes for the differentiation between pseudotumoral chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer using a minimally invasive sampling technique could be a promising technique.
PMID: 22020907
Norepinephrine Stimulates Pancreatic Cancer Cell Proliferation, Migration and Invasion Via ß-Adrenergic Receptor-Dependent Activation of P38/MAPK Pathway.
Background/Aims: There is growing evidence that chronic stress is associated with cancer pathogenesis and progression, but the mechanisms involved in this association are poorly understood.
This study aims to examine the effect of stress hormone norepinephrine (NE) on proliferation, migration and invasion of human pancreatic cancer cells and the molecular pathway involved.
Methodology: PANC-1 cells were examined for the expression of ß-Adrenergic receptor (ß-AR) subtypes, ß1-AR, ß2-AR by RT-PCR and western blotting, respectively.
The PANC-1 cells proliferation, cell cycle distribution, cell migration and invasion were assessed by CCK-8, flow cytometry, scratch wound healing and transwell Matrigel, respectively.
Results: PANC-1 cells expressed both ß1-AR and ß2-AR protein.
Exposure of PANC-1 cells to increasing concentrations of NE stimulated cell proliferation in a dose-dependent fashion.
In addition, NE increased S-phase population and decreased G1 and G2-phase population of PANC-1 cells.
Furthermore, NE significantly enhanced migration and invasion of PANC-1 cells.
More strikingly, we observed that NE elevated P38/MAPK phosphorylation (Phos-p38) level.
These stimulatory effects were completely abolished by ß-AR antagonist propranolol (PRO) or P38/MAPK inhibitor SB203580.
Conclusions: NE could stimulate pancreatic cancer cell proliferation, migration and invasion through a ß-AR-dependent activation of P38/MAPK pathway involved.
PMID: 22020905
Use of Multidetector-Row Computed Tomography to Evaluate Branch Duct Type Intraductal Papillary Mucinous Neoplasms of the Pancreas: Influence on Surgical Decision-Making.
Background/Aims: The purpose of this study was to evaluate factors predictive of the malignant grade associated with branch duct type intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (BD-IPMN) using multidetector-row computed tomography (MDCT).
Methodology: We reviewed the morphological features of 26 BD-IPMNs using MDCT.
Tumor size, caliber of the main pancreatic duct, number of mural nodules, diameter of the largest mural nodule and volume of the largest mural nodule were assessed and correlated with the pathological findings.
Results: By multiple- and single-regression analyses and Mann-Whitney U test, significant differences in the caliber of the main pancreatic duct and number of mural nodules were observed between adenoma and non-invasive carcinoma and in the number of mural nodules between adenoma and invasive carcinoma.
No significant differences were observed between non-invasive carcinoma and invasive carcinoma.
Based on the differential diagnostic criterion of 1 or more mural nodules for distinguishing adenoma from non-invasive carcinoma and invasive carcinoma, the sensitivities were 60% and 100%, respectively, and the specificity was 93% for both.
Conclusions: Although it was impossible to distinguish non-invasive carcinoma from invasive carcinoma, MDCT was reliable for distinguishing adenoma from non-invasive carcinoma and invasive carcinoma.
PMID: 22020810
Modulation of GemOx chemotherapy according to CIRS in elderly patients with advanced pancreatic cancer.
The present study evaluated activity and toxicity of modulated doses of gemcitabine associated to oxaliplatin in patients with secondary CIRS and with locally advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma (LAPC) and metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma (MPC).
Since January 2006, untreated LAPC and MPC patients have been assessed with ADL, IADL, CIRS to modulate chemotherapy dosages according to co-morbidity stage.
Patiens aged<75 years, co-morbidity stage primary/intermediate, or ≥75 years and co-morbidity stage primary, received gemcitabine 1,000 mg/m² as a 10 mg/m²/min infusion on day 1 and oxaliplatin 70 mg/m² as a 2-h infusion on day 2 every 2 weeks.
Patiens aged<75 years, co-morbidity stage secondary or ≥75 years and co-morbidity stage intermediate/secondary patients received gemcitabine 800 mg/m².
Primary endpoint was the overall response rate (ORR).
Secondary endpoints were disease control rate (DCR), PFS, OS and toxicity.
Thirty-one patients were recruited: 26% (8/31) LAPC and 74% (23/31) MPC; median age 69 years.
Co-morbidity stage primary/intermediate, 19; secondary, 12.
Twenty-seven valuable patients: ORR 30% (CI±0.14); disease control rate 85% (CI±0.18).
Median follow-up 13 months: median PFS and OS were 6 and 15 months, respectively.
Valuable cycles 140.
Grade 3/4 toxicity per patient: leukopenia, 18.5%; neutropenia, 55,5%; thrombocytopenia, 7.4%; SGOT/SGPT, 7.4%; gamma-GT, 7.4%; fever without neutropenia, 3.7%.
Median received dose intensity: gemcitabine 400 mg/m2/w; oxaliplatin 35 mg/m2/w.
Modulation of GemOx chemotherapy according, to CIRS stage in advanced pancreatic cancer confirms reported efficacy and tolerability.
PMID: 22020429
Multidetector computed tomography in the study of pancreatic metastases.
PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to explore the diagnostic performance of multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) in characterising pancreatic metastases.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: CT examinations of 17 patients affected by pancreatic metastases were retrospectively reviewed.
The primary malignancy was renal cell carcinoma (RCC) in eight cases, uterine leiomyosarcoma in two, lung carcinoma in four and breast carcinoma in three.
CT images were assessed for lesion number, size and morphology.
RESULTS: Pancreatic lesions were solitary in seven cases and multiple in ten.
Lesion size ranged between 8 and 40 mm.
Metastases from RCC were hyperattenuating in the arterial phase, metastases from breast cancer and lung cancer were hypoattenuating and metastases from uterine leiomyosarcoma were inhomogeneous.
Precise lesion characterisation was obtained by using CT examination in 12 cases.
In the remaining five patients, all with solitary metastases from RCC, a precise diagnosis was not possible because the lesions could not be differentiated from a neuroendocrine tumour.
CONCLUSIONS: MDCT allowed pancreatic metastases characterisation in 70.5% of cases.
The lesions were the manifestation of widely disseminated neoplastic disease, with the exception of metastases from RCC, which were exclusively located in the pancreas.
PMID: 22020122
Accumulation of sub-100 nm polymeric micelles in poorly permeable tumours depends on size.
A major goal in cancer research is to develop carriers that can deliver drugs effectively and without side effects.
Liposomal and particulate carriers with diameters of ∼100 nm have been widely used to improve the distribution and tumour accumulation of cancer drugs, but so far they have only been effective for treating highly permeable tumours.
Here, we compare the accumulation and effectiveness of different sizes of long-circulating, drug-loaded polymeric micelles (with diameters of 30, 50, 70 and 100 nm) in both highly and poorly permeable tumours.
All the polymer micelles penetrated highly permeable tumours in mice, but only the 30 nm micelles could penetrate poorly permeable pancreatic tumours to achieve an antitumour effect.
We also showed that the penetration and efficacy of the larger micelles could be enhanced by using a transforming growth factor-β inhibitor to increase the permeability of the tumours.
PMID: 22019795
Use of samples from endoscopic ultrasound-guided 19-gauge fine-needle aspiration in diagnosis of autoimmune pancreatitis.
Histologic techniques are used to distinguish autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP) from pancreatic malignancies and to confirm the etiology of pancreatitis.
Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) is a well-established technique used in the diagnosis of pancreatic cancer.
However, it is unclear whether specimens obtained from pancreatic lesions by EUS-FNA are adequate for the histologic diagnosis of AIP, because the evaluation of tissue architecture and immunostaining assays usually require larger samples.
We evaluated samples collected by EUS-FNA with a conventional 19-gauge needle by histologic analysis, looking for features of AIP.
We analyzed data from 44 patients who were diagnosed with AIP and underwent EUS-FNA with a 19-gauge needle from January 2004 to September 2010.
The FNA specimens were reviewed by histologic analysis; AIP was diagnosed based on the presence of lymphoplasmacytic sclerosing pancreatitis or immunoglobulin (Ig)G4-positive plasma cells in the infiltrate.
The specimen amount was inadequate from 3 patients.
Among the remaining 41 patients, histopathologic analysis revealed lymphoplasmacytic sclerosing pancreatitis in 17 samples and IgG4-positive plasma cells in 5 (3 samples were positive for both); no samples had granulocytic epithelial lesions.
Therefore, 19 patients (43%) were diagnosed with AIP based on histologic analysis.
One patient had temporary abdominal pain.
EUS-FNA, with a 19-gauge needle, is a safe and reliable procedure for obtaining pancreatic samples for the histologic analysis of AIP.
Although it does not have a high diagnostic yield, it might be useful in patients without typical features of AIP because it would allow patients to avoid surgery.
PMID: 22019693
Induction of apoptosis by cinobufacini preparation through mitochondria- and Fas-mediated caspase-dependent pathways in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells.
Cinobufacini (Huachansu), an aqueous extract from the skins of Bufo bufo gargarizans Cantor, is a well-known traditional Chinese medicine widely used in clinical cancer therapy in China.
However, the precise mechanisms induced by cinobufacini in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells are still not very clear.
The aim of present study was to investigate possible apoptotic mechanisms induced by cinobufacini in HCC cell lines HepG(2) and Bel-7402.
We found that cinobufacini treatment resulted in a significant decrease in cell proliferation and induced apoptotic cell death with the increase of treatment time.
It indicated that cinobufacini-induced apoptosis was associated with mitochondria-mediated pathway including the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential (Δψm), the increase of Bax/Bcl-2 ratio, cytochrome c release, caspase-9 and caspase-3 activation, and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) degradation.
Additionally, cinobufacini also activated Fas-mediated apoptosis pathway obviously as evident by an increase in Fas expression, and caspase-8 and caspase-10 activation.
Moreover, the BH3-only protein Bid was cleaved into a truncated Bid (tBid) after cinobufacini treatment.
Taken together, these data suggested cinobufacini could induce apoptosis of HCC cells through mitochondria- and Fas-mediated caspase-dependent pathways with the increase of treatment time, which might provide an experimental evidence for cinobufacini treatment of HCC.
PMID: 22018953
Main dietary compounds and pancreatic cancer risk. The quantitative analysis of case-control and cohort studies.
Estimation of the role of main dietary compounds in the risk of developing pancreatic cancer.
Literature published till 2010 was reviewed and selected for further analysis.
The used terms were: red meat, minced meat, ham, bacon, sausages, white meat, poultry, vegetables, fish, eggs, fruits, lifestyle, diet, pancreatic cancer and pancreatic neoplasm.
The collected data were meta-analysed with calculation of combined relative risk and 95% confidence interval as well as studies heterogeneity.
A meta-analysis of 11 case-control studies indicates that red meat ingestion elevates pancreatic cancer risk by 48% (95% CI=1.25-1.76).
The vegetables and fruit reduce the risk by 38% (95% CI=0.54-0.73) and 29% (95% CI=0.59-0.84), respectively.
The pooled analyses of 10 cohort studies do not show significant relations between main dietary compound ingestion and pancreatic cancer risk.
The red meat intake is associated with elevated risk of pancreatic cancer in contrast to vegetables and fruit ingestion.
The ingestion of red meat, vegetables and fruit in cohort studies was not influenced on pancreatic cancer risk.
The role of fish, poultry and eggs was not significant in both case-control and cohort studies, thus further studies were needed.
PMID: 22018284
MicroRNA-10b is overexpressed in pancreatic cancer, promotes its invasiveness, and correlates with a poor prognosis.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been gaining attention as new, key molecules that contribute to carcinogenesis.
In pancreatic cancer, previous profiling analyses of miRNA expression have shown that several miRNAs are differently expressed in normal and cancerous tissues.
Several pancreatic cancer-specific miRNAs differed, however, in each analysis.
We investigated the miRNA expression profiles of the pancreatic cancer cell lines CAPAN-1 and CFPAC1 and an immortalized human normal pancreatic ductal epithelial cell line (HPDE) using a high-throughput, TaqMan, qRT-PCR array analysis.
We also analyzed the expression levels of this miRNA in microdissected (n = 15) and formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) (n = 115) samples from pancreatic cancers by quantitative RT-PCR.
Finally, we investigated the effects of this miRNA on the invasiveness of pancreatic cancer cells.
Based on the microarray analysis, miR-372, miR-146a, miR-204, miR-10a, and miR-10b showed particularly large differences (>10-fold changes) between both pancreatic cell lines and HPDE cells.
Thirteen of the 15 pancreatic cancer cell lines showed 2.1- to 36.4-fold (median, 15.3-fold) greater levels of miR-10b than HPDE cells.
Microdissection analysis revealed that miR-10b exhibited greater expression levels in pancreatic cancer cells (n = 5) than in normal pancreatic ductal cells (n = 10) (P < .020).
Analysis of FFPE samples showed that high miR-10b expression was associated with a lesser overall survival (P = .014).
Furthermore, miR-10b correlated with the invasiveness of pancreatic cancer cells (P < .01).
miR-10b is overexpressed in pancreatic cancer and may be involved in the invasiveness in pancreatic cancer cells, thereby leading to a poor prognosis.
PMID: 22016776
Benzyl isothiocyanate suppresses pancreatic tumor angiogenesis and invasion by inhibiting HIF-α/VEGF/Rho-GTPases: pivotal role of STAT-3.
Our previous studies have shown that benzyl isothiocyanate (BITC) suppresses pancreatic tumor growth by inhibiting STAT-3; however, the exact mechanism of tumor growth suppression was not clear.
Here we evaluated the effects and mechanism of BITC on pancreatic tumor angiogenesis.
Our results reveal that BITC significantly inhibits neovasularization on rat aorta and Chicken-Chorioallantoic membrane.
Furthermore, BITC blocks the migration and invasion of BxPC-3 and PanC-1 pancreatic cancer cells in a dose dependant manner.
Moreover, secretion of VEGF and MMP-2 in normoxic and hypoxic BxPC-3 and PanC-1 cells was significantly suppressed by BITC.
Both VEGF and MMP-2 play a critical role in angiogenesis and metastasis.
Our results reveal that BITC significantly suppresses the phosphorylation of VEGFR-2 (Tyr-1175), and expression of HIF-α.
Rho-GTPases, which are regulated by VEGF play a crucial role in pancreatic cancer progression.
BITC treatment reduced the expression of RhoC whereas up-regulated the expression of tumor suppressor RhoB.
STAT-3 over-expression or IL-6 treatment significantly induced HIF-1α and VEGF expression; however, BITC substantially suppressed STAT-3 as well as STAT-3-induced HIF-1α and VEGF expression.
Finally, in vivo tumor growth and matrigel-plug assay show reduced tumor growth and substantial reduction of hemoglobin content in the matrigel plugs and tumors of mice treated orally with 12 µmol BITC, indicating reduced tumor angiogenesis.
Immunoblotting of BITC treated tumors show reduced expression of STAT-3 phosphorylation (Tyr-705), HIF-α, VEGFR-2, VEGF, MMP-2, CD31 and RhoC.
Taken together, our results suggest that BITC suppresses pancreatic tumor growth by inhibiting tumor angiogenesis through STAT-3-dependant pathway.
PMID: 22016635
Looking to the future: biomarkers in the management of pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
The incidence and mortality of pancreas cancer converge.
There has been little advancement in the treatment of pancreas cancer since the acceptance of gemcitabine as the standard therapy.
Unfortunately, the efficacy of gemcitabine is dismal.
While there is much discussion for the development of biomarkers to help direct therapy in this area, there is little action to move them into clinical practice.
Herein, we review potential pancreatic cancer biomarkers and discuss the limitations in their implementation.
PMID: 22016596
Primary adenosquamous cell carcinoma of the pancreas: a case report with a review of the Korean literature.
The most common pancreatic cancer is adenocarcinoma.
Primary adenosquamous cell carcinoma of the pancreas is very rare and aggressive.
A 46-year-old man presented with a 3-month history of dyspepsia and a 7-kg weight loss.
The physical examination showed tenderness of the right upper quadrant of the abdomen.
There was no jaundice.
Amylase and lipase were elevated.
CA 19-9 was elevated to 566.7 U/mL.
Gastroduodenoscopy showed a hard ulceroinfiltrative mass with a yellowish exudate that bled readily on touch in the second portion of the duodenum.
Abdominal computed tomography showed a 7.1 × 6.3-cm heterogeneously enhancing mass in the pancreatic head.
The pancreatic mass had invaded the duodenum wall, gastric antrum, and gastroduodenal artery sheath.
Fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the pancreatic mass revealed adenosquamous cell carcinoma, anaplastic type.
We concluded that an adenosquamous cell carcinoma of pancreas had invaded the duodenal mucosa causing ulceration.
PMID: 22016467
Copy number variation at 6q13 functions as a long-range regulator and is associated with pancreatic cancer risk.
Copy number variations (CNVs) have been recognized to contribute to phenotypic variations and to be associated with susceptibility to certain complex diseases.
This study examined the functional significance of CNVR2966.1 at 6q13 and its association with pancreatic cancer susceptibility.
The CNVR2966.1 was found to be a 10,379 bp nucleotides deletion/insertion within the uniform boundaries chromosome 6: 74 648 791-74 659 169.
Luciferase reporter gene assays revealed an active regulator in CNVR2966.1, which was demonstrated by circular chromosome conformation capture assays to physically interact with the upstream functional sequence of CDKN2B.
CDKN2B transcription levels in pancreatic tissues were therefore significantly higher in individuals with two copies of CNVR2966.1 than in those with low copy number of CNVR2966.1.
The risk of pancreatic cancer observed in 1027 cases and 1031 controls was significantly associated with copy number of CNVR2966.1, with the odds ratio being 1.31 (95% confidence interval = 1.08-1.60; P = 0.007) for one copy genotype compared with two copies genotype.
These results suggest that CNVR2966.1 is associated with pancreatic cancer risk probably owing to its effect on long-range regulation of CDKN2B.
PMID: 22015974
Clinical Implications of Mucinous Nonneoplastic Cysts of the Pancreas.
OBJECTIVES:: An undercharacterized subclass of pancreatic mucinous cysts without histologic characteristics of neoplasia is emerging.
This article aimed to highlight the clinical characteristics and implications of this new subset of pancreatic cystic lesions.
METHODS:: The clinical, radiologic, and pathologic features of all cysts that underwent operative resection at a tertiary referral pancreatic disease center from February 2005 to June 2009 were reviewed.
Immunohistochemistry for mucinous peptide antigens was selectively performed.
RESULTS:: Of 104 operations, a pathologic examination revealed 52 intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms, 9 mucinous cystadenomas, 17 serous cystadenomas, 9 pseudocysts, 5 solid pseudopapillary tumors, 2 carcinomas, 1 cystic pancreatic endocrine tumor, and 2 other cystic lesions.
Seven mucinous cysts without neoplastic features were identified, representing 2% of all pancreatic resections, 6.7% of all resected cysts, and 10.3% of the 68 mucinous cysts.
There was no evidence of cytologic atypia, papillary growth, or ovarian-type stroma in any of the cases.
MUC1, MUC2, and MUC5AC were expressed in 83%, 0%, and 100%, respectively.
There has been no recurrence with a mean follow-up of 44 months.
CONCLUSIONS:: This underappreciated entity belongs to the family of mucinous pancreatic cysts.
However, unifying clinical characteristics that would prevent unnecessary resections in patients harboring these seemingly benign lesions are currently lacking.
PMID: 22015969
Proteomic analysis of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded pancreatic tissue using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry.
FFPE tissue is a standard method of specimen preservation for hospital pathology departments.
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue banks are a resource of histologically characterized specimens for retrospective biomarker investigation.
We aim to establish liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry analysis of FFPE pancreatic tissue as a suitable strategy for the study of the pancreas proteome.
We investigated the proteomic profile of FFPE pancreatic tissue specimens, using liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry, from 9 archived specimens that were histologically classified as normal (n = 3), chronic pancreatitis (n = 3), and pancreatic cancer (n = 3).
We identified 525 nonredundant proteins from 9 specimens.
Implementing our filtering criteria, 78, 15, and 21 proteins were identified exclusively in normal, chronic pancreatitis, and pancreatic cancer specimens, respectively.
Several proteins were identified exclusively in specimens with no pancreatic disease: spink 1, retinol dehydrogenase, and common pancreatic enzymes.
Similarly, proteins were identified exclusively in chronic pancreatitis specimens: collagen α1 (XIV), filamin A, collagen α3 (VI), and SNC73.
Proteins identified exclusively in pancreatic cancer included annexin 4A and fibronectin.
We report that differentially expressed proteins can be identified among FFPE tissue specimens originating from individuals with different pancreatic histologic findings.
The mass spectrometry-based method used herein has the potential to enhance biomarker discovery and chronic pancreatitis research.
CP - chronic pancreatitis, FFPE - formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded, GO - gene ontology, ID - inner diameter, KEGG - Kyoto Encyclopedia of Gene and Genomes, LC-MS/MS - liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry, LCM - laser capture microdissection, NP - normal pancreas, PC - pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22015968
Genes related to diabetes may be associated with pancreatic cancer in a population-based case-control study in Minnesota.
Type 2 diabetes is associated with increased pancreatic cancer risk; however, the nature of this relationship is not clear.
We examined the link between 10 diabetes-related single-nucleotide polymorphisms and pancreatic cancer in a case-control study conducted in 1994 to 1998.
Cases (n = 162) were ascertained from hospitals in the Twin Cities and Mayo Clinic, Minn.
Controls (n = 540) from the general population were frequency matched by age, sex, and race.
Unconditional logistic regression provided odds ratios of pancreatic cancer and 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs).
In a multivariate-adjusted model, a significant association was observed only for rs780094 in the glucokinase regulator (GCKR) gene: odds ratios for pancreatic cancer were 1.00 for TT, 1.35 (95% CI, 0.71-2.58) for CT, and 2.14 (95% CI, 1.12-4.08) for CC genotypes (P trend = 0.01) and did not change after the adjustment for diabetes.
This study provides the first evidence that GCKR rs780094, a single-nucleotide polymorphism related to diabetes, may be associated with pancreatic cancer risk.
Although the results from this analysis are preliminary, there is a biologic plausibility for such an association.
PMID: 22015691
Role of lipoxins, resolvins, and other bioactive lipids in colon and pancreatic cancer.
Unresolved inflammation, due to insufficient production of proresolving anti-inflammatory lipid mediators, can lead to an increased risk of tumorigenesis and tumor cell invasiveness.
Various bioactive lipids, particularly those formed by cyclooxygenase (COX) and lipoxygenase (LOX) enzymes, have been well established as therapeutic targets for many epithelial cancers.
Emerging studies suggest that there is a role for anti-inflammatory bioactive lipids and their mediators during the resolution phase of inflammation.
These proresolving bioactive lipids, including lipoxins (LXs) and resolvins (RVs), have potent anti-inflammatory and anti-carcinogenic properties.
The molecular signaling pathways controlling generation and degradation of the proresolving mediators LXs and RVs are now being elucidated, and the component molecules may serve as new targets for regulation of inflammation and inflammation-associated cancers like colon and pancreatic cancers.
This review will highlight the recent advances in our understanding of how these bioactive lipids and proresolving mediators may function with various immune cells and cytokines in inhibiting tumor cell proliferation and progression and invasiveness of colon and pancreatic cancers.
PMID: 22015618
The influence of staple size on fistula formation following distal pancreatectomy.
Pancreatic fistula continues to be a source of significant morbidity following distal pancreatic resections.
The technique of pancreatic division varies widely among surgeons, and there is no evidence that identifies a single method as superior.
In our practice, the technique of distal pancreatic resection has evolved from cut-and-sew to stapled technique with green and recently white cartridge.
The aim of our study was to evaluate the rate of clinically significant fistulas [International Study Group on Pancreatic Fistula (ISGPF) grade B or C] following distal pancreatectomy and to identify variables associated with a low rate of fistula development.
Clinical records of all patients who underwent distal pancreatic resections between February 1999 and July 2010 by a single surgeon were retrospectively reviewed focusing on the incidence and type of pancreatic fistula as defined by ISGPF.
Study variables included age, gender, surgical approach, extent of resection, ASA classification, type of stapler cartridge, use of Seamguard™, and ISGPF classification.
Statistical analysis was performed using Fisher's exact test, and univariate and multivariate logistic regression.
Sixty-four patients (median age 60, range 21-85; 54% male) underwent distal pancreatic resection (laparoscopy 50% vs.
open 50%).
The most common indications were pancreatic adenocarcinoma (N = 15; 23%) and neuroendocrine neoplasms (N = 14; 22%).
Clinically significant pancreatic fistula developed in 24% (N = 15).
The rate of fistula with cut-and-sew technique was 36% (4/11), with stapled green cartridge 31% (9/29) and only 5% (1/21) with stapled vascular cartridge.
Univariate logistic regression identified vascular cartridge size (p = 0.04, OR 0.11) and open stapled technique (p = 0.05, OR 0.12) as variables significantly associated with a low fistula rate.
Both vascular cartridge size (p = 0.05, OR 0.10) and open stapled technique (p = 0.04, OR 0.08) remained significant when analyzed by multivariate logistic regression.
Division of pancreatic parenchyma with vascular cartridges resulted in significantly (p = 0.03, OR 9.0) lower fistula rate compared to green cartridges.
The use of Seamguard™ did not affect fistula rate (16% vs.
27%; p = 0.34) nor did the performance of multivisceral resection vs.
distal pancreatectomy/splenectomy alone (21% vs.
23%, p = 1.0).
The optimal technique of pancreatic division has not been conclusively established.
Dividing the pancreas utilizing vascular (2.5 mm) staple cartridges significantly decreased the rate of clinically significant pancreatic fistula and we have changed our practice accordingly.
A prospective randomized trial is necessary to validate these results.
PMID: 22014283
Increasing stability and toxicity of Pseudomonas exotoxin by attaching an antiproteasic Peptide.
Trypsin-like activities are present within the endocytic pathway and allow cells to inactivate a fraction of incoming toxins, such as Pseudomonas exotoxin (PE), that require endocytic uptake before reaching the cytosol to inactivate protein synthesis.
PE is a favorite toxin for building immunotoxins.
The latter are promising molecules to fight cancer or transplant rejection, and producing more active toxins is a key challenge.
More broadly, increasing protein stability is a potentially useful approach to improve the efficiency of therapeutic proteins.
We report here that fusing an antiproteasic peptide (bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor, BPTI) to PE increases its toxicity to human cancer cell lines by 20-40-fold.
Confocal microscopic examination of toxin endocytosis, digestion, and immunoprecipitation experiments showed that the fused antiproteasic peptide specifically protects PE from trypsin-like activities.
Hence, the attached BPTI acts as a bodyguard for the toxin within the endocytic pathway.
Moreover, it increased the PE elimination half-time in mice by 70%, indicating that the fused BPTI stabilizes the toxin in vivo.
This BPTI-fusion approach may be useful for protecting other circulating or internalized proteins of therapeutic interest from premature degradation.
PMID: 22014215
Sustained expression of the RON receptor tyrosine kinase by pancreatic cancer stem cells as a potential targeting moiety for antibody-directed chemotherapeutics.
Cancer stem cells (CSCs) contribute to pancreatic cancer tumorigenesis through tumor initiation, drug resistance, and metastasis.
Currently, therapeutics targeting pancreatic CSCs are under intensive investigation.
This study tested a novel strategy that utilizes the RON receptor as a drug delivery moiety for increased therapeutic activity against pancreatic CSCs.
CD24(+)CD44(+)ESA(+) triple-positive pancreatic CSCs (CSCs(+24/44/ESA)) were obtained from spheroids of pancreatic L3.6pl cancer cells by sequential magnetic cell sorting methods.
These cells displayed a spherical growth pattern, expressed the unique self-renewal marker Bmi-1, redifferentiated into an epithelial phenotype, acquired an epithelial to mesenchymal phenotype, and caused tumor formation in animal models.
Among several receptor tyrosine kinases examined, RON was highly expressed and sustained by CSCs(+24/44/ESA).
This feature provided the cellular basis for validating the therapeutic effectiveness of anti-RON antibody Zt/c9-directing doxorubicin-immunoliposomes (Zt/c9-Dox-IL).
Zt/c9-Dox-IL specifically interacted with CSCs(+24/44/ESA) and rapidly caused RON internalization, which led to the uptake of liposome-coated Dox.
Moreover, Zt/c9-Dox-IL was effective in reducing viability of L3.6pl cells and CSCs(+24/44/ESA).
The IC(50) values between free Dox (62.0 ± 3.1 μM) and Zt/c9-Dox-IL (95.0 ± 6.1 μM) treated CSCs(+24/44/ESA) were at relatively comparable levels.
In addition, Zt/c9-Dox-IL in combination with small molecule inhibitors lapatinib, sunitinib, or dasatinib further reduced the viability of CSCs(+24/44/ESA).
In conclusion, RON expression by CSCs(+24/44/ESA) is a suitable molecule for the targeted delivery of chemoagents.
The anti-RON antibody-directed delivery of chemotherapeutics is effective in reducing viability of pancreatic CSCs.
PMID: 22014028
Sensory Epithelial Cells Acquire Features of Prosensory Cells Via Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition.
Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays a critical role during normal development and in adult tissue repair.
It is known that immortalized epithelial cells can undergo an EMT and become cancer stem cells, and that epithelial cells from mouse pancreatic islet and avian inner ear can acquire mesenchymal traits in vitro via EMT.
However, it is unclear whether epithelial cells from mammalian sensory system can undergo an EMT and obtain features of stem/progenitor cells.
In this study, we used mouse utricle sensory epithelial cells (MUCs) as a mammalian cell model to address this issue.
When cultured on 2-dimensional substrates, dissociated MUCs gradually lost their columnar shape and started to expand on the substrate with downregulation of expression of epithelial junction markers and upregulation of genes and proteins that are widely shown in mesenchymal cells.
Moreover, MUCs expressed genes and proteins that are usually presented in prosensory epithelial cells and stem cells.
These MUCs showed potential to differentiate into epithelial cells via a reverse EMT when they were forced to suspend in culture medium.
Our findings reveal that sensory epithelial cells from mammalian tissue can undergo an EMT to become cells expressing features of stem cells that can be induced to become epithelial cells via a reverse EMT.
The outcomes of this study may provide a novel approach to generate epithelial progenitors for use in cell replacement therapy to treat a number of human diseases, such as hearing loss and vision loss.
PMID: 22012910
It is diamond cut diamond when CT meets MR imaging in the evaluation of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22012608
Malignant pancreatic tumors in children and young adults: evaluation of 228 patients identified through the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Result (SEER) database.
Malignant pancreatic tumors are rare in young patients, few epidemiologic data are available.
We reviewed prognostic factors and outcome of 228 patients <30 years with malignant pancreatic tumors identified through the U.S.
National Cancer Institute's SEER (Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results) Public-use Database from 1973 to 2004.
Cases were grouped using the ICD-O-3.
5-year overall survival (OAS) was assessed by gender, ethnicity, SEER stage, and 5-year age intervals using univariate and Cox regression analysis.
228 patients with malignant pancreatic tumors were identified, resulting in an incidence of 0.46/million (100 carcinomas, 85 endocrine tumors, 8 solid pseudopapillary neoplasms (SPN), 11 pancreatoblastomas) in the USA.
OAS was worse in males than females (37% vs.
55%, p=0.005).
OAS according to stage was 87%, 68%, 21% for local (n=54), regional (n=42), distant metastatic disease (n=108), respectively.
OAS of patients with carcinoma was 33%, endocrine tumors 58%, SPNs 88%, pancreatoblastomas 66%.
Cox regression revealed stage (p=< 0.001), histology (p=< 0.001), age group (p=0.05) to be independent prognostic factors.
Malignant pancreatic tumors are extremely rare in children and young adults.
Entities change over the age groups towards more carcinomas with worse outcome in older patients.
Tumor stage, histology and age group are important predictors for outcome.
International collaboration is needed to learn more about pediatric pancreatic tumors.
PMID: 22012255
OGX-427 inhibits tumor progression and enhances gemcitabine chemotherapy in pancreatic cancer.
Despite many advances in oncology, almost all patients with pancreatic cancer (PC) die of the disease.
Molecularly targeted agents are offering hope for their potential role in helping translate the improved activity of combination chemotherapy into improved survival.
Heat shock protein 27 (Hsp27) is a chaperone implicated in several pathological processes such as cancer.
Further, Hsp27 expression becomes highly upregulated in cancer cells after chemotherapy.
Recently, a modified antisense oligonucleotide that is complementary to Hsp27 (OGX-427) has been developed, which inhibits Hsp27 expression and enhances drug efficacy in cancer xenograft models.
Phase II clinical trials using OGX-427 in different cancers like breast, ovarian, bladder, prostate and lung are in progress in the United States and Canada.
In this study, we demonstrate using TMA of 181 patients that Hsp27 expression and phosphorylation levels increase in moderately differentiated tumors to become uniformly highly expressed in metastatic samples.
Using MiaPaCa-2 cells grown both in vitro and xenografted in mice, we demonstrate that OGX-427 inhibits proliferation, induces apoptosis and also enhances gemcitabine chemosensitivity via a mechanism involving the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E.
Collectively, these findings suggest that the combination of Hsp27 knockdown with OGX-427 and chemotherapeutic agents such as gemcitabine can be a novel strategy to inhibit the progression of pancreas cancer.
PMID: 22012027
Neoadjuvant/Preoperative Gemcitabine for Patients with Localized Pancreatic Cancer: A Meta-analysis of Prospective Studies.
BACKGROUND: Long-term prognosis for localized pancreatic cancer remains poor.
We sought to assess the benefit of neoadjuvant/preoperative chemotherapy with or without radiotherapy.
METHODS: Prospective studies where gemcitabine with or without radiotherapy was provided before surgery in patients with initially resectable or unresectable disease were reviewed by meta-analysis.
Primary outcome was survival, and secondary outcomes were tumor response after therapy, toxicity, surgical exploration, and resection rates.
RESULTS: Twenty independent studies with 707 participants were included, 366 with resectable lesions and 341 with unresectable lesions.
Seven studies were phase I/II trials, 10 phase II, and 3 prospective cohort studies.
Estimated 1- and 2-year survival probabilities after resection were 91.7% (95% confidence interval [CI] 75-100) and 67.2% (95% CI 38-87) for initially resectable patients, and 86.3% (95% CI 78-100) and 54.2% (95% CI 25-100) for initially unresectable patients.
The complete/partial response rate was 12% (95% CI 4-23) and 27% (95% CI 18-38) in resectable and unresectable lesions, respectively.
The rate of treatment-related grade 3-4 toxicity was 31% (95% CI 21-42).
Of resectable patients evaluable after restaging, 91% (95% CI 83-97) underwent surgery, and 82% (95% CI 65-95) of explored patients underwent resection.
R0 resections amounted to 89% (95% CI 83-94).
Of unresectable patients evaluable after restaging, 39% (95% CI 28-50) underwent surgery, and 68% (95% CI 53-82) of explored patients were resected, with 60% (95% CI 50-71) R0 resections.
CONCLUSIONS: Current analysis provides marginal support to the assumed benefits of neoadjuvant therapies for patients with resectable cancer, and indicates a potential advantage only for a minority of those with unresectable lesions.
PMID: 22011943
Risk factors for pancreatitis following transpapillary self-expandable metal stent placement.
Pancreatitis is one of complications after self-expandable metal stent (SEMS) placement.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate risk factors for pancreatitis after endoscopic SEMS placement for malignant biliary obstruction (MBO).
We retrospectively reviewed 370 consecutive patients who underwent initial transpapillary SEMS placement for biliary decompression.
The characteristics of inserted SEMSs were classified according to axial and radial force.
Pancreatitis following SEMS insertion was observed in 22 patients (6%).
All of them were mild according to consensus criteria.
Univariate analysis indicated that injections of contrast into the pancreatic duct (frequency of pancreatitis, 10.3%), the placement of an SEMS with high axial force (8.3%), and nonpancreatic cancer (16.1%) significantly contributed to the development of pancreatitis, whereas female gender, a younger age, a covered SEMS, and a SEMS with high radial force or without a biliary sphincterotomy did not.
In a multivariate risk model, SEMSs with high axial force (odds ratio [OR], 3.69; p = 0.022) and nonpancreatic cancer (OR, 5.52; p < 0.001) were significant risk factors for pancreatitis.
SEMSs with high axial force and an etiology of MBO other than pancreatic cancer were strongly associated with a high incidence of pancreatitis following transpapillary SEMS placement in patients with distal MBO.
PMID: 22011302
Education and imaging. Hepatobiliary and pancreatic: Blocked metal biliary stent.
PMID: 22011251
Cytotoxic T-Lymphocyte Antigen-4 +49G/A Polymorphism and Susceptibility to Pancreatic Cancer.
Although pancreatic cancer has been extensively studied, few risk factors have been identified.
Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4) plays important roles in downregulating T-cell activation, thereby attenuating antitumor responses and increasing cancer susceptibility.
The CTLA-4 gene +49G/A polymorphism (rs231775) has been reported to be associated with various cancers.
The current study evaluated the association of the CTLA-4 gene +49G/A polymorphism with pancreatic cancer in the Chinese population.
Six hundred and two pancreatic cancer patients and 651 healthy controls were investigated for CTLA-4 +49G/A polymorphism by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis.
Data showed that prevalence of CTLA-4 gene +49 AA genotype and +49 A allele was significantly higher in pancreatic patients compared to controls (odds ratio [OR]=2.20, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.23-2.95, p=0.007; OR=1.32, 95% CI: 1.03-1.69, p=0.029; and OR=1.47, 95% CI: 1.03-2.09, p=0.033).
These results indicate that the CTLA-4 +49G/A polymorphism is associated with increased risk of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22010875
Immunodiagnostic Value of Combined Detection of Autoantibodies to Tumor-associated Antigens as Biomarkers in Pancreatic Cancer.
Previous studies demonstrated that cancer sera contain antibodies, which react with a unique group of autologous cellular antigens called tumour-associated antigens (TAAs).
This study determines whether a panel of TAAs would enhance antibody detection and be a useful approach in pancreatic cancer (PC) detection and diagnosis.
The panel of TAAs was composed of six TAAs including p53, p16, p62, survivin, Koc and IMP1 full-length recombinant proteins.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was used to detect antibodies against these six TAAs in 23 sera from patients with PC and also 23 sera from normal individuals.
Antibody frequency to any individual TAA in PC was variable and ranged from 14.7% to 30.4%.
With the successive addition of TAAs to a final total of six antigens, there was a stepwise increase in positive antibody reactions reaching a sensitivity of 60.9% and a specificity of 87.0% in PC.
Positive and negative likelihood ratio were 4.685 and 0.449, respectively.
Positive and negative predictive values were, respectively, 82.4% and 69.0%.
Agreement rate and Kappa value were 73.9% and 0.478, respectively.
The data from this study support our previous hypothesis that using a panel of appropriately selected TAAs can enhance autoantibody detection in immunodiagnosis of PC.
In 15 PC sera with carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) negative, 6 (40%) were found to have anti-TAA (anti-tumour associated antigens) antibodies.
When CA19-9 and anti-TAAs were used together as markers in PC detection, the diagnostic sensitivity could be raised from 60.9% to 69.6%.
Anti-TAA and CA19-9 were independent markers, and the simultaneous use of these two markers could raise the sensitivity of PC detection.
PMID: 22010213
Molecular determinants of retinoic acid sensitivity in pancreatic cancer.
To identify a predictive molecular "signature" for sensitivity to retinoic acid in pancreatic cancer.
Fourteen patient-derived, low-passage pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) lines with varied expression of fatty acid-binding protein 5 (FABP5) and cellular retinoic acid-binding protein 2 (CRABP2) were used to evaluate the response to all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA).
Cell proliferation, apoptosis, and migration/invasion assays were used to measure the in vitro response.
Tumor growth was monitored in subcutaneous xenografts in athymic nude mice for 4 weeks.
Response to ATRA was observed to be dependent upon differential expression of FABP5 versus CRABP2.
Thus, elevated FABP5 expression was associated with minimal cytotoxicity and tumor growth inhibition and a paradoxical increase in migration and invasion.
Conversely, CRABP2 expression in the absence of FABP5 was associated with significant tumor growth inhibition with ATRA, even in gemcitabine-resistant tumors.
The ATRA-resistant phenotype of FABP5(high)CRABP2(null) cells could be circumvented by ectopic expression of CRABP2.
Alternatively, reexpression of endogenous CRABP2 could be enabled in FABP5(high)CRABP2(null) PDAC lines by exposure to decitabine and trichostatin A, thereby relieving epigenetic silencing of the CRABP2 gene promoter.
Immunohistochemical staining for FABP5 in archival human tissue microarrays identifies a subset of cases (13 of 63, ~20%) which are negative for FABP5 expression and might be candidates for ATRA therapy.
The widely used agent ATRA deserves a "second look" in PDAC, but needs to be targeted to patient subsets with biopsy-proven FABP5-negative tumors, or be combined with a chromatin-modifying agent to reexpress endogenous CRABP2.
PMID: 22010175
Rewriting the mathematics of tumor growth.
PMID: 22009668
Crediting Treatments for Good Outcomes That Would Have Happened Anyway: The Impact of Baseline Risk on Treatment Perceptions.
BACKGROUND: In some patient populations, many would experience good outcomes even if untreated (described as a small baseline risk).
It appears that treatments for populations with small baseline risks are perceived as more effective than those for populations with large baseline risks: in essence, treatments are credited for good outcomes that would have happened anyway.
Previous research failed to control for differences in treatment effects.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate if the baseline risk of developing an acute condition influences the perceived effectiveness of preventive treatments besides the genuine treatment effect.
METHODS: In study 1 (n = 1100) and study 2 (n = 336), general population samples were shown information that systematically differed in size of treatment effect (absolute and relative risk reduction) and the size of the baseline risk of developing a condition.
In study 3, medical students (n = 110) were shown treatments that systematically differed in the size of the baseline risk of developing a condition and the type of condition to be prevented (i.e., migraines, heart disease, and pancreatic cancer).
MEASURES: included the perceived effectiveness of treatments, intentions to use these treatments, and numeracy.
RESULTS: The baseline risk of developing an acute condition influenced the perceived effectiveness of treatments (study 1: F (1,1043) = 66.17, P < 0.001; study 2: F (1,329) = 16.574, P < 0.001; study 3: F (1,98) = 14.31, P < 0.001) and, in turn, intention to use the treatment (study 1: F (1,1045) = 7.12, P = 0.008).
It caused treatments to be judged as unduly ineffective when the baseline risk was large and vice versa.
The influence was independent of treatment effect and was not moderated by numeracy.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatments for populations with a small baseline risk of developing the condition are perceived as more effective than those for populations with a large baseline risk.
PMID: 22008981
Cholecystectomy and risk of pancreatic cancer: a meta-analysis of observational studies.
Data from epidemiological studies related to the association of cholecystectomy and pancreatic cancer (PaC) risk are inconsistent.
We conducted a meta-analysis of observational studies to explore this relationship.
We identified studies by a literature search of Medline (from 1 January 1966) and EMBASE (from 1 January 1974), through 30 June 2011, and by searching the reference lists of pertinent articles.
Summary relative risks with their 95% confidence intervals were calculated with a random-effects model.
Between-study heterogeneity was assessed using Cochran's Q statistic and the I (2).
A total of 18 studies (10 case-control studies, eight cohort studies) were included in this meta-analysis.
Analysis of these 18 studies found that cholecystectomy was associated with a 23% excess risk of PaC (SRR = 1.23, 95% CI = 1.12-1.35), with moderate heterogeneity among these studies (p (heterogeneity) = 0.006, I (2) = 51.0%).
Sub-grouped analyses revealed that the increased risk of PaC was independent of geographic location, gender, study design and confounders.
There was no publication bias in the current meta-analysis.
The results of this meta-analysis suggest that individuals with a history of cholecystectomy may have an increased risk of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22008892
Characterization of small solid tumors in the pancreas: the value of contrast-enhanced harmonic endoscopic ultrasonography.
Contrast-enhanced harmonic endoscopic ultrasonography (CH-EUS), a novel technology, visualizes parenchymal perfusion in the pancreas.
This study prospectively evaluated how accurately CH-EUS characterizes pancreatic lesions and compared its diagnostic ability with that of contrast-enhanced multidetector-row computed tomography (MDCT) and endoscopic ultrasonography-guided fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA).
A total of 277 consecutive patients with pancreatic solid lesions that were detected by conventional EUS underwent CH-EUS for evaluation of vascularity.
After infusing an ultrasound contrast, CH-EUS was performed by using an echoendoscope and a specific mode for contrast harmonic imaging.
On the basis of the intensity of enhancement, the lesions were categorized into four patterns: nonenhancement, hypoenhancement, isoenhancement, and hyperenhancement.
For comparison, all patients underwent MDCT.
The ability of CH-EUS to differentiate ductal carcinomas from the other solid tumors, particularly small lesions (≤2 cm in diameter) was assessed, and compared with the differentiating abilities of MDCT and EUS-FNA.
In terms of reading the CH-EUS images, the κ-coefficient of the interobserver agreement test was 0.94 (P<0.001).
CH-EUS-depicted hypoenhancement diagnosed ductal carcinomas with a sensitivity and specificity of 95.1% (95% confidence interval (CI) 92.7-96.7%) and 89.0% (95% CI 83.0-93.1%), respectively.
For diagnosing small carcinomas by CH-EUS, the sensitivity and specificity were 91.2 % (95% CI 82.5-95.1%) and 94.4% (95% CI 86.2-98.1%), respectively.
CH-EUS-depicted hypervascular enhancement diagnosed neuroendocrine tumors with a sensitivity and specificity of 78.9% (95% CI 61.4-89.7%) and 98.7% (95% CI 96.7-98.8%), respectively.
Although CH-EUS and MDCT did not differ significantly in diagnostic ability with regard to all lesions, CH-EUS was superior to MDCT in diagnosing small (≤2 cm) carcinomas (P<0.05).
In 12 neoplasms that MDCT failed to detect, 7 ductal carcinomas and 2 neuroendocrine tumors had hypoenhancement and hyperenhancement on CH-EUS, respectively.
When CH-EUS was combined with EUS-FNA, the sensitivity of EUS-FNA increased from 92.2 to 100%.
CH-EUS is useful for characterizing conventional EUS-detected solid pancreatic lesions.
EUS equipped with contrast harmonic imaging may play an important role in the characterization of small tumors that other imaging methods fail to depict and may improve the diagnostic yield of EUS-FNA.
PMID: 22008845
[Strategies for preoperative downsizing in patients with local nonresectable pancreatic cancer].
In about 30-40% of all patients with pancreatic cancer a locally advanced lesion without distant metastases is found at primary diagnosis and the tumor is mostly nonresectable due to the close vicinity to blood vessels.
Neoadjuvant treatment strategies, such as neoadjuvant radiochemotherapy offer the possibility to achieve substantial tumor reduction so that secondary resectability can be achieved.
Therefore, treatment decisions should be made in an interdisciplinary context.
In the future, innovative study protocols as well as novel radiation modalities, such as carbon ions can open new horizons in the treatment of this patient population.
Additionally, molecular markers may help to stratify patients for different treatment schedules.
PMID: 22008078
A monoclonal antibody against human FXYD6.
Previous research has shown that FXYD6 (FXYD domain-containing ion transport regulator 6) is highly increased in bile duct tumor.
However, the biological function of FXYD6 is unclear.
We aim to prepare and identify a monoclonal antibody against FXYD6, which will be used in diagnostics and as a tool in understanding the role of FXYD6 in pathogenesis of hepatobiliary cancer.
In this study, hybridoma cell fusion technology is used for production of FXYD6 monoclonal antibody.
BALB/c mice are immunized with FXYD6 synthetic peptide fragment.
Hybridoma clones are screened using indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
FXYD6 monoclonal antibody is produced by ascites revulsion.
Protein A affinity chromatography is used for the purification of FXYD6 monoclonal antibody.
Titer and specificity of monoclonal antibody are assessed by ELISA.
Expression of FXYD6 in pancreatic cancer is detected by immunohistochemistry.
As a result, one stable hybridoma cell clone producing FXYD6 monoclonal antibody has been established.
2.86 mg monoclonal antibody against FXYD6 with high specificity is prepared with titer of 1:5400.
Immunohistochemistry shows that FXYD6 positive staining occurs in the cell membrane of pancreatic cancer, which results in an advantage in investigating the tissue distribution and biological function of FXYD6.
PMID: 22007199
Epidemiology, diagnosis, and management of cystic lesions of the pancreas.
Although little is known on the true prevalence of pancreatic cysts, physicians are currently more frequently confronted with pancreatic cysts because of the increasing use of sophisticated cross-sectional abdominal imaging.
Cystic lesions of the pancreas comprise of a heterogeneous group of diagnostic entities, some of which are benign such as inflammatory pseudocysts or serous cystadenomas and do not require resection when asymptomatic.
Others like mucinous cysts or intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN) have a malignant potential and in these cases surgical resection is often indicated.
For this reason an adequate distinction between the various cysts is crucial to optimize management strategy.
Different diagnostic methods that could be of value in the differentiation include radiologic imaging techniques such as CT, MR, and endosonography.
In addition, fluid aspiration for cytopathology, tumormarkers or molecular analysis is widely used.
Different guidelines are available but so far no optimal diagnostic algorithm exists.
We summarize the epidemiology, classification, clinical presentation, diagnostics, management, and future perspectives.
PMID: 22006877
Choledochal cyst and associated malignant tumors in adults: a multicenter survey in South Korea.
To determine the clinical features and clinical outcomes of Korean adults treated surgically for choledochal cyst.
Retrospective nationwide multicenter study.
Fifteen university hospitals (tertiary care referral centers) located in all 7 Korean provinces.
A total of 808 patients aged 18 years or older who underwent surgery for choledochal cyst from January 1, 1990, through December 31, 2007.
Demographic information, surgical data, associated biliary malignant tumors, and factors predicting malignant tumors.
Type I was most common (499 [68.2%]) followed by type IVa (208 [28.4%]).
Of 654 patients, anomalous pancreaticobiliary ductal union was identified in 467 patients (71.4%), 291 with the choledochal type (62.3%), 96 with the pancreatic type (20.6%), and 80 with the complex type (17.1%).
Biliary tract malignant tumor was associated in 80 patients (9.9%); 40 had bile duct cancer (50.0%), 35 had gallbladder cancer (43.8%), 3 had periampullary cancer, and 2 had synchronous gallbladder and bile duct cancer.
Twenty-two patients (26.3%) had a recurrence, with a median follow-up duration of 51.8 months.
Factors predicting malignant tumor by univariate analysis were age more than 40 years, the absence of a gallstone, elevated carcinoembryonic antigen or cancer antigen 19-9 serum level, and the presence of anomalous pancreaticobiliary ductal union, and by multivariate analysis, an elevated cancer antigen 19-9 level.
Associated biliary malignant tumor should always be considered in patients with choledochal cyst, especially in aged patients or patients with anomalous pancreaticobiliary ductal union or an elevated tumor marker level.
Lifelong follow-up is needed even after complete cyst excision because of the risk of the development of a metachronous biliary malignant tumor.
PMID: 22006857
Oxidative stress pathways in noncancerous human liver tissue to predict hepatocellular carcinoma recurrence: a prospective, multicenter study.
The prediction of cancer recurrence holds the key to improvement of the postoperative prognosis of patients.
In this study, the recurrence of early-stage hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) after curative hepatectomy was analyzed by the genome-wide gene-expression profiling on cancer tissue and the noncancerous liver tissue.
Using the training set of 78 cases, the cytochrome P450 1A2 (CYP1A2) gene in noncancerous liver tissue was identified as the predictive candidate for postoperative recurrence (hazard ratio [HR], 0.447; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.249-0.808; P = 0.010).
Multivariate analysis revealed the statistically significant advantage of CYP1A2 down-regulation to predict recurrence (odds ratio, 0.534; 95% CI, 0.276-0.916; P = 0.036), and the expression of CYP1A2 protein was confirmed immunohistochemically.
An independently multi-institutional cohort of 211 patients, using tissue microarrays, validated that loss of expression of CYP1A2 in noncancerous liver tissue as the only predictive factor of recurrence after curative hepatectomy for early-stage HCC (HR, 0.480; 95% CI, 0.256-0.902; P = 0.038).
Gene set-enrichment analysis revealed close association of CYP1A2 down-regulation with oxidative stress pathways in liver tissue (P < 0.001, false discovery rate [FDR] = 0.042; P = 0.006, FDR = 0.035).
Our results indicate these pathways as the molecular targets to prevent recurrence, as well as the potential prediction of the super high-risk population of HCC using liver tissue.
PMID: 22006099
Fucosylated haptoglobin is a novel type of cancer biomarker linked to the prognosis after an operation in colorectal cancer.
BACKGROUND: Fucosylation is a crucial oligosaccharide modification in cancer and inflammation.
Total cellular proteins of cancer cells and the sera of patients with cancer both show increased fucosylation levels.
Certain kinds of fucosylated proteins can be applied as novel cancer biomarkers in glyco-proteomic analyses.
We previously identified fucosylated haptoglobin (Fuc-Hpt) as a serologic marker for pancreatic cancer, and recently developed a lectin-antibody enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay system for quantifying Fuc-Hpt.
In the present study, we investigated the clinical outcome of Fuc-Hpt levels in patients with colorectal cancer (CRC), and examined the mechanisms underlying Fut-Hpt production using a murine tumor transplantation model.
METHODS: The relationship between Fuc-Hpt levels and clinical parameters was investigated in 77 patients with CRC, all of whom underwent primary resection.
Serum Fuc-Hpt levels were examined in athymic nude mice injected with colon cancer cell lines that lacked fucosylation.
RESULTS: Fuc-Hpt levels were significantly associated with overall and relapse-free survival, distant metastasis, clinical stage, and curability.
Multivariate analysis revealed that distant metastasis was an independent factor for increased Fuc-Hpt levels.
The combination of Fuc-Hpt and CEA might be a better serologic marker to predict prognosis.
Fuc-Hpt levels were higher in mice with direct injection of tumor cells into the spleen than in those injected subcutaneously.
CONCLUSIONS: Fuc-Hpt might be a useful marker for the prognosis of CRC.
Fuc-Hpt could be produced by the tissue surrounding tumor cells, which might be the mechanism underlying Fuc-Hpt elevation associated with distant metastasis.
Cancer 2011.
© 2011 American Cancer Society.
PMID: 22005518
Thymoquinone: potential cure for inflammatory disorders and cancer.
Thymoquinone is an active ingredient isolated from Nigella sativa and has been investigated for its anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory and anticancer activities in both in vitro and in vivo models since its first extraction in 1960s.
Its anti-oxidant/anti-inflammatory effect has been reported in various disease models, including encephalomyelitis, diabetes, asthma and carcinogenesis.
Moreover, thymoquinone could act as a free radical and superoxide radical scavenger, as well as preserving the activity of various anti-oxidant enzymes such as catalase, glutathione peroxidase and glutathione-S-transferase.
The anticancer effect(s) of thymoquinone are mediated through different modes of action, including anti-proliferation, apoptosis induction, cell cycle arrest, ROS generation and anti-metastasis/anti-angiogenesis.
In addition, this quinone was found to exhibit anticancer activity through the modulation of multiple molecular targets, including p53, p73, PTEN, STAT3, PPAR-γ, activation of caspases and generation of ROS.
The anti-tumor effects of thymoquinone have also been investigated in tumor xenograft mice models for colon, prostate, pancreatic and lung cancer.
The combination of thymoquinone and conventional chemotherapeutic drugs could produce greater therapeutic effect as well as reduce the toxicity of the latter.
In this review, we summarize the anti-oxidant/anti-inflammatory and anticancer effects of thymoquinone with a focus on its molecular targets, and its possible role in the treatment of inflammatory diseases and cancer.
PMID: 22004570
Zyflamend sensitizes tumor cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis through up-regulation of death receptors and down-regulation of survival proteins: role of ROS-dependent CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-homologous protein pathway.
TNF (tumor necrosis factor)-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), is a selective killer of tumor cells, although its potential is limited by the development of resistance.
In this article, we investigated whether the polyherbal preparation Zyflamend(®) can sensitize tumor cells to TRAIL.
We found that Zyflamend potentiated TRAIL-induced apoptosis in human cancer cells.
Zyflamend manifested its effects through several mechanisms.
First, it down-regulated the expression of cell survival proteins known to be linked to resistance to TRAIL.
Second, Zyflamend up-regulated the expression of pro-apoptotic protein, Bax.
Third, Zyflamend up-regulated the expression of death receptors (DRs) for TRAIL.
Up-regulation of DRs was critical as gene-silencing of these receptors significantly reduced the effect of Zyflamend on TRAIL-induced apoptosis.
The up-regulation of DRs was dependent on CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-homologous protein (CHOP), as Zyflamend induced CHOP, its gene-silencing abolished the induction of receptors, and mutation of the CHOP binding site on DR5 promoter abolished Zyflamend-mediated DR5 transactivation.
Zyflamend mediated its effects through reactive oxygen species (ROS), as ROS quenching reduced its effect.
Further, Zyflamend induced DR5 and CHOP and down-regulated the expression of cell survival proteins in nude mice bearing human pancreatic cancer cells.
Innovation: Zyflamend can sensitize tumor cells to TRAIL through modulation of multiple cell signaling mechanisms that are linked to ROS.
Zyflamend potentiates TRAIL-induced apoptosis through the ROS-CHOP-mediated up-regulation of DRs, increase in pro-apoptotic protein and down-regulation of cell survival proteins.
PMID: 22004109
Heat shock protein 27 as a prognostic and predictive biomarker in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
A role of heat shock protein 27 (HSP27) as a potential biomarker has been reported in various tumor entities, but comprehensive studies in pancreatic cancer are lacking.
Applying tissue microarray (TMA) analysis, we correlated HSP27 protein expression status with clinicopathologic parameters in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma specimens from 86 patients.
Complementary, we established HSP27 overexpression and RNA-interference models to assess the impact of HSP27 on chemo- and radiosensitivity directly in pancreatic cancer cells.
In the TMA study, HSP27 expression was found in 49% of tumor samples.
Applying univariate analyses, a significant correlation was found between HSP27 expression and survival.
In the multivariate Cox-regression model, HSP27 expression emerged as an independent prognostic factor.
HSP27 expression also correlated inversely with nuclear p53 accumulation, indicating either protein interactions between HSP27 and p53 or TP53 mutation-dependent HSP27-regulation in pancreatic cancer.
In the sensitivity studies, HSP27 overexpression rendered HSP27 low-expressing PL5 pancreatic cancer cells more susceptible towards treatment with gemcitabine.
Vice versa, HSP27 protein depletion in HSP27 high-expressing AsPC-1 cells caused increased gemcitabine resistance.
Importantly, HSP27 expression was inducible in pancreatic cancer cell lines as well as primary cells.
Taken together, our study suggests a role for HSP27 as a prognostic and predictive marker in pancreatic cancer.
Assessment of HSP27 expression could thus facilitate the identification of specific patient subpopulations that might benefit from individualized treatment options.
Additional studies need to clarify whether modulation of HSP27 expression could represent an attractive concept to support the incorporation of hyperthermia in clinical treatment protocols for pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 22003875
Hispidin isolated from Phellinus linteus protects against hydrogen peroxide-induced oxidative stress in pancreatic MIN6N β-cells.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) have been shown to cause DNA damage, protein denaturation, loss of antioxidative enzyme activity, and lipid peroxidation.
Thus, ROS are associated with tissue damage and are considered to be prime contributing factors in inflammation, diabetes, aging, and cancer.
In this study, we investigated whether or not hispidin protects pancreatic MIN6N β-cells from oxidative stress caused by hydrogen peroxide.
Treatment of MIN6N β-cells with 0.5 mM hydrogen peroxide for 4 hours caused significant loss of cell viability and an increase in the number of apoptotic cells.
However, pretreatment of MIN6N β-cells with hispidin for 24 hours reduced loss of cell viability and decreased the number of apoptotic cells.
In addition, 70 μM hispidin significantly scavenged intracellular ROS and inhibited apoptosis and caspase-3 induced by hydrogen peroxide.
Furthermore, the generation of thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances was inhibited in the presence of hispidin in a dose-dependent manner.
Also, 70 μM hispidin significantly increased insulin secretion in hydrogen peroxide-treated MIN6N β-cells.
These results suggest that hispidin may be effective for protecting MIN6N β-cells from ROS toxicity in diabetes.
PMID: 22002291
Biliary intraductal papillary-mucinous neoplasm diagnosed by peroral direct cholangioscopy using a slim upper endoscope (with video).
We experienced a case of biliary intraductal papillary mucin-producing neoplasm diagnosed before operation by using an ultraslim upper endoscope without assistance of the guide wire.
The patient, who had a Billroth II partial gastrectomy and partial resection of left liver lobe history, was admitted in our hospital because of jaundice.
Imaging examination indicated dilatation of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary ducts and pancreatic duct was normal.
During the process of endoscopic retrograde cholangiography, a large amount of mucus was found extruded from the dilated orifice of papilla.
A pediatric upper endoscope was inserted into the common bile duct and then into the left hepatic duct without the assistance of guide wire.
The lesion was located and biopsy was taken.
Final histology after surgery indicated the patient suffered from biliary intraductal papillary mucin-producing neoplasm.
Slim upper endoscope maybe a useful instrument in some patients for peroral direct cholangioscopy, instead of the sophisticated mother-baby endoscope system.
PMID: 22002275
Laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy: does splenic preservation affect outcomes?
Although the spleen is often routinely resected during both open and laparoscopic distal pancreatectomies, a splenectomy can increase the risk of postoperative and life-long infectious complications.
Spleen-preserving laparoscopic pancreatectomies can technically be more difficult because of the delicate dissection of the splenic vessels.
We performed a retrospective review of 34 laparoscopic pancreatectomies done at our institution.
All procedures were done laparoscopically without hand assistance.
Attempts were made in all patients to conserve the spleen, which was successful in 10 patients (29%).
In the splenectomy group, 9 patients had 12 surgical complications (26%), which was statistically significant compared with the spleen-preserving group, in which there were no complications.
This included 7 patients with a pancreatic leak (20%) and 3 with postoperative hemorrhage requiring reexploration (9%).
Patients with spleen-preserving pancreatectomies had significantly less blood loss and shorter operative time compared with patients who underwent concomitant splenectomy.
Splenic preservation should be attempted in all patients undergoing laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy unless there are overriding oncological or anatomic concerns.
PMID: 22002273
Reappraisal of anterior approach to laparoscopic splenectomy: technical feasibility and its clinical application.
Laparoscopic splenectomy has been accepted as the treatment of choice in managing spleen-associated pathologic conditions requiring splenectomy.
We introduce our surgical technique of modified laparoscopic splenectomy and discuss its technical feasibility and safety.
From March 2006 to March 2010, 38 patients underwent modified laparoscopic splenectomy.
Mean operating time was 169.5 ± 109.6 minutes.
Mean blood loss was 468 ± 971.5 mL.
Intraoperative transfusions were given to 10 patients (25.6%).
There was no case for open conversion.
In learning curve analysis, outcomes significantly improved with the first 17 patients.
When we compared first 27 cases of conventional laparoscopic splenectomy with recent cases of modified technique, the 2 groups showed no significant difference.
The presented technique of modified laparoscopic splenectomy seems to be a feasible, easy, and safe procedure.
It is also thought that surgical indication could be extended even to the splenomegaly by this technique.
PMID: 22001830
Clinical potential of microRNAs in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
Aggressive invasion and early metastases are characteristic features of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC).
More than 90% of patients have surgically nonresectable disease at presentation.
Despite increasing knowledge of the genetics of this complex disease, systemic therapies, particularly gemcitabine, have modest clinical benefit and marginal survival advantage.
MicroRNAs have been shown to have a role in oncogenesis, invasion, and metastases via epigenetic posttranscriptional gene regulation.
Our objective was to discuss the clinical impact of microRNAs within PDAC.
This review details the understanding of microRNAs to date and explores the clinical utility of microRNAs in PDAC.
Recent studies have focused on the impact of microRNA expression in PDAC, many of which have shown the diagnostic, predictive, and prognostic utility of microRNA profiling in PDAC identifying numerous potential targets including miR-21, miR-196a, and miR-217.
MicroRNA stability in body fluid and tissue samples makes this area one of the most promising for earlier detection of PDAC.
Indeed, microRNAs may in the future serve as a long-awaited screening tool for PDAC.
Furthermore, microRNA expression profiling in PDAC may be incorporated into modern treatment algorithms to enhance therapeutic management.
Equally as exciting is the potential for novel therapeutics directed against these important disease mediators.
PMID: 22000795
A prospective, randomized study of EUS-guided celiac plexus neurolysis for pancreatic cancer: one injection or two?
The technique of alcohol injection during EUS-guided celiac plexus neurolysis (CPN) in patients with pancreatic cancer-related pain has not been standardized.
To compare pain relief and safety of alcohol given as 1 versus 2 injections during EUS-guided CPN (EUS-CPN).
Secondary outcomes examined were characteristics that predict response and survival.
Single-blinded, prospective, randomized, parallel-group study.
Tertiary-care center.
This study involved patients with pancreatic cancer-related pain.
EUS-CPN done by injecting 20 mL of 0.75% bupivacaine and 10 mL 98% alcohol into 1 or 2 sites at the celiac trunk.
Participants were interviewed by telephone at 24 hours and weekly thereafter.
Time until onset of pain relief, duration of pain relief, complications.
Fifty patients (mean age 63 years; 24 men) were enrolled and randomized (29 in 1-injection, 21 in 2-injections groups).
Pain relief was observed in 37 (74%) patients: 20 (69%) in the 1-injection group and 17 (81%) in the 2-injection group (chi-square P = .340).
Median onset of pain relief was 1 day for both 1-injection (range 1-28 days) and 2-injection (range 1-21 days) groups (Mann-Whitney P = .943).
Median duration of pain relief in the 1-injection and 2-injection groups was 11 weeks and 14 weeks, respectively (log-rank P = .612).
Complete pain relief was observed in 4 (8%) patients total, 2 in each group.
There were no long-term complications.
Single-blinded study.
There were no differences in onset or duration of pain relief when either 1 or 2 injections were used.
There was no difference in safety or survival between the 2 groups.
PMID: 22000199
Outcomes after preoperative endoscopic ultrasonography and biopsy in patients undergoing distal pancreatectomy.
This retrospective cohort study analyzes the potential risks associated with preoperative fine needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy guided by endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) in patients undergoing distal pancreatectomy.
Excluding 204 patients with acute or chronic pancreatitis and those with previous pancreatic resections, 230 consecutive patients with primary pancreatic neoplasms underwent elective distal pancreatectomy between 2002 and 2009.
The most common indications were adenocarcinoma (28%), intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN; 20%), and endocrine neoplasms (17%).
Two-way statistical comparisons were performed between patients who did (EUS(+)) or did not (EUS(-)) undergo preoperative EUS-FNA.
Distal pancreatectomy was performed open in 118 patients (56%) and laparoscopically in 102 patients (44%).
No differences were observed in age, sex, American Society of Anesthesiologists class, operative time, or blood loss between the EUS(+) (n = 179) and EUS(-) (n = 51) groups.
Splenectomy was performed in 162 patients (70%) and was more common in the EUS(+) group.
With the exception of adenocarcinoma (n = 57 [32%] EUS(+) vs n = 6 [12%] EUS(-); P < .01), the final pathologic diagnosis did not differ significantly between the EUS groups.
Postoperative complications were more common in the EUS(+) patients with cystic neoplasms (43% vs 16% EUS(-); P = .04).
EUS-FNA caused pancreatitis in 2 patients preoperatively.
No differences in overall or recurrence-free survival were noted between cancer patients in the EUS groups.
Patterns of tumor recurrence were not associated with EUS-FNA.
Preoperative EUS-FNA is not associated with adverse perioperative or long-term outcomes in patients undergoing distal pancreatectomy for solid neoplasms of the pancreas.
The potentially detrimental long-term impact of preoperative EUS-FNA in patients with resectable pancreatic adenocarcinoma was not observed, but will require additional study.
PMID: 22000171
Does the interval from imaging to operation affect the rate of unanticipated metastasis encountered during operation for pancreatic adenocarcinoma?
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is an aggressive malignancy with a propensity for early metastasis that is often encountered unexpectedly at operation.
Our objective was to examine the effect of the time interval between preoperative imaging and attempted resection and the venue in which imaging was performed on the frequency of unanticipated metastasis (UM) encountered at operation.
We hypothesize that imaging obtained locally at our hospital and within 4 weeks of operation will result in a lesser frequency of UM encountered at operation.
Between January 2004 and December 2009, records of patients undergoing planned pancreatic resection for PDAC at a high volume pancreatic surgery center were compiled.
Exclusion criteria included neoadjuvant therapy, prior pancreatic resection, or evidence of metastasis on imaging.
Review and analysis of clinical, radiographic, operative, and pathologic data were undertaken.
Frequency of UM and outcome of resection was compared with the interval between most recent cross-sectional imaging (dual-phase contrast-enhanced CT or MRI) and operation defined as imaging-to-operation interval (IOI).
Four-hundred eighty-seven patients met eligibility requirements for the study: 431 (88%) proximal and 56 (12%) distal PDAC.
202 (41%) patients had their most recent imaging performed at an outside institution, and no difference in the rates of UM was observed whether imaging was conducted at our institution or at an outside institution (P > .05).
Of 329 with complete imaging information for analysis, UM were discovered in 60 (18%): 52 (18%) of 293 proximal PDAC and 8 (22%) of 36 distal PDAC.
In proximal PDAC, there was a linear relationship in the frequency of UM as a function of the weekly IOI (R(2) = .99; P = .006).
For distal PDAC, no significant difference in the frequency of UM as a function of IOI was observed.
For proximally located PDAC, the frequency of UM increases with greater imaging-to-operation interval.
Performing imaging at a high volume, pancreatic surgery center compared with elsewhere was not associated with a decrease in the rate of UM.
Obtaining timely diagnostic imaging for proximal PDAC may improve the accuracy of preoperative staging, and thereby reduce the number of operations not producing oncologic benefit.
PMID: 21999932
Phosphorylation status of heat shock protein 27 plays a key role in gemcitabine-induced apoptosis of pancreatic cancer cells.
Gemcitabine, an antitumor drug, is currently considered to be the standard of care for the treatment of advanced pancreatic cancer, but the clinical outcome is still not satisfactory.
Although heat shock protein (HSP) 27 is implicated in the resistance to chemotherapy in several types of cancers, the precise role of phosphorylated HSP27 in cancer cells remains to be clarified.
In this study, we investigated the relationship between the effect of gemcitabine and the phosphorylation status of HSP27 in pancreatic cancer cells, Panc1 and KP3.
Gemcitabine suppressed pancreatic cancer cell growth and induced apoptosis.
Gemcitabine caused activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), MAPK-activated protein kinase 2 (MAPKAPK-2) and subsequently phosphorylation of HSP27 at Ser15, 78 and 82 without affecting total HSP27 levels.
The inhibitions of p38 MAPK and MAPKAPK-2 reduced the phosphorylation of HSP27 and apoptosis in gemcitabine-treated cells.
To further investigate the role of phosphorylated HSP27, we established Panc1 cell lines which were stably transfected with empty vector (empty cells), wild-type HSP27-encoding vector (WT cells) and 2 mutant HSP27-encoding vectors that mimic non-phosphorylated (3A), and phosphorylated (3D), respectively.
In comparison of empty cells with WT cells, there was no difference in cell growth rate and the sensitivity to gemcitabine.
Interestingly, cell growth of 3D cells was retarded as compared to that of 3A cells.
Taken together, our results strongly suggest that phosphorylation status of HSP27 plays a key role in gemcitabine-induced growth suppression of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 21999588
Outcome of the pancreatic remnant following segmental pancreatectomy for non-invasive intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm.
Intraductual papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs) are often multifocal and involve the entire pancreas.
Because of the morbidity associated with total pancreatectomy, surgeons will perform segmental pancreatectomy, resecting only the most 'threatening' IPMN lesion(s).
We sought to determine whether the presence of residual IPMN following segmental pancreatectomy for non-invasive IPMN increases the risk for subsequent development of invasive pancreatic cancer and decreases survival.
Data on patients undergoing segmental resection of non-invasive IPMN during the period 1991-2010 at a high-volume academic institution were prospectively accrued.
Of 243 patients who underwent segmental resection for IPMN, 191 (79%) demonstrated non-invasive pathology.
Of these, 153 (80%) showed the absence and 38 (20%) the presence of residual IPMN at the initial operation.
Of the 38 patients with residual IPMN, eight had positive IPMN margins, 23 had radiographic evidence of IPMN, and seven had both.
During a mean follow-up of 73 months, 31 (20%) of 153 patients without residual IPMN developed a new radiographic lesion consistent with IPMN and, of these, three (10%) were found to represent invasive cancer.
One (3%) of 38 patients with residual IPMN developed invasive cancer.
In summary, in 191 initially non-invasive cases of IPMN, four invasive cancers (2%) developed during follow-up.
The mean progression-free interval in these four patients was 54 months (range: 20-99 months).
Compared with patients undergoing complete operative IPMN clearance, patients with residual IPMN after segmental pancreatectomy do not demonstrate increased risk for the development of invasive disease or reduced survival.
In patients without residual IPMN who later develop new IPMN, the risk for invasive IPMN is increased.
PMID: 21999221
Elevated urinary levels of urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma identify a clinically high-risk group.
The urokinase plasminogen activator receptor is highly expressed and its gene is amplified in about 50% of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas; this last feature is associated with worse prognosis.
It is unknown whether the level of its soluble form (suPAR) in urine may be a diagnostic-prognostic marker in these patients.
The urinary level of suPAR was measured in 146 patients, 94 pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and 52 chronic pancreatitis.
Urine from 104 healthy subjects with similar age and gender distribution served as controls.
suPAR levels were normalized with creatinine levels (suPAR/creatinine, ng/mg) to remove urine dilution effect.
Urinary suPAR/creatinine values of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma patients were significantly higher (median 9.8; 25th-75th percentiles 5.3-20.7) than those of either healthy donors (median 0; 0-0.5) or chronic pancreatitis patients (median 2.7; 0.9-4.7).
The distribution of values among cancer patients was widespread and asymmetric, 53% subjects having values beyond the 95th percentile of healthy donors.
The values of suPAR/creatinine did not correlate with tumour stage, Ca19-9 or CEA levels.
Higher values correlated with poor prognosis among non-resected patients at univariate analysis; multivariate Cox regression identified high urinary suPAR/creatinine as an independent predictor of poor survival among all cancer patients (odds ratio 2.10, p = 0.0023), together with tumour stage (stage III odds ratio 2.65, p = 0.0017; stage IV odds ratio 4.61, p < 0.0001) and female gender (odds ratio 1.85, p = 0.01).
A high urinary suPAR/creatinine ratio represents a useful marker for the identification of a subset of patients with poorer outcome.
PMID: 21999129
Therapy of locally advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma: unresectable and borderline patients.
Systemic chemotherapy for advanced pancreatic cancer is commonly used in practice; however, the optimal strategy for both neoadjuvant and adjuvant therapy in this disease remains controversial.
A particular challenge remains in patients who are considered to be locally advanced and either unresectable or borderline resectable.
Offering optimal neoadjuvant therapy to this group of patients may give them the opportunity to have a curative surgical approach.
This article will discuss the potential role of neoadjuvant therapy in borderline, potentially resectable pancreatic cancer.
It will also discuss areas of interest in potential targets as the biology of pancreatic adenocarcinoma is further explored.
PMID: 21998291
GDC-0980 is a novel class I PI3K/mTOR kinase inhibitor with robust activity in cancer models driven by the PI3K pathway.
Alterations of the phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K)/Akt signaling pathway occur broadly in cancer via multiple mechanisms including mutation of the PIK3CA gene, loss or mutation of phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), and deregulation of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) complexes.
The dysregulation of this pathway has been implicated in tumor initiation, cell growth and survival, invasion and angiogenesis, thus, PI3K and mTOR are promising therapeutic targets for cancer.
We discovered GDC-0980, a selective, potent, orally bioavailable inhibitor of Class I PI3 kinase and mTOR kinase (TORC1/2) with excellent pharmacokinetic and pharmaceutical properties.
GDC-0980 potently inhibits signal transduction downstream of both PI3K and mTOR, as measured by pharmacodynamic (PD) biomarkers, thereby acting upon two key pathway nodes to produce the strongest attainable inhibition of signaling in the pathway.
Correspondingly, GDC-0980 was potent across a broad panel of cancer cell lines, with the greatest potency in breast, prostate, and lung cancers and less activity in melanoma and pancreatic cancers, consistent with KRAS and BRAF acting as resistance markers.
Treatment of cancer cell lines with GDC-0980 resulted in G1 cell-cycle arrest, and in contrast to mTOR inhibitors, GDC-0980 induced apoptosis in certain cancer cell lines, including those with direct pathway activation via PI3K and PTEN.
Low doses of GDC-0980 potently inhibited tumor growth in xenograft models including those with activated PI3K, loss of LKB1 or PTEN, and elicited an exposure-related decrease in PD biomarkers.
These preclinical data show that GDC-0980 is a potent and effective dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor with promise for the clinic.
PMID: 21997803
Distinguishing autoimmune pancreatitis from pancreaticobiliary cancers: current strategy.
A review of the literature to identify current modalities for the diagnosis of autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP) with the objective of establishing a strategy to distinguish it from pancreaticobiliary cancers.
Pancreatic and biliary manifestations of AIP mimic pancreaticobiliary cancers.
Misdiagnosis of AIP can result in major surgery for a steroid-responsive disease.
A review of the literature was performed to identify recent advances in the diagnosis of AIP and evaluate outcomes with various diagnostic strategies to minimize operative intervention for an autoimmune disease.
Diagnostic criteria for AIP are based on histology, imaging, serology, extrapancreatic organ involvement, and response to steroid therapy.
The most commonly involved extrapancreatic sites are bile duct, kidney, and retroperitoneum.
The Mayo Clinic diagnostic strategy utilizes core biopsy of the pancreas and the Japanese strategy depends on a characteristic pancreatogram.
The rate of operative intervention was similar with both strategies and none of the patients with cancer received steroid therapy.
Immunoglobulin G subtype 4 (IgG4)-associated cholangitis mimics cholangiocarcinoma and presence of more than 10 IgG4-positive plasma cells/high power field on endoscopic biopsy of the bile duct was diagnostic for AIP in 88% patients.
Biliary complications and early relapse are common after surgical resection and immunomodulatory drugs can maintain long-term remission.
Criteria based on histology, imaging, endoscopy, serology, extrapancreatic organ involvement, and response to steroid therapy improve the diagnostic yield for AIP.
Application of diagnostic and therapeutic protocols by a multidisciplinary team will optimize outcomes with a decline in the rate of operative intervention for AIP, a steroid-responsive disease with propensity for relapse.
PMID: 21997759
Periostin expression and epithelial-mesenchymal transition in cancer: a review and an update.
Periostin, also called osteoblast-specific factor 2, is a secreted cell adhesion protein, which shares a homology with the insect cell adhesion molecule fasciclin I.
It has been shown to be an important regulator of bone and tooth formation and maintenance, and of cardiac development and healing.
Recent studies revealed that periostin plays an important role in tumor development and is upregulated in a wide variety of cancers such as colon, pancreatic, ovarian, breast, head and neck, thyroid, and gastric cancer as well as in neuroblastoma.
Periostin binding to the integrins activates the Akt/PKB- and FAK-mediated signaling pathways which lead to increased cell survival, angiogenesis, invasion, metastasis, and importantly, epithelial-mesenchymal transition of carcinoma cells.
In this review we summarize recent clinicopathological studies that have investigated periostin expression in lung, kidney, prostate, liver cancer, and malignant pleural mesothelioma and discuss the role of periostin isoforms in tumorigenesis and their potential as targets for stroma-targeted anticancer therapy.
PMID: 21997696
Paranuclear dot-like immunostaining for CD99: presence in colonic adenomas and adenocarcinomas.
PMID: 21997559
Oncogenic transcription factors: cornerstones of inflammation-linked pancreatic carcinogenesis.
Transcription factors are proteins that regulate gene expression by modulating the synthesis of messenger RNA.
Since this process is often one dominant control point in the production of many proteins, transcription factors represent the key regulators of numerous cellular functions, including proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis.
Pancreatic cancer progression is characterised by activation of inflammatory signalling pathways converging on a limited set of transcription factors that fine-tune gene expression patterns contributing to the growth and maintenance of these tumours.
Thus strategies targeting these transcriptional networks activated in pancreatic cancer cells could block the effects of upstream inflammatory responses participating in pancreatic tumorigenesis.
The authors review this field of research and summarise current strategies for targeting oncogenic transcription factors and their activating signalling networks in the treatment of pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 21997479
EUS-FNA mutational analysis in differentiating autoimmune pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer.
Autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP) may mimic pancreatic cancer (PC).
The detection of DNA mutations in endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) material may improve discrimination between AIP and PC and is the context for this study.
In a retrospective study, archived EUS-FNA material from patients with AIP and PC at two centers was analyzed for KRAS mutations and loss-of-heterozygosity analysis involving 18 microsatellite markers.
KRAS status and the fractional allelic loss (number of affected microsatellites divided by informative ones) were compared for AIP and PC.
Thirty-two patients with 33 samples were studied.
There were 16 patients with AIP (17 samples) and 16 patients with PC.
DNA amplification failed in 7 samples.
Of 25 patients (26 samples), 14 had AIP (7 male, age 57 ± 17 years; mean ± SD) and 11 had PC (7 male, age 65 ± 14 years; mean ± SD).
Cytology results for AIP were inflammatory = 3, inconclusive = 10, suspicious for malignancy = 2 and for PC were malignant = 5, suspicious for malignancy = 4 and inconclusive = 2, respectively.
KRAS mutation was detected in none of the AIP cases and 10/11 PC cases (91%, Pearson χ(2) = 22.16, p < 0.001) or 10/16 PC cases (63%) accounting for PC cases with failed DNA amplification.
Mean (±SD) fractional allelic loss for the AIP cases (0.16 ± 0.15) was not significantly different from the PC cases (0.26 ± 0.19).
A KRAS mutation in EUS/FNA material from a pancreatic mass is associated with malignancy and may help discriminate from benign conditions such as AIP.
PMID: 21996748
A Kras(G12D)-driven genetic mouse model of pancreatic cancer requires glypican-1 for efficient proliferation and angiogenesis.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDACs) exhibit multiple molecular alterations and overexpress heparin-binding growth factors (HBGFs) and glypican-1 (GPC1), a heparan sulfate proteoglycan that promotes efficient signaling by HBGFs.
It is not known, however, whether GPC1 has a role in genetic mouse models of PDAC.
Therefore, we generated a GPC1 null mouse that combines pancreas-specific Cre-mediated activation of oncogenic Kras (Kras(G12D)) with deletion of a conditional INK4A/Arf allele (Pdx1-Cre;LSL-Kras(G12D);INK4A/Arf(lox/lox);GPC1(-/-) mice).
By comparison with Pdx1-Cre;LSL-Kras(G12D);INK4A/Arf(lox/lox) mice that were wild type for GPC1, the Pdx1-Cre;LSL-Kras(G12D);INK4A/Arf(lox/lox);GPC1(-/-) mice exhibited attenuated pancreatic tumor growth and invasiveness, decreased cancer cell proliferation and mitogen-activated protein kinase activation.
These mice also exhibited suppressed angiogenesis in conjunction with decreased expression of messenger RNAs encoding several pro-angiogenic factors and molecules, including vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A), SRY-box containing gene (SOX17), chemokine C-X3-C motif ligand 1 (CX3CL1) and integrin β3 (ITGB3).
Moreover, pancreatic cancer cells isolated from the tumors of GPC1(-/-) mice were not as invasive in response to fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) as cancer cells isolated from wild-type mice, and formed smaller tumors that exhibited an attenuated metastatic potential.
Similarly, VEGF-A and FGF-2 did not enhance the migration of hepatic endothelial cells and immortalized murine embryonic fibroblasts isolated from GPC1 null mice.
These data demonstrate in an oncogenic Kras-driven genetic mouse model of PDAC that tumor growth, angiogenesis and invasion are enhanced by GPC1, and suggest that suppression of GPC1 may be an important component of therapeutic strategies in PDAC.Oncogene advance online publication, 26 September 2011; doi:10.1038/onc.2011.430.
PMID: 21996346
Follow-up study after resection of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas; special references to the multifocal lesions and development of ductal carcinoma in the remnant pancreas.
BACKGROUND: Frequency and characteristics of metachronous occurrence of multifocal intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs) or distinct pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDACs) in the remnant pancreas during follow-up evaluation after pancreatectomy for IPMNs have not been well known.
The aim of this study was to investigate the outcomes after resection of IPMNs, especially focusing on the metachronous occurrence of multifocal IPMNs and distinct PDACs.
METHODS: Medical records of 172 patients who underwent resection of IPMNs were reviewed retrospectively, and the data regarding the occurrence of metachronous IPMNs or PDACs in the remnant pancreas during a mean postoperative follow-up period of 64 months were collected.
RESULTS: The incidence including synchronous and metachronous multifocal occurrence of IPMNs was 20% (34 of 172), and that of distinct PDACs was 9.9% (17 of 172).
Ten metachronous IPMNs developed in the remnant pancreas after a mean time of 23 postoperative months (range, 12-84 mo), and 2 with main duct IPMNs (both were carcinoma in situ) required remnant pancreatectomy.
Six distinct PDACs developed in the remnant pancreas after a mean time of 84 postoperative months (range, 12-150 mo).
Four of them were found to have a tumor with a size of less than 2 cm, whereas the remaining 2 PDACs were found to be unresectable more than 10 years after resection of IPMNs.
CONCLUSIONS: Intense long-term follow-up evaluation is necessary for the early detection of metachronous occurrence of distinct PDACs as well as malignant IPMNs after resection of IPMNs.
PMID: 21995960
Gastrin upregulates the prosurvival factor secretory clusterin in adenocarcinoma cells and in oxyntic mucosa of hypergastrinemic rats.
We show that the gastric hormone gastrin induces the expression of the prosurvival secretory clusterin (sCLU) in rat adenocarcinoma cells.
Clusterin mRNA was still upregulated in the presence of the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide, although at a lower level.
This indicates that gastrin induces clusterin transcription independently of de novo protein synthesis but requires de novo protein synthesis of signal transduction pathway components to achieve maximal expression level.
Luciferase reporter assay indicates that the AP-1 transcription factor complex is involved in gastrin-mediated activation of the clusterin promoter.
Gastrin-induced clusterin expression and subsequent secretion is dependent on sustained treatment, because removal of gastrin after 1-2 h abolished the response.
Neutralization of secreted clusterin by a specific antibody abolished the antiapoptotic effect of gastrin on serum starvation-induced apoptosis, suggesting that extracellular clusterin is involved in gastrin-mediated inhibition of apoptosis.
The clusterin response to gastrin was validated in vivo in hypergastrinemic rats, showing increased clusterin expression in the oxyntic mucosa, as well as higher levels of clusterin in plasma.
In normal rat oxyntic mucosa, clusterin protein was strongly expressed in chromogranin A-immunoreactive neuroendocrine cells, of which the main cell type was the histidine decarboxylase-immunoreactive enterochromaffin-like (ECL) cell.
The association of clusterin with neuroendocrine differentiation was further confirmed in human gastric ECL carcinoids.
Interestingly, in hypergastrinemic rats, clusterin-immunoreactive cells formed distinct groups of diverse cells at the base of many glands.
Our results suggest that clusterin may contribute to gastrin's growth-promoting effect on the oxyntic mucosa.
PMID: 21994954
Chromogranin A and neuron-specific enolase as prognostic markers in patients with advanced pNET treated with everolimus.
Everolimus, an oral inhibitor of mammalian target of rapamycin, significantly prolongs progression-free survival (PFS) in patients with advanced pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (pNET).
Chromogranin A (CgA) and neuron-specific enolase (NSE) are considered general biomarkers of these tumors.
The objective of the study was to evaluate the prognostic value of CgA and NSE in patients with pNET treated with everolimus.
Patients with low- to intermediate-grade advanced pNET enrolled in two phase 2 studies [RAD001 in Advanced Neuroendocrine Tumors (RADIANT-1) and single institution phase II study at The University of Texas M.
D.
Anderson Cancer Center] received everolimus.
Blood samples were collected and analyzed by a central laboratory at baseline and monthly thereafter.
PFS and overall survival (OS) were evaluated in patients with elevated and nonelevated baseline CgA/NSE levels.
In RADIANT-1, elevated vs.
nonelevated baseline CgA was associated with shorter median PFS (8.34 vs.
15.64 months; P = 0.03) and OS (16.95 months vs.
not reached; P < 0.001).
Elevated vs.
nonelevated baseline NSE resulted in shorter median PFS (7.75 vs.
12.29 months; P = 0.01) and OS (13.96 vs.
24.90 months; P = 0.005).
Median PFS was prolonged in patients with early CgA or NSE response (11.0 vs.
5.0 months) compared with those without early biomarker response.
More patients with CgA (87 vs.
50%) or NSE (81 vs.
14%) response experienced tumor shrinkage compared with those without response.
CgA response data from the single-institution phase II study at The University of Texas M.
D.
Anderson Cancer Center study are consistent with data from the RADIANT-1 study.
Elevated baseline CgA/NSE provided prognostic information on PFS and survival; early CgA/NSE responses are potential prognostic markers for treatment outcomes in patients with advanced pNET.
PMID: 21994333
Variations of oral microbiota are associated with pancreatic diseases including pancreatic cancer.
ObjectiveThe associations between oral diseases and increased risk of pancreatic cancer have been reported in several prospective cohort studies.
In this study, we measured variations of salivary microbiota and evaluated their potential associations with pancreatic cancer and chronic pancreatitis.MethodsThis study was divided into three phases: (1) microbial profiling using the Human Oral Microbe Identification Microarray to investigate salivary microbiota variation between 10 resectable patients with pancreatic cancer and 10 matched healthy controls, (2) identification and verification of bacterial candidates by real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) and (3) validation of bacterial candidates by qPCR on an independent cohort of 28 resectable pancreatic cancer, 28 matched healthy control and 27 chronic pancreatitis samples.ResultsComprehensive comparison of the salivary microbiota between patients with pancreatic cancer and healthy control subjects revealed a significant variation of salivary microflora.
Thirty-one bacterial species/clusters were increased in the saliva of patients with pancreatic cancer (n=10) in comparison to those of the healthy controls (n=10), whereas 25 bacterial species/clusters were decreased.
Two out of six bacterial candidates (Neisseria elongata and Streptococcus mitis) were validated using the independent samples, showing significant variation (p<0.05, qPCR) between patients with pancreatic cancer and controls (n=56).
Additionally, two bacteria (Granulicatella adiacens and S mitis) showed significant variation (p<0.05, qPCR) between chronic pancreatitis samples and controls (n=55).
The combination of two bacterial biomarkers (N elongata and S mitis) yielded a receiver operating characteristic plot area under the curve value of 0.90 (95% CI 0.78 to 0.96, p<0.0001) with a 96.4% sensitivity and 82.1% specificity in distinguishing patients with pancreatic cancer from healthy subjects.ConclusionsThe authors observed associations between variations of patients' salivary microbiota with pancreatic cancer and chronic pancreatitis.
This report also provides proof of salivary microbiota as an informative source for discovering non-invasive biomarkers of systemic diseases.
PMID: 21994206
Best case series program supportive cases of Cordyceps militaris- and panax notoginseng-based anticancer herbal formula.
The major aim of this study was to present 2 cancer cases treated with anticancer herbal formula Panax notoginseng and Cordyceps militaris.
Two patients, with pancreatic adenocarcinoma and mucosa-associated lymphatic tissue type lymphoma, respectively, were treated with P notoginseng and C militaris herbal formula without conventional treatments.
Their tumor masses were compared using computed tomography during early and later periods of herbal formula treatment.
On computed tomography, reduction in tumor mass in both patients after 17 and 13 months of herbal treatments was noted, and the patients maintained stable disease and good quality of life until the last contact in November 2008.
C militaris and P notoginseng are potential anticancer herbal prescriptions for adenocarcinoma and mucosa-associated lymphatic tissue type lymphoma.
PMID: 21993922
ZSTK474, a PI3K inhibitor, suppresses proliferation and sensitizes human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells to gemcitabine.
The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt signaling pathway is important in cell proliferation and survival, and it is frequently and aberrantly activated in pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
Potential anti-tumor effect(s) of ZSTK474, a PI3K/Akt inhibitor, together with a key clinically relevant anti-tumor agent, gemcitabine (GEM), have been reported in a human pancreatic cancer xenograft mouse model.
However, the precise molecular mechanism of these anti-tumor effects has not been well elucidated.
In this study, we investigated the molecular mechanism of GEM plus ZSTK474 in reducing tumor cell survival in human pancreatic cancer cell lines.
Our study showed that ZSTK474 inhibited cell growth by arresting cells at the G1 phase and by inducing apoptosis.
ZSTK474 also inhibited the phosphorylation of Akt, GSK3β and BAD.
The combination of GEM and ZSTK474 demonstrated synergistic anti-tumor effects on pancreatic cancer cells in both transient (3 days) and long-term (14 days) clonogenic assays.
Thus, we elucidated the potential molecular mechanism leading to the enhanced anti-tumor effect when GEM and ZSTK474 are combined in treatment.
PMID: 21993732
A fight for life that united a field.
PMID: 21993421
p53 null fluorescent yellow direct repeat (FYDR) mice have normal levels of homologous recombination.
The tumor suppressor p53 is a transcription factor whose function is critical for maintaining genomic stability in mammalian cells.
In response to DNA damage, p53 initiates a signaling cascade that results in cell cycle arrest, DNA repair or, if the damage is severe, programmed cell death.
In addition, p53 interacts with repair proteins involved in homologous recombination.
Mitotic homologous recombination (HR) plays an essential role in the repair of double-strand breaks (DSBs) and broken replication forks.
Loss of function of either p53 or HR leads to an increased risk of cancer.
Given the importance of both p53 and HR in maintaining genomic integrity, we analyzed the effect of p53 on HR in vivo using Fluorescent Yellow Direct Repeat (FYDR) mice as well as with the sister chromatid exchange (SCE) assay.
FYDR mice carry a direct repeat substrate in which an HR event can yield a fluorescent phenotype.
Here, we show that p53 status does not significantly affect spontaneous HR in adult pancreatic cells in vivo or in primary fibroblasts in vitro when assessed using the FYDR substrate and SCEs.
In addition, primary fibroblasts from p53 null mice do not show increased susceptibility to DNA damage-induced HR when challenged with mitomycin C.
Taken together, the FYDR assay and SCE analysis indicate that, for some tissues and cell types, p53 status does not greatly impact HR.
PMID: 21993002
Enhancing antitumor effects in pancreatic cancer cells by combined use of COX-2 and 5-LOX inhibitors.
Cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 and lipoxygenase (LOX)-5 are involved in carcinogenesis of pancreatic cancer.
COX-2 inhibitor celecoxib displays inhibitory effects in pancreatic cancer cell growth.
Recently, it has been reported that COX-2 inhibitor may not be able to suppress pancreatic tumor growth in vivo and its application is further limited by untoward side effects.
The present study provides evidence that combined use of celecoxib and 5-LOX inhibitor MK886 markedly suppresses pancreatic tumor cell growth in vitro.
Compared to the single inhibitor treatment, dual treatment with celecoxib and MK886 exerted additive antitumor effects in pancreatic tumor cells.
We found that MK886 reversed celecoxib-induced increases in 5-LOX gene expression and Erk1/2 activation in pancreatic tumor cells.
Moreover, Dual treatment of pancreatic tumor cells with celecoxib and MK886 inhibited the levels of LBT4 receptor BLT1 and vascular endothelial growth factor.
Our results imply that combined use of celecoxib and MK886 might be an effective way to treat clinical patients with pancreatic cancer.
PMID: 21992816
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma in hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. A case report.
Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer is an autosomal dominant cancer syndrome characterized by highly penetrant diffuse gastric cancer.
It is caused by germ line mutations in CDH1, encoding the cell-cell adhesion protein E-cadherin.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is one of the most dismal malignancies in humans.
Although absent E-cadherin expression in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is related to a higher tumor grade and a worse prognosis, there have been no reports of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma associated with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer.
Here, we describe a patient with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer who was subsequently diagnosed with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
To investigate if the previously identified CDH1 germ line mutation initiated pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma development, we performed mutational and proteomic analyses.
We conclude that the pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma did not occur in the context of the germ line CDH1 mutation but rather appeared as a sporadic event.
Immunohistochemistry ultimately proved to be the most valuable tool of investigation as persistent CDH1 staining in the pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma unequivocally revealed E-cadherin expression.
PMID: 21991388
STAT3 knockdown reduces pancreatic cancer cell invasiveness and matrix metalloproteinase-7 expression in nude mice.
Transducer and activator of transcription-3 (STAT3) plays an important role in tumor cell invasion and metastasis.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the effects of STAT3 knockdown in nude mouse xenografts of pancreatic cancer cells and underlying gene expression.
A STAT3 shRNA lentiviral vector was constructed and infected into SW1990 cells.
qRT-PCR and western immunoblot were performed to detect gene expression.
Nude mouse xenograft assays were used to assess changes in phenotypes of these stable cells in vivo.
HE staining was utilized to evaluate tumor cell invasion and immunohistochemistry was performed to analyze gene expression.
STAT3 shRNA successfully silenced expression of STAT3 mRNA and protein in SW1990 cells compared to control cells.
Growth rate of the STAT3-silenced tumor cells in nude mice was significantly reduced compared to in the control vector tumors and parental cells-generated tumors.
Tumor invasion into the vessel and muscle were also suppressed in the STAT3-silenced tumors compared to controls.
Collagen IV expression was complete and continuous surrounding the tumors of STAT3-silenced SW1990 cells, whereas collagen IV expression was incomplete and discontinuous surrounding the control tumors.
Moreover, microvessel density was significantly lower in STAT3-silenced tumors than parental or control tumors of SW1990 cells.
In addition, MMP-7 expression was reduced in STAT3-silenced tumors compared to parental SW1990 xenografts and controls.
In contrast, expression of IL-1β and IgT7α was not altered.
These data clearly demonstrate that STAT3 plays an important role in regulation of tumor growth, invasion, and angiogenesis, which could be act by reducing MMP-7 expression in pancreatic cancer cells.
PMID: 21990070
Real-time detection of hepatic micrometastases from pancreatic cancer by intraoperative fluorescence imaging: Preliminary results of a prospective study.
BACKGROUND: Recently, a highly sensitive fluorescent imaging technique was developed for the real-time identification of hepatic tumors.
The authors applied this procedure for the intraoperative detection of radiographically occult hepatic micrometastases from pancreatic cancer.
METHODS: Forty-nine consecutive patients with pancreatic cancer who underwent surgical intervention were examined.
Preoperative clinical images had not revealed any hepatic metastases.
On the day before surgery, indocyanine green was injected intravenously.
During the operation, the liver was observed with a near-infrared camera system, and abnormal fluorescent foci were examined by frozen-section histology.
The patients with hepatic micrometastases were judged to have unresectable disease and underwent only palliative surgery followed by systemic chemotherapy using gemcitabine.
RESULTS: Abnormal hepatic fluorescence at least 1.5 mm in greatest dimension without any apparent tumor was observed in 13 patients.
Among them, histologic examination confirmed micrometastases in 8 of 49 patients (16%).
All patients with hepatic micrometastases had clinical T3 or T4 disease and high serum CA19-9 levels (P = .042).
On follow-up computed tomography images that were obtained within 6 months after surgery, the patients with hepatic micrometastases manifested hepatic overt metastases (7 of 8 patients; 88%) more frequently than the patients without hepatic micrometastases (4 of 41 patients; 10%; P < .001).
Regardless of histologic confirmation, the positive predictive value of abnormal fluorescence for the manifestation of hepatic relapse within 6 months was 77% (10 of 13 patients), and the negative predictive value was 97% (35 of 36 patients).
CONCLUSIONS: Indocyanine green-fluorescent imaging can detect hepatic micrometastases of pancreatic cancer during surgery.
The hepatic micrometastases seem to have an adverse clinical impact identical to that of evident distant metastases.
Cancer 2011.
© 2011 American Cancer Society.
PMID: 21990041
The clinical implications and biologic relevance of neurofilament expression in gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasms.
BACKGROUND: Although gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasms (GEP-NENs) exhibit widely divergent behavior, limited biologic information (apart from Ki-67) is available to characterize malignancy.
Therefore, the identification of alternative biomarkers is a key unmet need.
Given the role of internexin alpha (INA) in neuronal development, the authors assessed its function in neuroendocrine cell systems and the clinical implications of its expression as a GEP-NEN biomarker.
METHODS: Functional assays were undertaken to investigate the mechanistic role of INA in the pancreatic BON cell line.
Expression levels of INA were investigated in 50 pancreatic NENs (43 primaries, 7 metastases), 43 small intestinal NENs (25 primaries, 18 metastases), normal pancreas (n = 10), small intestinal mucosa (n = 16), normal enterochromaffin (EC) cells (n = 9), mouse xenografts (n = 4) and NEN cell lines (n = 6) using quantitative polymerase chain reaction, Western blot, and immunostaining analyses.
RESULTS: In BON cells, decreased levels of INA messenger RNA and protein were associated with the inhibition of both proliferation and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling.
INA was not expressed in normal neuroendocrine cells but was overexpressed (from 2-fold to 42-fold) in NEN cell lines and murine xenografts.
In pancreatic NENs, INA was overexpressed compared with pancreatic adenocarcinomas and normal pancreas (27-fold [P = .0001], and 9-fold [P = .02], respectively).
INA transcripts were correlated positively with Ki-67 (correlation coefficient [r] = 0.5; P < .0001) and chromogranin A (r = 0.59; P < .0001).
INA distinguished between primary tumors and metastases (P = .02), and its expression was correlated with tumor size, infiltration, and grade (P < .05).
CONCLUSIONS: INA is a novel NEN biomarker, and its expression was associated with MAPK signaling and proliferation.
In clinical samples, elevated INA was correlated with Ki-67 and identified malignancy.
INA may provide additional biologic information relevant to delineation of both pancreatic NEN tumor phenotypes and clinical behavior.
Cancer 2011.
© 2011 American Cancer Society.
