PMID: 21964254
Calcitonin gene-related peptide expression levels predict motor neuron vulnerability in the superoxide dismutase 1-G93A mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) some motor neurons degenerate while others survive.
The molecular mechanisms underlying this selective vulnerability and resistance, respectively, are poorly understood.
Since the neuropeptide, calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), is expressed by many but not all motor neurons, we asked if motor neuron CGRP levels predict their vulnerability in the SOD1-G93A mouse model of ALS.
In wild type mice three types of somatic motor neurons were distinguished based on their CGRP expression pattern, i.e. highCGRP, lowCGRP, and nonCGRP.
Since motor nuclei III, IV and VI contained mostly nonCGRP motor neurons, they defined the oculomotor group.
In comparison, the facial group (nuclei V, VII and XII) contained equal numbers of all three types, while the spinomedullary group (ambiguus nucleus and lumbar spinal cord) contained mainly highCGRP motor neurons.
Analysis on the transcript level, and of mice lacking the αCGRP isoform, revealed that these group differences in CGRP expression were predominantly based on αCGRP.
At disease end-stage in SOD1-G93A mice, group-specific extent of motor neuron loss correlated with CGRP expression as neurons with highCGRP were reduced by 80%, those with lowCGRP by 50%, and nonCGRP motor neurons were not significantly affected in all three groups.
Finally, highCGRP motor neuron degeneration preceded lowCGRP motor neuron degeneration during disease progression.
Our analysis revealed that the relative abundance of CGRP mRNA and immunoreactivity in motor neurons predicts their vulnerability.
CGRP may be an autocrine or paracrine factor promoting motor neuron degeneration in this ALS model.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22874379
Psychological evaluation of 24-hour home nursing care: application of an analytic hierarchy process to improve quality of life.
Twenty-four-hour home nursing care services for patients with severe diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis have been started in Japan.
To improve the quality of home nursing care as well as the patients quality of life (QOL), we undertook a psychological evaluation of the care services.
An analytic hierarchy process (AHP) was applied to the psychological evaluation.
Forty-eight staff replied to our questionnaire, of which twenty-nine staff showed a consistency index of less than 0.1.
In the first hierarchy, the intensities of importance were 0.436 for quality of care, 0.351 for staff awareness, and 0.213 for economic efficiency.
Most staff appeared to feel that the relationships among patients, their families, and staffs were the most important criteria.
While many staff might have increased their physical profit and burden, the intensities of importance for those criteria were low.
PMID: 23497730
Measurement of cystatin C functional activity in the cerebrospinal fluid of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and control subjects.
Cystatin C is a constitutively expressed and abundant cysteine protease inhibitor within the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
Recent studies have reported a significant reduction in cystatin C concentration in the CSF of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and several other neurodegenerative diseases, relative to healthy controls.
Cystatin C can exhibit both neuroprotective and neurotoxic properties, suggesting that altered CSF cystatin C concentrations could potentially impact the pathogenesis or progression of these disorders.
However, it is unclear if alterations in cystatin C concentration result in physiologically relevant differences in its functional activity within the CSF.
Measurements of the cysteine protease inhibitory activity of cystatin C within the CSF have not been reported, and the relationship between CSF cystatin C concentration and activity levels in different disease contexts has not been investigated.
We used a papain inhibition assay to evaluate the total cystatin C activity in CSF samples from 23 ALS patients, 23 healthy controls, and 23 neurological disease controls.
Cystatin C concentrations in these samples were previously measured by ELISA.
Correlations between cystatin C concentration and activity were assessed with nonparametric statistics.
Activity ratios were compared among diagnostic groups using both one-way ANOVA and repeated measures statistics.
Total cystatin C activity was found to be directly proportional to its protein concentration in all subjects, and cystatin C activity was not altered in ALS patients.
In addition, our data suggest that cystatin C is the predominant cysteine protease inhibitor in human CSF.
Our data demonstrate the successful measurement of the functional activity of cystatin C in the CSF, and show that total cystatin C activity can be inferred from its total protein concentration.
Our results also suggest that cystatin C is the major cysteine protease inhibitor in human CSF and altered CSF cystatin C concentration may play a role in the pathobiology of ALS and other neurological diseases.
PMID: 21391902
Chronic inflammatory disorders and their redox control: from molecular mechanisms to therapeutic opportunities.
A chronic inflammatory disease is a condition characterized by persistent inflammation.
A number of human pathologies fall into this category, and a great deal of research has been conducted to learn more about their characteristics and underlying mechanisms.
In many cases, a genetic component has been identified, but also external factors like food, smoke, or environmental pollutants can significantly contribute to worsen their symptoms.
Accumulated evidence clearly shows that chronic inflammatory diseases are subjected to a redox control.
Here, we shall review the identity, source, regulation, and biological activity of redox molecules, to put in a better perspective their key-role in cancer, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, atherosclerosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases, and inflammatory bowel diseases.
In addition, the impact of redox species on autoimmune disorders (rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, psoriasis, and celiac disease) and neurodegenerative diseases (Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and multiple sclerosis) will be discussed, along with their potential therapeutic implications as novel drugs to combat chronic inflammatory disorders.
PMID: 22219285
Mitochondrial dynamics and bioenergetic dysfunction is associated with synaptic alterations in mutant SOD1 motor neurons.
Mutations in Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS), a rapidly fatal motor neuron disease.
Mutant SOD1 has pleiotropic toxic effects on motor neurons, among which mitochondrial dysfunction has been proposed as one of the contributing factors in motor neuron demise.
Mitochondria are highly dynamic in neurons; they are constantly reshaped by fusion and move along neurites to localize at sites of high-energy utilization, such as synapses.
The finding of abnormal mitochondria accumulation in neuromuscular junctions, where the SOD1-FALS degenerative process is though to initiate, suggests that impaired mitochondrial dynamics in motor neurons may be involved in pathogenesis.
We addressed this hypothesis by live imaging microscopy of photo-switchable fluorescent mitoDendra in transgenic rat motor neurons expressing mutant or wild-type human SOD1.
We demonstrate that mutant SOD1 motor neurons have impaired mitochondrial fusion in axons and cell bodies.
Mitochondria also display selective impairment of retrograde axonal transport, with reduced frequency and velocity of movements.
Fusion and transport defects are associated with smaller mitochondrial size, decreased mitochondrial density, and defective mitochondrial membrane potential.
Furthermore, mislocalization of mitochondria at synapses among motor neurons, in vitro, correlates with abnormal synaptic number, structure, and function.
Dynamics abnormalities are specific to mutant SOD1 motor neuron mitochondria, since they are absent in wild-type SOD1 motor neurons, they do not involve other organelles, and they are not found in cortical neurons.
Together, these results suggest that impaired mitochondrial dynamics may contribute to the selective degeneration of motor neurons in SOD1-FALS.
PMID: 22595972
Mutant superoxide dismutase-1 indistinguishable from wild-type causes ALS.
A reason for screening amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients for mutations in the superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1) gene is the opportunity to find novel mutations with properties that can give information on pathogenesis.
A novel c.352C&gt;G (L117V) SOD1 mutation was found in two Syrian ALS families living in Europe.
The disease showed unusually low penetrance and slow progression.
In erythrocytes, the total SOD1 activity, as well as specific activity of the mutant protein, was equal in carriers of the mutation and family controls lacking SOD1 mutations.
The structural stabilities of the L117V mutant and wild-type SOD1 under denaturing conditions were likewise equal, but considerably lower than that of murine SOD1.
As analyzed with an ELISA specific for misfolded SOD1 species, no differences were found in the content of misfolded SOD1 protein between extracts of fibroblasts from wild-type controls and from an L117V patient.
In contrast, elevated levels of misfolded SOD1 protein were found in fibroblasts from ALS patients carrying seven other mutations in the SOD1 gene.
We conclude that mutations in SOD1 that result in a fully stable protein are associated with low disease penetrance for ALS and may be found in cases of apparently sporadic ALS.
Wild-type human SOD1 is moderately stable, and was found here to be within the stability range of ALS-causing SOD1 variants, lending support to the hypothesis that wild-type SOD1 could be more generally involved in ALS pathogenesis.
PMID: 22826701
A non-adhesive solid-gel electrode for a non-invasive brain-machine interface.
A non-invasive brain-machine interface (BMI) or brain-computer interface is a technology for helping individuals with disabilities and utilizes neurophysiological signals from the brain to control external machines or computers without requiring surgery.
However, when applying electroencephalography (EEG) methodology, users must place EEG electrodes on the scalp each time, and the development of easy-to-use electrodes for clinical use is required.
In this study, we developed a conductive non-adhesive solid-gel electrode for practical non-invasive BMIs.
We performed basic material testing, including examining the volume resistivity, viscoelasticity, and moisture-retention properties of the solid-gel.
Then, we compared the performance of the solid-gel, a conventional paste, and an in-house metal-pin-based electrode using impedance measurements and P300-BMI testing.
The solid-gel was observed to be conductive (volume resistivity 13.2 Ωcm) and soft (complex modulus 105.4 kPa), and it remained wet for a prolonged period (&gt;10 h) in a dry environment.
Impedance measurements revealed that the impedance of the solid-gel-based and conventional paste-based electrodes was superior to that of the pin-based electrode.
The EEG measurement suggested that the signals obtained with the solid-gel electrode were comparable to those with the conventional paste-based electrode.
Moreover, the P300-BMI study suggested that systems using the solid-gel or pin-based electrodes were effective.
One of the advantages of the solid-gel is that it does not require cleaning after use, whereas the conventional paste adheres to the hair, which requires washing.
Furthermore, the solid-gel electrode was not painful compared with a metal-pin electrode.
Taken together, the results suggest that the solid-gel electrode worked well for practical BMIs and could be useful for bedridden patients such as those with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
PMID: 23164079
Host induction by transplanted neural stem cells in the spinal cord: further evidence for an adult spinal cord neurogenic niche.
To explore the hypothesis that grafts of exogenous stem cells in the spinal cord of athymic rats or rats with transgenic motor neuron disease can induce endogenous stem cells and initiate intrinsic repair mechanisms that can be exploited in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis therapeutics.
Human neural stem cells (NSCs) were transplanted into the lower lumbar spinal cord of healthy rats or rats with transgenic motor neuron disease to explore whether signals related to stem cells can initiate intrinsic repair mechanisms in normal and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis subjects.
Patterns of migration and differentiation of NSCs in the gray and white matter, with emphasis on the central canal region and ependymal cell-driven neurogenesis, were analyzed.
Findings suggest that there is extensive cross-signaling between transplanted NSCs and a putative neurogenic niche in the ependyma of the lower lumbar cord.
The formation of a neuronal cord from NSC-derived cells next to ependyma suggests that this structure may serve a mediating or auxiliary role for ependymal induction.
These findings raise the possibility that NSCs may stimulate endogenous neurogenesis and initiate intrinsic repair mechanisms in the lower spinal cord.
PMID: 22903397
The genetics and neuropathology of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disease of motor neurons leading to death from respiratory failure within about 3 years of symptom onset.
A family history of ALS is obtained in about 5 % but the distinction between familial and apparently sporadic ALS is artificial and genetic factors play a role in all types.
For several years, only one gene was known to have a role in ALS pathogenesis, SOD1.
In the last few years there has been a rapid advance in our genetic knowledge of the causes of ALS, and the relationship of the genetic subtypes with pathological subtypes and clinical phenotype.
Mutations in the gene for TDP-43 protein, TARDBP, highlight this, with pathology mimicking closely that found in other types of ALS, and a phenotypic spectrum that includes frontotemporal dementia.
Mutations in the FUS gene, closely related to TDP-43, lead to a similar clinical phenotype but distinct pathology, so that the three pathological groups represented by SOD1, TARDBP, and FUS are distinct.
In this review, we explore the genetic architecture of ALS, highlight some of the genes implicated in pathogenesis, and describe their phenotypic range and overlap with other diseases.
PMID: 21810174
TDP-43 and FUS/TLS: sending a complex message about messenger RNA in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis?
TAR DNA binding protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43) and fused in sarcoma/translocated in liposarcoma (FUS/TLS) have recently been linked to the pathology of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
These proteins share many common features that include interaction with either DNA or RNA, participation in the formation of RNP complexes, the formation of pathological aggregates in degenerating motor neurons in ALS, and the ability to impact the RNA metabolism pathway at multiple levels from transcription to translation.
Coupled with the observation that mutations in either TDP-43 or FUS/TLS are associated with ALS, this provides further support for the integral role of altered RNA metabolism in ALS.
© 2011 The Authors Journal compilation © 2011 FEBS.
PMID: 23235148
Accelerated disease onset with stabilized familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)-linked mutant TDP-43 proteins.
Abnormal protein accumulation is a pathological hallmark of neurodegenerative diseases, including accumulation of TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Dominant mutations in the TDP-43 gene are causative for familial ALS; however, the relationship between mutant protein biochemical phenotypes and disease course and their significance to disease pathomechanism are not known.
Here, we found that longer half-lives of mutant proteins correlated with accelerated disease onset.
Based on our findings, we established a cell model in which chronic stabilization of wild-type TDP-43 protein provoked cytotoxicity and recapitulated pathogenic protein cleavage and insolubility to the detergent Sarkosyl, TDP-43 properties that have been observed in sporadic ALS lesions.
Furthermore, these cells showed proteasomal impairment and dysregulation of their own mRNA levels.
These results suggest that chronically increased stability of mutant or wild-type TDP-43 proteins results in a gain of toxicity through abnormal proteostasis.
PMID: 22971635
Nutritional intervention for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The aim of the study was to assess the consequences of early and systematic nutritional intervention on the clinical conditions of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients and on the opportunity to maintain a good nutritional status for as long as possible.
Thirty-three subjects with ALS.
Protocol Group: 12 subjects (9 M and 3 F) monitored according to a precise nutritional intervention protocol.
Control Group: 21 subjects (10 M and 11 F) monitored before applying the protocol.
Data recorded at the time of initial assessment were compared and expressed as the mean ± standard deviation for the Protocol Group vs. the Control Group: BMI (kg/m2) 23.6 ± 4.1 vs. 21.6 ± 3.5; weight loss as a percentage of usual weight 6.6 ± 7.9 vs. 16.3 ± 8.8 (P=0.003).
At six months: weight loss as a percentage of usual weight 4.9 ± 6.2 vs. 16.9 ± 10.2 (P=0.002).
At 12 months: weight loss as a percentage of usual weight 7.3 ± 7.1 vs. 17.5 ± 11.1 (P=0.03).
At the first follow-up visit, fewer patients in the Protocol Group were receiving enteral nutrition (25%) than patients in the Control Group (60%).
At six-month follow-up visit: 30% vs. 68%.
Standard enteral nutrition formulas were used.
One year after initial assessment, the mortality rate was 17% for the Protocol Group, whereas it was 24% at six months and 33% after one year for the Control Group.
If patients are treated before any significant weight loss occurs, early and specific nutritional intervention allows good nutritional status to be maintained for a longer period; if artificial nutrition is required, standard diets are able to ensure adequate clinical results.
PMID: 22226010
Writing errors in ALS related to loss of neuronal integrity in the anterior cingulate gyrus.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by loss of motor neuron and various cognitive deficits including writing errors.
(11)C-flumazenil (FMZ), the positron emission tomography (PET) GABA(A) receptor ligand, is a marker of cortical dysfunction.
The objective of this study was to investigate the relationship between cognitive deficits and loss of neuronal integrity in ALS patients using (11)C-FMZ PET.
Ten patients with ALS underwent both neuropsychological tests and (11)C-FMZ-PET.
The binding potential (BP) of FMZ was calculated from (11)C-FMZ PET images.
There were no significant correlations between the BP and most test scores except for the writing error index (WEI), which was measured by the modified Western Aphasia Battery - VB (WAB-IVB) test.
The severity of writing error was associated with loss of neuronal integrity in the bilateral anterior cingulate gyrus with mild right predominance (n=9; x=4 mm, y=36 mm, z=4 mm, Z=5.1).
The results showed that writing errors in our patients with ALS were related to dysfunction in the anterior cingulate gyrus.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23545117
Genome wide array analysis indicates that an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mutation of FUS causes an early increase of CAMK2N2 in vitro.
Mutations in the RNA binding protein FUS (fused in sarcoma) have been linked to a subset of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) cases.
The mutations are clustered in the C-terminal nuclear localization sequence (NLS).
Various FUS mutants accumulate in the cytoplasm whereas wild-type (WT) FUS is mainly nuclear.
Here we investigate the effect of one ALS causing mutant (FUS-ΔNLS, also known as R495X) on pre-mRNA splicing and RNA expression using genome wide exon-junction arrays.
Using a non-neuronal stable cell line with inducible FUS expression, we detected early changes in RNA composition.
In particular, mutant FUS-ΔNLS increased calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II inhibitor 2 (CAMK2N2) at both mRNA and protein levels, whereas WT-FUS had no effect.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments showed that FUS-ΔNLS accumulated at the CAMK2N2 promoter region, whereas promoter occupation by WT-FUS remained constant.
Given the loss of FUS-ΔNLS in the nucleus through the mutation-induced translocation, this increase of promoter occupancy is surprising.
It indicates that, despite the obvious cytoplasmic accumulation, FUS-ΔNLS can act through a nuclear gain of function mechanism.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23570271
Roles of vitamin D in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: possible genetic and cellular signaling mechanisms.
Evidence suggests that there are aberrations in the vitamin D-endocrine system in subjects with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Here, we review the relationship between vitamin D and ALS.
Vitamin D deficiency was reported in patients with ALS.
Dietary vitamin D(3) supplementation improves functional capacity in the G93A transgenic mouse model of ALS.
Genetic studies have provided an opportunity to identify the proteins that link vitamin D to ALS pathology, including major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecules, toll-like receptors, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1, heme oxygenase-1, and calcium-binding proteins, as well as the reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate.
Vitamin D also exerts its effect on ALS through cell-signaling mechanisms, including glutamate, matrix metalloproteinases, mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways, the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway, prostaglandins, reactive oxygen species, and nitric oxide synthase.
In conclusion, vitamin D may have a role in ALS.
Further investigation of vitamin D in ALS patients is needed.
PMID: 23027932
Neuroprotective efficacy of aminopropyl carbazoles in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
We previously reported the discovery of P7C3, an aminopropyl carbazole having proneurogenic and neuroprotective properties in newborn neural precursor cells of the hippocampal dentate gyrus.
We have further found that chemicals having efficacy in this in vivo screening assay also protect dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra following exposure to the neurotoxin 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine, a mouse model of Parkinson disease.
Here, we provide evidence that an active analog of P7C3, known as P7C3A20, protects ventral horn spinal cord motor neurons from cell death in the G93A-SOD1 mutant mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
P7C3A20 is efficacious in this model when administered at disease onset, and protection from cell death correlates with preservation of motor function in assays of walking gait and in the accelerating rotarod test.
The prototypical member of this series, P7C3, delays disease progression in G93A-SOD1 mice when administration is initiated substantially earlier than the expected time of symptom onset.
Dimebon, an antihistaminergic drug with significantly weaker proneurogenic and neuroprotective efficacy than P7C3, confers no protection in this ALS model.
We propose that the chemical scaffold represented by P7C3 and P7C3A20 may provide a basis for the discovery and optimization of pharmacologic agents for the treatment of ALS.
PMID: 23777095
[Update of multifocal motor neuropathy].
We surveyed patients with multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN) in comparison with those with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) in Japan.
This retrospective study consisted of 47 patients with MMN and 1,051 patients with ALS from major neuromuscular centers in Japan from 2005 to 2009.
The ratio of MMN to ALS patients (0-0.10) varied among the centers, but mostly converged to 0.05.
The prevalence was estimated to be 0.3 cases for MMN and 6.63 cases for ALS per 100,000 persons.
Twenty-seven of 47 patients (56.5%) showed conduction block (CB).
Of the 45 patients who received intravenous immunoglobulin (MVg), 34(75.6 %) demonstrated clear clinical improvement.
PMID: 22351600
Novel telomerase-increasing compound in mouse brain delays the onset of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Telomerase is expressed in the neonatal brain, in distinct regions of adult brain, and was shown to protect developing neurons from apoptosis.
Telomerase reactivation by gene manipulation reverses neurodegeneration in aged telomerase-deficient mice.
Hence, we and others hypothesized that increasing telomerase expression by pharmaceutical compounds may protect brain cells from death caused by damaging agents.
In this study, we demonstrate for the first time that the novel compound AGS-499 increases telomerase activity and expression in the mouse brain and spinal cord (SC).
It exerts neuroprotective effects in NMDA-injected CD-1 mice, delays the onset and progression of the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) disease in SOD1 transgenic mice, and, after the onset of ALS, it increases the survival of motor neurons in the SC by 60%.
The survival of telomerase-expressing cells (i.e. motor neurons), but not telomerase-deficient cells, exposed to oxidative stress was increased by AGS-499 treatment, suggesting that the AGS-499 effects are telomerase-mediated.
Therefore, a controlled and transient increase in telomerase expression and activity in the brain by AGS-499 may exert neuroprotective effects.
Copyright © 2012 EMBO Molecular Medicine.
PMID: 22332887
A novel variant of human superoxide dismutase 1 harboring amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-associated and experimental mutations in metal-binding residues and free cysteines lacks toxicity in vivo.
Mutations in superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The Cu-binding capacity of SOD1 has spawned hypotheses that implicate metal-mediated production of reactive species as a potential mechanism of toxicity.
In past experiments, we have tested such hypotheses by mutating residues in SOD1 that normally coordinate the binding of Cu, finding that such mutants retain the capacity to induce motor neuron disease.
We now describe the lack of disease in mice that express a variant of human SOD1 in which residues that coordinate the binding of Cu and Zn have been mutated (SODMD).
SODMD encodes three disease-causing and four experimental mutations that ultimately eliminate all histidines involved in the binding of metals; and includes one disease-causing and one experimental mutation that eliminate secondary metal binding at C6 and C111.
We show that the combined effect of these mutations produces a protein that is unstable but does not aggregate on its own, is not toxic, and does not induce disease when co-expressed with high levels of wild-type SOD1.
In cell culture models, we determine that the combined mutation of C6 and C111 to G and S, respectively, dramatically reduces the aggregation propensity of SODMD and may account for the lack of toxicity for this mutant.
© 2012 The Authors.
Journal of Neurochemistry © 2012 International Society for Neurochemistry.
PMID: 22875086
C9ORF72 repeat expansion in clinical and neuropathologic frontotemporal dementia cohorts.
To determine the frequency of a hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72, a gene of unknown function implicated in frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), in Australian FTD patient cohorts and to examine the clinical and neuropathologic phenotypes associated with this expansion.
We examined a clinically ascertained FTD cohort (n = 89) and a neuropathologically ascertained cohort of frontotemporal lobar degeneration cases with TDP-43 pathology (FTLD-TDP) (n = 22) for the C9ORF72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion using a repeat primed PCR assay.
All expansion-positive patients were genotyped for rs3849942, a surrogate marker for the chromosome 9p21 risk haplotype previously associated with FTD and ALS.
The C9ORF72 repeat expansion was detected in 10% of patients in the clinically diagnosed cohort, rising to 29% in those with a positive family history of early-onset dementia or ALS.
The prevalence of psychotic features was significantly higher in expansion-positive cases (56% vs 14%).
In the pathology cohort, 41% of TDP-43-positive cases harbored the repeat expansion, and all exhibited type B pathology.
One of the 17 expansion-positive probands was homozygous for the nonrisk G allele of rs3849942.
The C9ORF72 repeat expansion is a relatively common cause of FTD in Australian populations, and is especially common in those with FTD-ALS, psychotic features, and a strong family history.
Detection of a repeat expansion on the 9p21 putative nonrisk haplotype suggests that not all mutation carriers are necessarily descended from a common founder and indicates that the expansion may have occurred on multiple haplotype backgrounds.
PMID: 22875087
Frontotemporal dementia due to C9ORF72 mutations: clinical and imaging features.
To describe the phenotype of patients with C9FTD/ALS (C9ORF72) hexanucleotide repeat expansion.
A total of 648 patients with frontotemporal dementia (FTD)-related clinical diagnoses and Alzheimer disease (AD) dementia were tested for C9ORF72 expansion and 31 carried expanded repeats (C9+).
Clinical and neuroimaging data were compared between C9+ (15 behavioral variant FTD [bvFTD], 11 FTD-motor neuron disease [MND], 5 amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [ALS]) and sporadic noncarriers (48 bvFTD, 19 FTD-MND, 6 ALS).
All C9+ patients displayed clinical syndromes of bvFTD, ALS, or FTD-MND.
At first evaluation, C9+ bvFTD patients had more delusions and greater impairment of working memory, but milder eating dysregulation compared to bvFTD noncarriers.
C9+FTD-MND patients had a trend for longer survival and had an earlier age at onset than FTD-MND noncarriers.
Voxel-based morphometry demonstrated more thalamic atrophy in FTD and FTD-MND carriers than in noncarriers.
Patients with the C9ORF72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion develop bvFTD, ALS, or FTD-MND with similar clinical and imaging features to sporadic cases.
Other FTD spectrum diagnoses and AD dementia appear rare or absent among C9+ individuals.
Longer survival in C9+ FTD-MND suggests slower disease progression and thalamic atrophy represents a novel and unexpected feature.
PMID: 21941597
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: new genes, new models, and new mechanisms.
Research aimed at understanding amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) has seen exceptional growth in the past few years.
New genes, new models, and new mechanisms have not only improved our understanding, but also contributed to the increasing complexity of ALS pathogenesis.
The focus of this piece is to highlight some of the more notable developments in the field and to encourage a re-appreciation for the superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) mouse models.
PMID: 23549464
Histochemical approaches to assess cell-to-cell transmission of misfolded proteins in neurodegenerative diseases.
Formation, aggregation and transmission of abnormal proteins are common features in neurodegenerative disorders including Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and Huntington's disease.
The mechanisms underlying protein alterations in neurodegenerative diseases remain controversial.
Novel findings highlighted altered protein clearing systems as common biochemical pathways which generate protein misfolding, which in turn causes protein aggregation and protein spreading.
In fact, proteinaceous aggregates are prone to cell-to-cell propagation.
This is reminiscent of what happens in prion disorders, where the prion protein misfolds thus forming aggregates which spread to neighbouring cells.
For this reason, the term prionoids is currently used to emphasize how several misfolded proteins are transmitted in neurodegenerative diseases following this prion-like pattern.
Histochemical techniques including the use of specific antibodies covering both light and electron microscopy offer a powerful tool to describe these phenomena and investigate specific molecular steps.
These include: prion like protein alterations; glycation of prion-like altered proteins to form advanced glycation end-products (AGEs); mechanisms of extracellular secretion; interaction of AGEs with specific receptors placed on neighbouring cells (RAGEs).
The present manuscript comments on these phenomena aimed to provide a consistent scenario of the available histochemical approaches to dissect each specific step.
PMID: 21998625
Lack of effect of methylene blue in the SOD1 G93A mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Methylene blue (MB) is a drug with a long history and good safety profile, and with recently-described features desirable in a treatment for ALS.
We tested oral MB in inbred high-copy number SOD1 G93A mice, at 25 mg/kg/day beginning at 45 days of age.
We measured disease onset, progression, and survival.
There was no difference in disease onset between MB-treated mice and controls, although subgroup analysis showed a modest but statistically significant delay in disease onset in MB-treated female mice only (control 122 ± 10.2 versus MB 129 ± 10.0 days).
MB-treated mice of both sexes spent more time in less severe stages of disease, and less time in later, more severe stages of disease.
There was a non-significant trend to longer survival in MB-treated animals (control males reached endpoint at 161 ± 14.1 days, versus 166 ± 10.0 days for MB-treated animals, and control females reached endpoint at 171 ± 6.2 days versus 173 ± 13.4 days for MB-treated animals).
In spite of a strong theoretical rationale, MB had no significant effects on onset or survival in the inbred SOD1 G93A mouse model of ALS.
PMID: 22558300
Early functional deficit and microglial disturbances in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by selective motoneurons degeneration.
There is today no clear-cut pathogenesis sequence nor any treatment.
However growing evidences are in favor of the involvement, besides neurons, of several partners such as glia and muscles.
To better characterize the time course of pathological events in an animal model that recapitulates human ALS symptoms, we investigated functional and cellular characteristics of hSOD1(G93A) mice.
We have evaluated locomotor function of hSOD1(G93A) mice through dynamic walking patterns and spontaneous motor activity analysis.
We detected early functional deficits that redefine symptoms onset at 60 days of age, i.e.
20 days earlier than previously described.
Moreover, sequential combination of these approaches allows monitoring of motor activity up to disease end stage.
To tentatively correlate early functional deficit with cellular alterations we have used flow cytometry and immunohistochemistry approaches to characterize neuromuscular junctions, astrocytes and microglia.
We show that (1) decrease in neuromuscular junction's number correlates with motor impairment, (2) astrocytes number is not altered at pre- and early-symptomatic ages but intraspinal repartition is modified at symptoms onset, and (3) microglia modifications precede disease onset.
At pre-symptomatic age, we show a decrease in microglia number whereas at onset of the disease two distinct microglia sub-populations emerge.
In conclusion, precise motor analysis updates the onset of the disease in hSOD1(G93A) mice and allows locomotor monitoring until the end stage of the disease.
Early functional deficits coincide with alterations of neuromuscular junctions.
Importantly, we identify different sets of changes in microglia before disease onset as well as at early-symptomatic stage.
This finding not only brings a new sequence of cellular events in the natural history of the disease, but it may also provide clues in the search for biomarkers of the disease, and potential therapeutic targets.
PMID: 23445362
Arylazanylpyrazolone derivatives as inhibitors of mutant superoxide dismutase 1 dependent protein aggregation for the treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The arylsulfanylpyrazolone and aryloxanylpyrazolone scaffolds previously were reported to inhibit Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase 1 dependent protein aggregation and to extend survival in the ALS mouse model.
However, further evaluation of these compounds indicated weak pharmacokinetic properties and a relatively low maximum tolerated dose.
On the basis of an ADME analysis, a new series of compounds, the arylazanylpyrazolones, has been synthesized, and structure-activity relationships were determined.
The SAR results showed that the pyrazolone ring is critical to cellular protection.
The NMR, IR, and computational analyses suggest that phenol-type tautomers of the pyrazolone ring are the active pharmacophore with the arylazanylpyrazolone analogues.
A comparison of experimental and calculated IR spectra is shown to be a valuable method to identify the predominant tautomer.
PMID: 23300739
Identification of epigenetically altered genes in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a terminal disease involving the progressive degeneration of motor neurons within the motor cortex, brainstem and spinal cord.
Most cases are sporadic (sALS) with unknown causes suggesting that the etiology of sALS may not be limited to the genotype of patients, but may be influenced by exposure to environmental factors.
Alterations in epigenetic modifications are likely to play a role in disease onset and progression in ALS, as aberrant epigenetic patterns may be acquired throughout life.
The aim of this study was to identify epigenetic marks associated with sALS.
We hypothesize that epigenetic modifications may alter the expression of pathogenesis-related genes leading to the onset and progression of sALS.
Using ELISA assays, we observed alterations in global methylation (5 mC) and hydroxymethylation (5 HmC) in postmortem sALS spinal cord but not in whole blood.
Loci-specific differentially methylated and expressed genes in sALS spinal cord were identified by genome-wide 5mC and expression profiling using high-throughput microarrays.
Concordant direction, hyper- or hypo-5mC with parallel changes in gene expression (under- or over-expression), was observed in 112 genes highly associated with biological functions related to immune and inflammation response.
Furthermore, literature-based analysis identified potential associations among the epigenes.
Integration of methylomics and transcriptomics data successfully revealed methylation changes in sALS spinal cord.
This study represents an initial identification of epigenetic regulatory mechanisms in sALS which may improve our understanding of sALS pathogenesis for the identification of biomarkers and new therapeutic targets.
PMID: 23085936
Concurrence of multiple sclerosis and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in patients with hexanucleotide repeat expansions of C9ORF72.
Crossover in the pathogenic mechanisms of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and multiple sclerosis (MS) has been described but is poorly understood.
A GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat expansion of C9ORF72 has recently been identified in a significant proportion of patients with ALS.
In approximately 650 patients diagnosed with ALS from the North of England we identified seven patients who initially presented with MS.
DNA obtained from five patients with MS-ALS and 215 patients with MS alone was screened for the C9ORF72 expansion.
Post-mortem material was examined from two patients with MS-ALS.
Gene expression profiling was performed on lymphoblastoid cells and levels of CXCL10 were measured in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from patients with ALS with and without the C9ORF72 expansion and controls.
Concurrence of MS and ALS is higher than expected in our population.
The C9ORF72 expansion was identified in 80% of patients with MS-ALS but not in those with MS alone.
In the presence of preceding MS, C9ORF72-ALS was more rapidly progressive.
MetaCore analysis identified alteration of the NF-кB pathway in C9ORF72-ALS and non-C9ORF72-ALS.
NF-кB activation is associated with increased expression of the neuroprotective cytokine CXCL10 but, in C9ORF72-ALS, CXCL10 is downregulated and CSF levels are reduced.
We propose that MS-associated neuroinflammation may affect penetrance and progression of the C9ORF72 expansion.
In particular, the NF-кB pathway is activated in MS and appears to be dysfunctional in C9ORF72-ALS.
Aberrant downregulation of CXCL10 may explain the predisposition of C9ORF72 expansion carriers to develop ALS in the context of MS and NF-кB activation, and offers a potential therapeutic target.
PMID: 22995823
In silico docking reveals possible Riluzole binding sites on Nav1.6 sodium channel: implications for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis therapy.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a common neurodegenerative disorder characterized mainly by a progressive loss of motor neurons.
Glutamate excitotoxicity is likely the main cause of neuronal death, and Riluzole interferes with glutamate-mediated transmission.
Thus, in such independent pathway, these effects may be partly due to inactivation of voltage-dependent sodium channels.
Here we predict the structural model of the interaction and report the possible binding sites of Riluzole on Nav1.6 channel.
The docked complexes were subjected to minimization and we further investigated the key interacting residues, binding free energies, pairing bridge determination, folding pattern, hydrogen bounding formation, hydrophobic contacts and flexibilities.
Our results demonstrate that Riluzole interacts with the Nav1.6 channel, more specifically in the key residues TYR 1787, LEU 1843 and GLN 1799, suggesting possible cellular implications driven by these amino acids on Riluzole-Nav1.6 interaction, which may serve as an important output for a more specific and experimental drug design therapy against ALS.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22052354
Modeling ALS and FTLD proteinopathies in yeast: an efficient approach for studying protein aggregation and toxicity.
In recent years there have been several reports of human neurodegenerative diseases that involve protein misfolding being modeled in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
This review summarizes recent advances in understanding the specific mechanisms underlying intracellular neuronal pathology during Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) and Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration (FTLD), including SOD1, TDP-43 and FUS protein inclusions and the potential of these proteins to be involved in pathogenic prion-like mechanisms.
More specifically, we focus on findings from yeast systems that offer tremendous possibilities for screening for genetic and chemical modifiers of disease-related proteotoxicity.
PMID: 21879834
Patients' perceptions of services and preferences for care in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a review.
Service providers and service users often have different perspectives on health and social care services.
We have undertaken a systematic review of empirical data between 1988 and March 2011 relating to ALS service users' perspectives on health and social care services.
Forty-seven texts were extracted and a narrative synthesis conducted.
Few studies have explored ALS patients' experiences in relation to their satisfaction with services.
Our review showed that ALS patients expect dignified care but they are often dissatisfied with health care services and have unmet expectations of their care.
Most studies of decision-making and preferences for care have focused on end-of-life intervention.
Various factors influence preferences for care from the service user perspective and people with ALS may adjust their use of services as they negotiate change.
In conclusion, further research on the timeliness of services to meet changing needs of service users is required.
The service user experience of allied health care services prior to end-of-life care also warrants investigation.
Service providers need to support people with ALS as they negotiate feelings of acceptance and independence.
Research to identify the key parameters of the ALS patient experience of services is required.
PMID: 23499957
Cortical excitability differences between flexor pollicis longus and APB.
Although abductor pollicis brevis (APB) and flexor pollicis longus (FPL) share a common peripheral nerve supply, these muscles subserve different functions and may be differently affected in neurodegenerative disease such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
As a consequence, differences in cortical excitability may potentially develop in relation to these functional differences.
Cortical excitability was assessed using the threshold tracking transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) technique in 15 healthy controls with motor responses recorded over the APB and FPL using surface electrode recordings.
Short-interval intracortical inhibition (SICI) was significantly reduced from the FPL compared to APB (SICIFPL 6.9±1.8%; SICIAPB 10.7±1.4%, P&lt;0.01).
In addition, the FPL motor evoked potential amplitude (MEPFPL 14.7±2.3%; MEPAPB 21.7±3.9%; P&lt;0.01) and cortical silent period duration (CSPFPL 174.7±6.7ms; CSPAPB 205.4±3.9ms, P&lt;0.01) were significantly smaller.
The findings in the present study indicate that cortical inhibition and corticomotoneuronal output is reduced when recording over the FPL.
The differences in cortical excitability may develop as a consequence of varied function and could potentially explain the dissociated muscle atrophy evident in ALS.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22469346
High school football and risk of neurodegeneration: a community-based study.
To assess whether high school football played between 1946 and 1956, when headgear was less protective than today, was associated with development of neurodegenerative diseases later in life.
All male students who played football from 1946 to 1956 in the high schools of Rochester, Minnesota, plus a non-football-playing referent group of male students in the band, glee club, or choir were identified.
Using the records-linkage system of the Rochester Epidemiology Project, we reviewed (from October 31, 2010, to March 30, 2011) all available medical records to assess later development of dementia, Parkinson disease (PD), or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
We also compared the frequency of dementia, PD, or ALS with incidence data from the general population of Olmsted County, Minnesota.
We found no increased risk of dementia, PD, or ALS among the 438 football players compared with the 140 non-football-playing male classmates.
Parkinson disease and ALS were slightly less frequent in the football group, whereas dementia was slightly more frequent, but not significantly so.
When we compared these results with the expected incidence rates in the general population, only PD was significantly increased; however, this was true for both groups, with a larger risk ratio in the non-football group.
Our findings suggest that high school students who played American football from 1946 to 1956 did not have an increased risk of later developing dementia, PD, or ALS compared with non-football-playing high school males, despite poorer equipment and less regard for concussions compared with today and no rules prohibiting head-first tackling (spearing).
Copyright © 2012 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22482452
The complex molecular biology of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is an adult-onset neurodegenerative disorder that causes selective death of motor neurons followed by paralysis and death.
A subset of ALS cases is caused by mutations in the gene for Cu, Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1), which impart a toxic gain of function to this antioxidant enzyme.
This neurotoxic property is widely believed to stem from an increased propensity to misfold and aggregate caused by decreased stability of the native homodimer or a tendency to lose stabilizing posttranslational modifications.
Study of the molecular mechanisms of SOD1-related ALS has revealed a complex array of interconnected pathological processes, including glutamate excitotoxicity, dysregulation of neurotrophic factors and axon guidance proteins, axonal transport defects, mitochondrial dysfunction, deficient protein quality control, and aberrant RNA processing.
Many of these pathologies are directly exacerbated by misfolded and aggregated SOD1 and/or cytosolic calcium overload, suggesting the primacy of these events in disease etiology and their potential as targets for therapeutic intervention.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22482456
Biology of mitochondria in neurodegenerative diseases.
Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) are the most common human adult-onset neurodegenerative diseases.
They are characterized by prominent age-related neurodegeneration in selectively vulnerable neural systems.
Some forms of AD, PD, and ALS are inherited, and genes causing these diseases have been identified.
Nevertheless, the mechanisms of the neuronal degeneration in these familial diseases, and in the more common idiopathic (sporadic) diseases, are unresolved.
Genetic, biochemical, and morphological analyses of human AD, PD, and ALS, as well as their cell and animal models, reveal that mitochondria could have roles in this neurodegeneration.
The varied functions and properties of mitochondria might render subsets of selectively vulnerable neurons intrinsically susceptible to cellular aging and stress and the overlying genetic variations.
In AD, alterations in enzymes involved in oxidative phosphorylation, oxidative damage, and mitochondrial binding of Aβ and amyloid precursor protein have been reported.
In PD, mutations in mitochondrial proteins have been identified and mitochondrial DNA mutations have been found in neurons in the substantia nigra.
In ALS, changes occur in mitochondrial respiratory chain enzymes and mitochondrial programmed cell death proteins.
Transgenic mouse models of human neurodegenerative disease are beginning to reveal possible principles governing the biology of selective neuronal vulnerability that implicate mitochondria and the mitochondrial permeability transition pore.
This chapter reviews several aspects of mitochondrial biology and how mitochondrial pathobiology might contribute to the mechanisms of neurodegeneration in AD, PD, and ALS.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23824486
Muscle histone deacetylase 4 upregulation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: potential role in reinnervation ability and disease progression.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a typically rapidly progressive neurodegenerative disorder affecting motor neurons leading to progressive muscle paralysis and death, usually from respiratory failure, in 3-5 years.
Some patients have slow disease progression and prolonged survival, but the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood.
Riluzole, the only approved treatment, only modestly prolongs survival and has no effect on muscle function.
In the early phase of the disease, motor neuron loss is initially compensated for by collateral reinnervation, but over time this compensation fails, leading to progressive muscle wasting.
The crucial role of muscle histone deacetylase 4 and its regulator microRNA-206 in compensatory reinnervation and disease progression was recently suggested in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (transgenic mice carrying human mutations in the superoxide dismutase gene).
Here, we sought to investigate whether the microRNA-206-histone deacetylase 4 pathway plays a role in muscle compensatory reinnervation in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and thus contributes to disease outcome differences.
We studied muscle reinnervation using high-resolution confocal imaging of neuromuscular junctions in muscle samples obtained from 11 patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, including five long-term survivors.
We showed that the proportion of reinnervated neuromuscular junctions was significantly higher in long-term survivors than in patients with rapidly progressive disease.
We analysed the expression of muscle candidate genes involved in the reinnervation process and showed that histone deacetylase 4 upregulation was significantly greater in patients with rapidly progressive disease and was negatively correlated with the extent of muscle reinnervation and functional outcome.
Conversely, the proposed regulator of histone deacetylase 4, microRNA-206, was upregulated in both patient groups, but did not correlate with disease progression or reinnervation.
We conclude that muscle expression of histone deacetylase 4 may be a key factor for muscle reinnervation and disease progression in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Specific histone deacetylase 4 inhibitors may then constitute a therapeutic approach to enhancing motor performance and slowing disease progression in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
PMID: 23117224
Riluzole and prognostic factors in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis long-term and short-term survival: a population-based study of 1149 cases in Taiwan.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a rare disease in Taiwan; thus, estimation of ALS mortality is difficult.
We evaluated factors associated with ALS survival in Taiwan.
The study enrolled 1149 Taiwanese with a primary diagnosis of ALS during 1999-2008.
Follow-up information was available for all patients; mean (SD) duration of follow-up was 2.91 (2.62) years.
Medical interventions, including noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV), tracheotomy, gastrostomy, and riluzole, were included in time-dependent survival analysis.
Of the 1149 ALS patients, 438 (38.12%) died during follow-up.
Mortality in the first year was 16%, which was 13 times (95% CI 11.1-15.2) the age- and sex-standardized rate of the general population in Taiwan.
The average annual crude mortality rate was 13.1% (person-years).
Factors significantly associated with increased mortality were male sex, advanced age, rural residence, lower economic status, no tracheotomy, and no riluzole treatment.
Significant predictors of long-term versus average survival were younger age at diagnosis, being a dependent or receiving social welfare, and NIPPV support.
Significant predictors of short-term versus average survival were older age, being employed, no tracheotomy, and no riluzole use.
The results support the use of riluzole to improve ALS survival.
Patients who received riluzole and underwent tracheotomy had the best survival.
PMID: 22572540
Valosin-containing protein (VCP) mutations in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
We recently reported that mutations in the valosin-containing protein (VCP) gene are a cause of 1%-2% of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) cases, but their role in the pathogenesis of sporadic ALS is unclear.
We undertook mutational screening of VCP in 701 sporadic ALS cases.
Three pathogenic variants (p.Arg159Cys, p.Asn387Thr, and p.R662C) were found in three U.S. cases, each of whom presented with progressive upper and lower motor neuron signs consistent with definite ALS by El Escorial diagnostic criteria.
Our data indicate that VCP mutations may underlie apparently sporadic ALS but account for &lt;1% of this form of disease.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23533690
Redox regulation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disease that results from the death of upper and lower motor neurons.
Due to a lack of effective treatment, it is imperative to understand the underlying mechanisms and processes involved in disease progression.
Regulations in cellular reduction/oxidation (redox) processes are being increasingly implicated in disease.
Here we discuss the possible involvement of redox dysregulation in the pathophysiology of ALS, either as a cause of cellular abnormalities or a consequence.
We focus on its possible role in oxidative stress, protein misfolding, glutamate excitotoxicity, lipid peroxidation and cholesterol esterification, mitochondrial dysfunction, impaired axonal transport and neurofilament aggregation, autophagic stress, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress.
We also speculate that an ER chaperone protein disulphide isomerase (PDI) could play a key role in this dysregulation.
PDI is essential for normal protein folding by oxidation and reduction of disulphide bonds, and hence any disruption to this process may have consequences for motor neurons.
Addressing the mechanism underlying redox regulation and dysregulation may therefore help to unravel the molecular mechanism involved in ALS.
PMID: 23499006
Neurodegeneration-associated protein fragments as short-lived substrates of the N-end rule pathway.
Protein aggregates are a common feature of neurodegenerative syndromes.
Specific protein fragments were found to be aggregated in disorders including Alzheimer's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and Parkinson's disease.
Here, we show that the natural C-terminal fragments of Tau, TDP43, and α-synuclein are short-lived substrates of the Arg/N-end rule pathway, a processive proteolytic system that targets proteins bearing destabilizing N-terminal residues.
Furthermore, a natural TDP43 fragment is shown to be metabolically stabilized in Ate1(-/-) fibroblasts that lack the arginylation branch of the Arg/N-end rule pathway, leading to accumulation and aggregation of this fragment.
We also found that a fraction of Aβ42, the Alzheimer's disease-associated fragment of APP, is N-terminally arginylated in the brains of 5xFAD mice and is degraded by the Arg/N-end rule pathway.
The discovery that neurodegeneration-associated natural fragments of TDP43, Tau, α-synuclein, and APP can be selectively destroyed by the Arg/N-end rule pathway suggests that this pathway counteracts neurodegeneration.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22101323
p62 positive, TDP-43 negative, neuronal cytoplasmic and intranuclear inclusions in the cerebellum and hippocampus define the pathology of C9orf72-linked FTLD and MND/ALS.
Neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions (NCIs) containing phosphorylated TDP-43 (p-TDP-43) are the pathological hallmarks of motor neuron disease/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (MND/ALS) and FTLD-TDP.
The vast majority of NCIs in the brain and spinal cord also label for ubiquitin and p62, however, we have previously reported a subset of TDP-43 proteinopathy patients who have unusual and abundant p62 positive, TDP-43 negative inclusions in the cerebellum and hippocampus.
Here we sought to determine whether these cases carry the hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9orf72.
Repeat primer PCR was performed in 36 MND/ALS, FTLD-MND/ALS and FTLD-TDP cases and four controls.
Fourteen individuals with the repeat expansion were detected.
In all the 14 expansion mutation cases there were abundant globular and star-shaped p62 positive NCIs in the pyramidal cell layer of the hippocampus, the vast majority of which were p-TDP-43 negative.
p62 positive NCIs were also abundant in the cerebellar granular and molecular layers in all cases and in Purkinje cells in 12/14 cases but they were only positive for p-TDP-43 in the granular layer of one case.
Abundant p62 positive, p-TDP-43 negative neuronal intranuclear inclusions (NIIs) were seen in 12/14 cases in the pyramidal cell layer of the hippocampus and in 6/14 cases in the cerebellar granular layer.
This unusual combination of inclusions appears pathognomonic for C9orf72 repeat expansion positive MND/ALS and FTLD-TDP which we believe form a pathologically distinct subset of TDP-43 proteinopathies.
Our results suggest that proteins other than TDP-43 are binding p62 and aggregating in response to the mutation which may play a mechanistic role in neurodegeneration.
PMID: 22101322
Acute and chronically increased immunoreactivity to phosphorylation-independent but not pathological TDP-43 after a single traumatic brain injury in humans.
The pathologic phosphorylation and sub-cellular translocation of neuronal transactive response-DNA binding protein (TDP-43) was identified as the major disease protein in frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) with ubiquitinated inclusions, now termed FTLD-TDP, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
More recently, TDP-43 proteinopathy has been reported in dementia pugilistica or chronic traumatic encephalopathy caused by repetitive traumatic brain injury (TBI).
While a single TBI has been linked to the development of Alzheimer's disease and an increased frequency of neurofibrillary tangles, TDP-43 proteinopathy has not been examined with survival following a single TBI.
Using immunohistochemistry specific for both pathological phosphorylated TDP-43 (p-TDP-43) and phosphorylation-independent TDP-43 (pi-TDP-43), we examined acute (n = 23: Survival &lt; 2 weeks) and long-term (n = 39; 1-47 years survival) survivors of a single TBI versus age-matched controls (n = 47).
Multiple regions were examined including the hippocampus, medial temporal lobe, cingulate gyrus, superior frontal gyrus and brainstem.
No association was found between a history of single TBI and abnormally phosphorylated TDP-43 (p-TDP-43) inclusions.
Specifically, just 3 of 62 TBI cases displayed p-TDP-43 pathology versus 2 of 47 control cases.
However, while aggregates of p-TDP-43 were not increased acutely or long-term following TBI, immunoreactivity to phosphorylation-independent TDP-43 was commonly increased in the cytoplasm following TBI with both acute and long-term survival.
Moreover, while single TBI can induce multiple long-term neurodegenerative changes, the absence of TDP-43 proteinopathy may indicate a fundamental difference in the processes induced following single TBI from those of repetitive TBI.
PMID: 23762114
α -Synuclein Modification in an ALS Animal Model.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressively paralytic neurodegenerative disease that can be caused by mutations in Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1).
Transgenic mice that overexpress mutant SOD1 develop paralysis and accumulate aggregates of mutant protein in the brainstem and spinal cord.
Bee venom (BV), which is also known as apitoxin, is extracted from honeybees and is commonly used in oriental medicine for the treatment of chronic rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis.
The purpose of the present study was to determine whether BV affects misfolded protein aggregates such as alpha-synuclein, which is a known pathological marker in Parkinson disease, and ubiquitin-proteasomal activity in hSOD1(G93A) mutant mice.
BV was bilaterally administered into a 98-day-old hSOD1(G93A) animal model.
We found that BV-treated hSOD1(G93A) transgenic mice showed reduced detergent-insoluble polymerization and phosphorylation of α -synuclein.
Furthermore, phosphorylated or nitrated α -synuclein was significantly reduced in the spinal cords and brainstems of BV-treated hSOD1(G93A) mice and reduced proteasomal activity was revealed in the brainstems of BV-treated symptomatic hSOD1(G93A).
From these findings, we suggest that BV treatment attenuates the dysfunction of the ubiquitin-proteasomal system in a symptomatic hSOD1(G93A) ALS model and may help to slow motor neuron loss caused by misfolded protein aggregates in ALS models.
PMID: 22791740
Smoking, alcohol consumption, and the risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a population-based study.
Smoking has been posited as a possible risk factor for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), but large population-based studies of patients with incident disease are still needed.
The authors performed a population-based case-control study in the Netherlands between 2006 and 2009, including 494 patients with incident ALS and 1,599 controls.
To prove the relevance of population-based incidence cohorts in case-control studies, the authors compared results with those from cohorts including patients with prevalent ALS and referral patients.
Subjects were sent a questionnaire.
Multivariate analyses showed an increased risk of ALS among current smokers (odds ratio = 1.38, 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.02, 1.88) in the incident patient group only.
Cox regression models showed that current smoking was also independently associated with shorter survival (hazard ratio = 1.51, 95% CI: 1.07, 2.15), explaining the lack of association in the prevalent and referral patient groups.
Current alcohol consumption was associated with a reduced risk of ALS (incident patient group: odds ratio = 0.52, 95% CI: 0.40, 0.75).
These findings indicate that current smoking is associated with an increased risk of ALS, as well as a worse prognosis, and alcohol consumption is associated with a reduced risk of ALS, further corroborating the role of lifestyle factors in the pathogenesis of ALS.
The importance of population-based incident patient cohorts in identifying risk factors is highlighted by this study.
PMID: 20675015
Large-scale screening of TARDBP mutation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in Japanese.
Mutations in TARDBP encoding TDP (TAR DNA binding protein)-43 have been reported in familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), but mostly in Caucasians.
In other ethnic groups, four types of mutations are found in familial ALS.
In sporadic ALS, the TARDBP mutations frequency is low in Caucasians (0-5%) and no mutation has been found in other ethnic groups.
To examine spectrum of TARDBP mutations and its frequency in Japanese, we screened the TARDBP mutation in 721 Japanese ALS by direct sequencing.
We identified a novel mutation, c.1069G &gt; A (p.Gly357Ser) and a known mutation in sporadic ALS.
One patient was homozygous for p.Gly357Ser, which was the first for TARDBP mutation.
Our study showed that TARDBP mutations also occur in non-Caucasian sporadic ALS.
The estimated frequency of the TARDBP mutation in sporadic ALS is 0.29% in Japanese.
The mutation frequency in familial ALS in Japanese is also similar to that in Caucasian, and is ∼10 times higher than that in Japanese sporadic ALS.
Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23153708
Brain-computer interface and semantic classical conditioning of communication in paralysis.
We propose a classical semantic conditioning procedure to allow basic yes-no communication in the completely locked-in state as an alternative to instrumental-operant learning of brain responses, which is the common approach in brain-computer interface research.
More precisely, it was intended to establish cortical responses to the trueness of a statement irrespective of the particular constituent words and letters or sounds of the words.
As unconditioned stimulus short aversive stimuli consisting of 1-ms electrical pulses were used.
True and false statements were presented acoustically and only the true statements were immediately followed by electrical stimuli.
15 healthy participants and one locked-in ALS patient underwent the experiment.
Three different classifiers were employed in order to differentiate between the two cortical responses by means of electroencephalographic recordings.
The offline analysis revealed that semantic classical conditioning can be applied successfully to enable basic communication using a non-muscular channel.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22337587
Protein interaction profiling of the p97 adaptor UBXD1 points to a role for the complex in modulating ERGIC-53 trafficking.
UBXD1 is a member of the poorly understood subfamily of p97 adaptors that do not harbor a ubiquitin association domain or bind ubiquitin-modified proteins.
Of clinical importance, p97 mutants found in familial neurodegenerative conditions Inclusion Body Myopathy Paget's disease of the bone and/or Frontotemporal Dementia and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis are defective at interacting with UBXD1, indicating that functions regulated by a p97-UBXD1 complex are altered in these diseases.
We have performed liquid chromatography-mass spectrometric analysis of UBXD1-interacting proteins to identify pathways in which UBXD1 functions.
UBXD1 displays prominent association with ERGIC-53, a hexameric type I integral membrane protein that functions in protein trafficking.
The UBXD1-ERGIC-53 interaction requires the N-terminal 10 residues of UBXD1 and the C-terminal cytoplasmic 12 amino acid tail of ERGIC-53.
Use of p97 and E1 enzyme inhibitors indicate that complex formation between UBXD1 and ERGIC-53 requires the ATPase activity of p97, but not ubiquitin modification.
We also performed SILAC-based quantitative proteomic profiling to identify ERGIC-53 interacting proteins.
This analysis identified known (e.g. COPI subunits) and novel (Rab3GAP1/2 complex involved in the fusion of vesicles at the cell membrane) interactions that are also mediated through the C terminus of the protein.
Immunoprecipitation and Western blotting analysis confirmed the proteomic interaction data and it also revealed that an UBXD1-Rab3GAP association requires the ERGIC-53 binding domain of UBXD1.
Localization studies indicate that UBXD1 modules the sub-cellular trafficking of ERGIC-53, including promoting movement to the cell membrane.
We propose that p97-UBXD1 modulates the trafficking of ERGIC-53-containing vesicles by controlling the interaction of transport factors with the cytoplasmic tail of ERGIC-53.
PMID: 23314020
Altered localization, abnormal modification and loss of function of Sigma receptor-1 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Intracellular accumulations of mutant, misfolded proteins are major pathological hallmarks of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and related disorders.
Recently, mutations in Sigma receptor 1 (SigR1) have been found to cause a form of ALS and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD).
Our goal was to pinpoint alterations and modifications of SigR1 in ALS and to determine how these changes contribute to the pathogenesis of ALS.
In the present study, we found that levels of the SigR1 protein were reduced in lumbar ALS patient spinal cord.
SigR1 was abnormally accumulated in enlarged C-terminals and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) structures of alpha motor neurons.
These accumulations co-localized with the 20s proteasome subunit.
SigR1 accumulations were also observed in SOD1 transgenic mice, cultured ALS-8 patient's fibroblasts with the P56S-VAPB mutation and in neuronal cell culture models.
Along with the accumulation of SigR1 and several other proteins involved in protein quality control, severe disturbances in the unfolded protein response and impairment of protein degradation pathways were detected in the above-mentioned cell culture systems.
Furthermore, shRNA knockdown of SigR1 lead to deranged calcium signaling and caused abnormalities in ER and Golgi structures in cultured NSC-34 cells.
Finally, pharmacological activation of SigR1 induced the clearance of mutant protein aggregates in these cells.
Our results support the notion that SigR1 is abnormally modified and contributes to the pathogenesis of ALS.
PMID: 22255354
An auditory brain-computer interface using virtual sound field.
Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) exploring the auditory communication channel might be preferable for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients with poor sight or with the visual system being occupied for other uses.
Spatial attention was proven to be able to modulate the event-related potentials (ERPs); yet up to now, there is no auditory BCI based on virtual sound field.
In this study, auditory spatial attention was introduced by using stimuli in a virtual sound field.
Subjects attended selectively to the virtual location of the target sound and discriminated its relevant properties.
The concurrently recorded ERP components and the users' performance were compared with those of the paradigm where all sounds were presented in the frontal direction.
The early ERP components (100-250 ms) and the simulated online accuracies indicated that spatial attention indeed added effective discriminative information for BCI classification.
The proposed auditory paradigm using virtual sound field may lead to a high-performance and portable BCI system.
PMID: 22796962
Differential sirtuin expression patterns in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) postmortem tissue: neuroprotective or neurotoxic properties of sirtuins in ALS?
Sirtuins (SIRT1-7; class III histone deactylases) modulate fundamental mechanisms in age-related neurodegenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
We assessed the expression levels of sirtuins in human postmortem ALS and control brain and spinal cord.
By quantitative real-time PCR, a significant reduction of SIRT1 and SIRT2 was detected in homogenates of the primary motor cortex (white and gray matter), while there were no differences in spinal cord homogenates.
When specifically analyzing mRNA and protein expression in the gray matter (cortical layers I-VI of the precentral gyrus, ventral/dorsal horn of the spinal cord) by in situ hybridization histochemistry and immunohistochemistry, we found increased levels of SIRT1, SIRT2 and SIRT5 in ALS which were significant for SIRT1 and SIRT5 mRNA in the spinal cord.
Our results indicate a general reduction of SIRT1 and SIRT2 in ALS primary motor cortex, while in situ hybridization histochemistry and immunohistochemistry showed neuron-specific upregulation of SIRT1, SIRT2 and SIRT5, particularly in the spinal cord.
Opposed effects have been described for SIRT1 and SIRT2: while SIRT1 activation is mainly associated with neuroprotection, SIRT2 upregulation is toxic to neuronal cells.
Novel therapeutic approaches in ALS could therefore target SIRT1 activation or SIRT2 inhibition.
Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.
PMID: 21796424
Effects of obovatol on GSH depleted glia-mediated neurotoxicity and oxidative damage.
Earlier studies indicate that obovatol (OBO), isolated from a medicinal herb Magnolia obovata, has anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative properties.
Depletion of glutathione (GSH) in glial cells with the γ-glutamylcysteine synthase inhibitor D,L-buthionine-S,R-sulfoximine (BSO) is known to produce oxidative stress which, in turn, induces these cells to secrete inflammatory cytokines and other neurotoxic substances.
In the present study, we investigated the ability of OBO to protect SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells from this effect.
Human microglia, astrocytes and their surrogate THP-1 and U373 cell lines were activated by treatment with BSO.
Such treatment depleted their intracellular GSH and increased levels of damage to DNA, lipids and proteins (8-OHdG, lipid peroxide, protein carbonyls and 3-nitrotyrosine), and activated the inflammatory pathways P38 MAP kinase and NFκB.
These are accompanied by release of proinflammatory factors such as TNFα, IL-6 and nitric oxide.
Their conditioned media were toxic to SH-SY5Y cells.
All these effects were attenuated by pre-treatment with OBO.
Prior treatment of SH-SY5Y cells with OBO also attenuated THP-1 or U373 conditioned media neurotoxicity and also reduced oxidative damage produced by treatment with hydrogen peroxide or BSO.
Prior treatment with OBO potentiated survival of SH-SY5Y cells exposed to conditioned medium from BSO-treated THP-1, U373 cells, microglia and astrocytes.
The data indicate that OBO could be anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidative and neuroprotective, and be an effective agent for inhibiting pathogenesis in neurological diseases such as Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in which glial-mediated neuroinflammation and oxidative stress are thought to contribute to disease progression.
PMID: 22258555
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-associated mutant VAPBP56S perturbs calcium homeostasis to disrupt axonal transport of mitochondria.
A proline-to-serine substitution at position 56 in the gene encoding vesicle-associated membrane protein-associated protein B (VAPB; VAPBP56S) causes some dominantly inherited familial forms of motor neuron disease, including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) type-8.
Here, we show that expression of ALS mutant VAPBP56S but not wild-type VAPB in neurons selectively disrupts anterograde axonal transport of mitochondria.
VAPBP56S-induced disruption of mitochondrial transport involved reductions in the frequency, velocity and persistence of anterograde mitochondrial movement.
Anterograde axonal transport of mitochondria is mediated by the microtubule-based molecular motor kinesin-1.
Attachment of kinesin-1 to mitochondria involves the outer mitochondrial membrane protein mitochondrial Rho GTPase-1 (Miro1) which acts as a sensor for cytosolic calcium levels ([Ca(2+)]c); elevated [Ca(2+)]c disrupts mitochondrial transport via an effect on Miro1.
To gain insight into the mechanisms underlying the VAPBP56S effect on mitochondrial transport, we monitored [Ca(2+)]c levels in VAPBP56S-expressing neurons.
Expression of VAPBP56S but not VAPB increased resting [Ca(2+)]c and this was associated with a reduction in the amounts of tubulin but not kinesin-1 that were associated with Miro1.
Moreover, expression of a Ca(2+) insensitive mutant of Miro1 rescued defective mitochondrial axonal transport and restored the amounts of tubulin associated with the Miro1/kinesin-1 complex to normal in VAPBP56S-expressing cells.
Our results suggest that ALS mutant VAPBP56S perturbs anterograde mitochondrial axonal transport by disrupting Ca(2+) homeostasis and effecting the Miro1/kinesin-1 interaction with tubulin.
PMID: 22402017
Novel deletion mutations of OPTN in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in Japanese.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease characterized by selective motor neuron death in the brain and spinal cord.
Many disease genes for ALS have been identified; however, each disease gene is responsible for very small fractions of ALS.
Recently, mutations of the gene encoding optineurin (OPTN) are reported in familial and sporadic ALS.
OPTN is also responsible for a small number of ALS, 3.8% of familial and 0.29% of sporadic ALS in Japanese.
The low prevalence may be an underestimation due to incomplete screening of the mutation.
To examine OPTN mutations more extensively, we screened the OPTN deletions using a quantitative PCR system.
We examined 710 Japanese ALS subjects who had previously been found to have no OPTN mutations by a screening using a PCR-direct sequence strategy.
We identified 3 kinds of deletions in 5 patients; one was homozygous, and the remaining were heterozygous.
All deletions occurred due to the Alu-mediated recombination and are expected to result in null alleles.
Our results suggest that the OPTN deletion mutation in ALS is not infrequent and the prevalence of the OPTN mutation in Japanese sporadic ALS is considerably high.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22333068
Neurorestoration therapeutics for neurodegenerative and psychiatric disease.
Neurorestoration within the human central nervous system (CNS) is a concept that is barely a decade old.
Despite this, there is significant clinical activity in this area, although there has not been any attempt to systematically identify these trials  and organize them by disease area and phase of development.
The objective of this investigation is to broadly review the current state of neurorestorative clinical trial activity ongoing worldwide.
Iterative searches of the databases clinicaltrials.gov, EU Clinical Trials  Register and ADIS Insight were used to locate clinical trials identified as involving neurorecovery/restoration strategies or stem cells for central nervous system diseases.
A wide range of neurorestorative clinical trials (N = 106) are ongoing or planned.
Nearly three-fourths of all clinical trials (75/106) are targeting one of four disease areas: multiple sclerosis, stroke, Parkinson's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Nearly two-thirds (63%) of 106 ongoing and planned clinical trials focus on cell-based therapy, although these  are almost exclusively in phase 1 or 2 of development.
Neurorecovery is an emerging field that is currently focused on earlier stages of clinical development, primarily in four disease areas.
As the field matures, it is expected that there will be a greater balance of  studies across a wider spectrum of CNS diseases as well as in late-stage development.
PMID: 22820142
Regulatory T lymphocytes from ALS mice suppress microglia and effector T lymphocytes through different cytokine-mediated mechanisms.
Activated microglia and infiltrating lymphocytes are neuropathological hallmarks of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a fatal motoneuron disease.
Although both cell types play pivotal roles in the ALS pathogenic process, the interactions between microglia and lymphocytes, specifically regulatory CD4+CD25High T lymphocytes (Tregs) and cytotoxic CD4+CD25- T lymphocytes (Teffs), have not been addressed.
When co-cultured with mSOD1 adult microglia, mSOD1 Tregs suppressed the cytotoxic microglial factors NOX2 and iNOS through an IL-4-mediated mechanism, whereas Teffs were only minimally effective; IL-4 inhibitory antibodies blocked the suppressive function of mSOD1 Tregs, and conditioned media from mSOD1 Tregs or the addition of IL-4 reduced microglial NOX2 expression.
During the stable disease phase, the total number of Tregs, specifically the numbers of CD4+CD25HighIL-4+, CD4+CD25HighIL-10+ and CD4+CD25HighTGF-β+ Tregs, were increased in ALS mice compared with WT mice; Tregs isolated during this phase reduced Teff proliferation.
In contrast, during the rapidly progressing phase, the number of mSOD1 Tregs decreased while the proliferation of mSOD1 Teffs increased.
The combination of IL-4, IL-10, and TGF-β was required to inhibit the proliferation of mSOD1 Teffs by mSOD1 Tregs that were isolated during the slow phase, while inhibition of mSOD1 Teffs by mSOD1 Tregs during the rapid phase, as well as WT Teffs, was not dependent on these factors.
Thus, mSOD1 Tregs at the slow phase suppressed microglial toxicity and SOD1 Teff proliferation through different mechanisms; microglial activation was suppressed through IL-4 whereas mSOD1 Teffs were suppressed by IL-4, IL-10 and TGF-β.
These data suggest that mSOD1 Tregs contribute to the slowly progressing phase in ALS mice and may offer a novel therapeutic option for ALS patients.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22711008
Efficient differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells into motor neurons.
Direct differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells into functional motor neurons represents a promising resource to study disease mechanisms, to screen new drug compounds, and to develop new therapies for motor neuron diseases such as spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Many current protocols use a combination of retinoic acid (RA) and sonic hedgehog (Shh) to differentiate mouse embryonic stem (mES) cells into motor neurons.
However, the differentiation efficiency of mES cells into motor neurons has only met with moderate success.
We have developed a two-step differentiation protocol that significantly improves the differentiation efficiency compared with currently established protocols.
The first step is to enhance the neuralization process by adding Noggin and fibroblast growth factors (FGFs).
Noggin is a bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) antagonist and is implicated in neural induction according to the default model of neurogenesis and results in the formation of anterior neural patterning.
FGF signaling acts synergistically with Noggin in inducing neural tissue formation by promoting a posterior neural identity.
In this step, mES cells were primed with Noggin, bFGF, and FGF-8 for two days to promote differentiation towards neural lineages.
The second step is to induce motor neuron specification.
Noggin/FGFs exposed mES cells were incubated with RA and a Shh agonist, Smoothened agonist (SAG), for another 5 days to facilitate motor neuron generation.
To monitor the differentiation of mESs into motor neurons, we used an ES cell line derived from a transgenic mouse expressing eGFP under the control of the motor neuron specific promoter Hb9.
Using this robust protocol, we achieved 51 ± 0.8% of differentiation efficiency (n = 3; p &lt; 0.01, Student's t-test).
Results from immunofluorescent staining showed that GFP+ cells express the motor neuron specific markers, Islet-1 and choline acetyltransferase (ChAT).
Our two-step differentiation protocol provides an efficient way to differentiate mES cells into spinal motor neurons.
PMID: 22308360
Near-infrared fluorescent sensor for in vivo copper imaging in a murine Wilson disease model.
Copper is an essential metal nutrient that is tightly regulated in the body because loss of its homeostasis is connected to severe diseases such as Menkes and Wilson diseases, Alzheimer's disease, prion disorders, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The complex relationships between copper status and various stages of health and disease remain challenging to elucidate, in part due to a lack of methods for monitoring dynamic changes in copper pools in whole living organisms.
Here we present the synthesis, spectroscopy, and in vivo imaging applications of Coppersensor 790, a first-generation fluorescent sensor for visualizing labile copper pools in living animals.
Coppersensor 790 combines a near-infrared emitting cyanine dye with a sulfur-rich receptor to provide a selective and sensitive turn-on response to copper.
This probe is capable of monitoring fluctuations in exchangeable copper stores in living cells and mice under basal conditions, as well as in situations of copper overload or deficiency.
Moreover, we demonstrate the utility of this unique chemical tool to detect aberrant increases in labile copper levels in a murine model of Wilson disease, a genetic disorder that is characterized by accumulation of excess copper.
The ability to monitor real-time copper fluxes in living animals offers potentially rich opportunities to examine copper physiology in health and disease.
PMID: 22596264
Riluzole: what it does to spinal and brainstem neurons and how it does it.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Lou Gehrig's disease) is a devastating neurodegenerative disorder for which the only licensed treatment is riluzole.
Although riluzole clinical efficacy is rather limited, its use has important implications for identifying those parameters that might improve its clinical benefits (dose, timing, disease stage) and for its off-label administration in other neurodegenerative diseases, such as spinal cord injury.
Studies of riluzole also have an intrinsically heuristic value to unveil mechanisms regulating the excitability of brain and spinal neurons because this drug is a pharmacological tool to probe the function of certain ion channels, or to study neurotransmitter release processes, and intracellular neuroprotective pathways.
The present review focuses on how riluzole acts on brain and spinal neurons within motor networks, what mechanisms can be deduced from its effects, and what conditions may favor its use to contrast neurodegeneration or to ameliorate late symptoms like spasticity.
Taking as an example the experimental neurodegeneration caused by overactivation of glutamatergic synapses (excitotoxicity), it seems likely that protection of motor networks by riluzole involves selected administration timing and dosing to target processes for releasing glutamate from very active synapses or for dampening repetitive firing by hyperfunctional motor cells.
PMID: 22961620
Overexpression of human wild-type FUS causes progressive motor neuron degeneration in an age- and dose-dependent fashion.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) are relentlessly progressive neurodegenerative disorders with overlapping clinical, genetic and pathological features.
Cytoplasmic inclusions of fused in sarcoma (FUS) are the hallmark of several forms of FTLD and ALS patients with mutations in the FUS gene.
FUS is a multifunctional, predominantly nuclear, DNA and RNA binding protein.
Here, we report that transgenic mice overexpressing wild-type human FUS develop an aggressive phenotype with an early onset tremor followed by progressive hind limb paralysis and death by 12 weeks in homozygous animals.
Large motor neurons were lost from the spinal cord accompanied by neurophysiological evidence of denervation and focal muscle atrophy.
Surviving motor neurons in the spinal cord had greatly increased cytoplasmic expression of FUS, with globular and skein-like FUS-positive and ubiquitin-negative inclusions associated with astroglial and microglial reactivity.
Cytoplasmic FUS inclusions were also detected in the brain of transgenic mice without apparent neuronal loss and little astroglial or microglial activation.
Hemizygous FUS overexpressing mice showed no evidence of a motor phenotype or pathology.
These findings recapitulate several pathological features seen in human ALS and FTLD patients, and suggest that overexpression of wild-type FUS in vulnerable neurons may be one of the root causes of disease.
Furthermore, these mice will provide a new model to study disease mechanism, and test therapies.
PMID: 21740381
RNA interference and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a debilitating neuro-degenerative disorder characterized by progressive loss of motor neurons.
The etiology and molecular pathogenesis of cell death in most sub-types of the disease are largely unknown.
The best documented cause of moto-neuron degeneration is the mutation in the superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1) gene, which occurs in 10% of the familial forms of ALS.
Discovery of RNA interference (RNAi), which plays an important role in the regulation of gene expression, has proven to be a powerful tool to study the pathogenesis and to develop innovative treatment options for hereditary diseases, including familial variants of ALS.
This review summarizes current research advances in RNAi in relation to ALS.
PMID: 22161544
Genetically engineered mesenchymal stem cells as a proposed therapeutic for Huntington's disease.
There is much interest in the use of mesenchymal stem cells/marrow stromal cells (MSC) to treat neurodegenerative disorders, in particular those that are fatal and difficult to treat, such as Huntington's disease.
MSC present a promising tool for cell therapy and are currently being tested in FDA-approved phase I-III clinical trials for many disorders.
In preclinical studies of neurodegenerative disorders, MSC have demonstrated efficacy, when used as delivery vehicles for neural growth factors.
A number of investigators have examined the potential benefits of innate MSC-secreted trophic support and augmented growth factors to support injured neurons.
These include overexpression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor and glial-derived neurotrophic factor, using genetically engineered MSC as a vehicle to deliver the cytokines directly into the microenvironment.
Proposed regenerative approaches to neurological diseases using MSC include cell therapies in which cells are delivered via intracerebral or intrathecal injection.
Upon transplantation, MSC in the brain promote endogenous neuronal growth, encourage synaptic connection from damaged neurons, decrease apoptosis, reduce levels of free radicals, and regulate inflammation.
These abilities are primarily modulated through paracrine actions.
Clinical trials for MSC injection into the central nervous system to treat amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, traumatic brain injury, and stroke are currently ongoing.
The current data in support of applying MSC-based cellular therapies to the treatment of Huntington's disease is discussed.
PMID: 23514786
Prostaglandin E2-induced cell death is mediated by activation of EP2 receptors in motor neuron-like NSC-34 cells.
Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) was shown to induce neuronal death in the CNS.
To characterize the neurotoxicity of PGE2 and E-prostanoid receptors (EP) in motor neurons, we investigated PGE2-induced cell death and the type(s) of EP responsible for mediating it in NSC-34, a motor neuron-like cell line.
Immunoblotting studies showed that EP2 and EP3 were dominantly expressed in NSC-34 cells and motor neurons in mice.
Exposure to PGE2 and butaprost, an EP2 agonist, but not sulprostone, an EP1/3 agonist, resulted in decreased viability of these cells.
These results suggest that PGE2 induces cell death by activation of EP2 in NSC-34 cells.
PMID: 22591278
Dietary vitamin D3 supplementation at 10× the adequate intake improves functional capacity in the G93A transgenic mouse model of ALS, a pilot study.
Vitamin D has antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and neuroprotective properties, and may mitigate amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) pathology.
To determine the effects of dietary vitamin D(3) (D(3)) at 10-fold the adequate intake (AI) on functional and disease outcomes and lifespan in the transgenic G93A mouse model of ALS.
Starting at age 40 days, 32 G93A mice (21 M, 11 F) were provided ad libitum with either an adequate (AI; 1 IU/g feed) or high (HiD; 10 IU/g feed) D(3) diet.
Differences were considered significant at P≤ 0.10, as this was a pilot study.
For paw grip endurance, HiD mice had a 7% greater score between 60-133 d versus AI mice (P= 0.074).
For motor performance, HiD mice had a 22% greater score between 60-133 days (P= 0.074) versus AI mice due to changes observed in male mice, where HiD males had a 33% greater score (P= 0.064) versus AI males.
There were no significant diet differences in disease onset, disease progression, or lifespan.
Although disease outcomes were not affected, D(3) supplementation at 10-fold the AI improved paw grip endurance and motor performance in the transgenic G93A mouse model of ALS, specifically in males.
© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
PMID: 21777407
Genetic strategies to study TDP-43 in rodents and to develop preclinical therapeutics for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The neuropathological hallmark of the majority of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and a class of frontotemporal lobar degeneration is ubiquitinated cytoplasmic aggregates composed of transactive response DNA binding protein 43 kDa (TDP-43).
Genetic manipulation of TDP-43 in animal models has been used to study the protein's role in pathogenesis.
Transgenic rodents for TDP-43 have recapitulated key aspects of ALS such as paralysis, loss of spinal motor neurons and muscle atrophy.
Viral vectors are an alternate approach to express pathological proteins in animals.
Use of the recombinant adeno-associated virus vector serotype 9 has permitted widespread transgene expression throughout the central nervous system after intravenous administration.
Expressing TDP-43 in rats with this method produced a phenotype that was consistent with and similar to TDP-43 transgenic lines.
Increased levels of TDP-43 in the nucleus are toxic to neurons and sufficient to produce ALS-like symptoms.
Animal models based on TDP-43 will address the relationships between TDP-43 expression levels, pathology, neuronal loss, muscle atrophy, motor function and causative mechanisms of disease.
New targets that modify TDP-43 function, or targets from previous ALS models and other models of spinal cord diseases, could be tested for efficacy in the recent rodent models of ALS based on TDP-43.
The vector approach could be an important therapeutic channel because the entire spinal cord can be affected from a one-time peripheral administration.
© 2011 The Authors.
European Journal of Neuroscience © 2011 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
PMID: 22264801
Secreted VAPB/ALS8 major sperm protein domains modulate mitochondrial localization and morphology via growth cone guidance receptors.
The VAPB/ALS8 major sperm protein domain (vMSP) is implicated in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and spinal muscular atrophy, yet its function in the nervous system is not well understood.
In Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila, the vMSP is cleaved from its transmembrane anchor and secreted in a cell type-specific fashion.
We show that vMSPs secreted by neurons act on Lar-like protein-tyrosine phosphatase and Roundabout growth cone guidance receptors expressed in striated muscle.
This signaling pathway promotes Arp2/3-dependent actin remodeling and mitochondrial localization to actin-rich muscle I-bands.
C. elegans VAPB mutants have mitochondrial localization, morphology, mobility, and fission/fusion defects that are suppressed by Lar-like receptor or Arp2/3 inactivation.
Hence, growth cone guidance receptor pathways that remodel the actin cytoskeleton have unanticipated effects on mitochondrial dynamics.
We propose that neurons secrete vMSPs to promote striated muscle energy production and metabolism, in part through the regulation of mitochondrial localization and function.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22028183
RNA-binding proteins in neurodegenerative disease: TDP-43 and beyond.
Neurodegenerative diseases are a diverse group of disorders that affect different neuron populations, differ in onset and severity, and can be either inherited or sporadic.
One common pathological feature of most of these diseases is the presence of insoluble inclusions in and around neurons, which largely consist of misfolded and aggregated protein.
For this reason, neurodegenerative diseases are typically thought to be disorders of aberrant protein processing, in which the cumulative effects of misfolded protein aggregates overwhelm the neuron's proteostatic capacity.
However, a growing body of evidence suggests a role for abnormal RNA processing in neurodegenerative disease.
The importance of RNA metabolism in disease was highlighted by the discovery of TDP-43 (TAR DNA-binding protein of 43 kDa), an RNA-binding protein (RBP), as a primary component of insoluble aggregates in patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Subsequently, inherited mutations in TDP-43 and the structurally related RBP, FUS/TLS (fused in sarcoma/translated in liposarcoma), were found to cause ALS.
These exciting findings have ushered in a new era of ALS research in which the deregulation of RNA metabolism is viewed as a central cause of motor neuron deterioration.
In addition, the fact that neuropathologically and anatomically distinct neurodegenerative diseases display altered RNA metabolism suggests that common pathologic mechanisms may underlie many of these disorders.
Copyright © 2011 John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd.
PMID: 23848967
Weight loss, dysphagia and supplement intake in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS): impact on quality of life and therapeutic options.
Weight loss is a frequent feature in the motor neuron disease Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
In this study we investigated possible causes of weight loss in ALS, its impact on mood/quality of life (QOL) and the benefit of high calorie nutritional/other dietary supplements and percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG).
121 ALS patients were interviewed and answered standardized questionnaires (Beck depression inventory - II, SF36 Health Survey questionnaire, revised ALS functional rating scale).
Two years after the initial survey we performed a follow-up interview.
In our ALS-cohort, 56.3% of the patients suffered from weight loss.
Weight loss had a negative impact on QOL and was associated with a shorter survival.
Patients who took high calorie nutritional supplements respectively had a PEG stated a great benefit regarding weight stabilization and/or QOL.38.2% of our patients had significant weight loss without suffering from dysphagia.
To clarify the reasons for weight loss in these patients, we compared them with patients without weight loss.
The two groups did not differ regarding severity of disease, depression, frontotemporal dementia or fasciculations, but patients with weight loss declared more often increased respiratory work.
Weight loss is a serious issue in ALS and cannot always be attributed to dysphagia.
Symptomatic treatment of weight loss (high calorie nutritional supplements and/ or PEG) should be offered more frequently.
PMID: 22070610
Stem cell challenges in the treatment of neurodegenerative disease.
Neurodegenerative diseases result from the gradual and progressive loss of neural cells and lead to nervous system dysfunction.
The rapidly advancing stem cell field is providing attractive alternative options for fighting these diseases.
Results have provided proof of principle that cell replacement can work in humans with Parkinson's disease (PD).
However, three clinical studies of cell transplantation were published that found no net benefit, while patients in two of the studies developed dyskinesias that persisted despite reductions in treatment.
Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) have major potential advantages because patient-specific neuroblasts are suitable for transplantation, avoid immune reactions, and can be produced without the use of human ES cells (hESC).
Although iPSCs have not been successfully used in clinical trials for PD, patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) were treated with autologous stem cells and, though they had some degree of decline one year after treatment, they were still improved compared with the preoperative period or without any drug therapy.
In addition, neural stem cells (NSCs), via brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), have been shown to ameliorate complex behavioral deficits associated with widespread Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology in a transgenic mouse model of AD.
So far, the FDA lists 18 clinical trials treating multiple sclerosis (MS), but most are in preliminary stages.
This article serves as an overview of recent studies in stem cell and regenerative approaches to the above chronic neurodegenerative disorders.
There are still many obstacles to the use of stem cells as a cure for neurodegenerative disease, especially because we still don't fully understand the true mechanisms of these diseases.
However, there is hope in the potential of stem cells to help us learn and understand a great deal more about the mechanisms underlying these devastating neurodegenerative diseases.
© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
PMID: 23390184
Prediagnostic body fat and risk of death from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: the EPIC cohort.
The aim of this study was to investigate for the first time the association between body fat and risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) with an appropriate prospective study design.
The EPIC (European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition) study included 518,108 individuals recruited from the general population across 10 Western European countries.
At recruitment, information on lifestyle was collected and anthropometric characteristics were measured.
Cox hazard models were fitted to investigate the associations between anthropometric measures and ALS mortality.
Two hundred twenty-two ALS deaths (79 men and 143 women) occurred during the follow-up period (mean follow-up = 13 years).
There was a statistically significant interaction between categories of body mass index and sex regarding ALS risk (p = 0.009): in men, a significant linear decrease of risk per unit of body mass index was observed (hazard ratio = 0.93, 95% confidence interval 0.86-0.99 per kg/m(2)); among women, the risk was more than 3-fold increased for underweight compared with normal-weight women.
Among women, a significant risk reduction increasing the waist/hip ratio was also evident: women in the top quartile had less than half the risk of ALS compared with those in the bottom quartile (hazard ratio = 0.48, 95% confidence interval 0.25-0.93) with a borderline significant p value for trend across quartiles (p = 0.056).
Increased prediagnostic body fat is associated with a decreased risk of ALS mortality.
PMID: 23046668
Duration of observation required in detecting fasciculation potentials in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis using high-density surface EMG.
High-density surface electromyography (HD-SEMG) has recently emerged as a potentially useful tool in the evaluation of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
This study addresses a practical constraint that arises when applying HD-SEMG for supporting the diagnosis of ALS; specifically, how long the surface EMG should be recorded before one can be confident that fasciculation potentials (FPs) are absent in a muscle being tested.
HD-SEMG recordings of 29 muscles from 11 ALS patients were analyzed.
We used the distribution of intervals between FPs, and estimated the observation duration needed to record from one to five FPs with a probability approaching unity.
Such an approach was previously tested by Mills with a concentric needle electrode.
We found that the duration of recording was up to 70 s in order to record a single FP with a probability approaching unity.
Increasing recording time to 2 minutes, the probability of recording five FPs approached approximately 0.95.
HD-SEMG appears to be a suitable method for capturing FPs comparable to intramuscular needle EMG.
PMID: 21572310
Adult polyglucosan body disease masquerading as ALS with dementia of the Alzheimer type: an exceptional phenotype in a rare pathology.
We describe an exceptional clinical picture, namely, cognitive impairment of the Alzheimer disease type in a man who later developed manifestations typical of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and who was subsequently found to have adult polyglucosan body disease (APGBD) upon postmortem neuropathologic explorations.
The combined occurrence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and cognitive impairment of the Alzheimer disease type in APGBD has not been reported before.
This case also underlines the diverse clinical presentation of this rare clinicopathologic entity (namely APGBD) and highlights the importance of recognizing the unusual association of clinical features in making the diagnosis.
(C) 2012 Lippincott Williams &amp; Wilkins, Inc.
PMID: 23621426
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/motor neuron disease deaths in the United States, 1999-2009.
Our objective was to examine trends and epidemiology of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)/motor neuron disease (MND) associated deaths in the United States.
ALS/MND associated death rates and trends in the United States for 1999-2009 were examined using the multiple cause-of-death mortality data.
Age-specific and age-adjusted death rates were calculated.
For 1999-2009, the average annual age-adjusted death rate was 2.17/100,000 persons.
The age-specific rate increased with age until 75-79 years.
Males experienced a higher death rate than females.
There was no definitive trend in the annual ALS/MND associated death rate, although analyses suggested a possible decrease (p = 0.05); however, the rate increased for persons 20-49 years of age and declined for persons ≥ 65 years of age.
The annual rate for males decreased whereas the rate for females showed no change.
In conclusion, the suggested decreasing annual ALS/MND associated death rate for 1999-2009 contrasts with earlier reports indicating that the incidence and death rate of ALS were increasing.
While the ALS/MND associated death rate slightly increased among adults 20-49 years of age, rates declined among two subpopulations at higher risk for ALS/MND--males and persons ≥ 65 years of age.
Continued monitoring of ALS/MND mortality data and additional epidemiological studies will be important to further elucidate these epidemiological trends.
PMID: 22499346
Phenotype difference between ALS patients with expanded repeats in C9ORF72 and patients with mutations in other ALS-related genes.
Expanded GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeats in the promoter of the C9ORF72 gene have recently been identified in frontotemporal dementia (FTD), Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) and ALS-FTD and appear as the most common genetic cause of familial (FALS) and sporadic (SALS) forms of ALS.
We searched for the C9ORF72 repeat expansion in 950 French ALS patients (225 FALS and 725 SALS) and 580 control subjects and performed genotype-phenotype correlations.
The repeat expansion was present in 46% of FALS, 8% of SALS and 0% of controls.
Phenotype comparisons were made between FALS patients with expanded C9ORF72 repeats and patients carrying another ALS-related gene (SOD1, TARDBP, FUS) or a yet unidentified genetic defect.
SALS patients with and without C9ORF72 repeat expansions were also compared.
The C9ORF72 group presented more frequent bulbar onset both in FALS (p&lt;0.0001 vs SOD1, p=0.002 vs TARDBP, p=0.011 vs FUS, p=0.0153 vs other FALS) and SALS (p=0.047).
FALS patients with C9ORF72 expansions had more frequent association with FTD than the other FALS patients (p&lt;0.0001 vs SOD1, p=0.04 vs TARDBP, p=0.004 vs FUS, p=0.03 vs other FALS).
C9ORF72-linked FALS patients presented an older age of onset than SOD1 (p=0.0139) or FUS mutation (p&lt;0.0001) carriers.
Disease duration was shorter for C9ORF72 expansion carriers than for SOD1 (p&lt;0.0001) and TARDBP (p=0.0242) carriers, other FALS (p&lt;0.0001) and C9ORF72-negative SALS (p=0.0006).
Our results confirm the major role of expanded repeats in C9ORF72 as causative for ALS and provide evidence for specific phenotypic aspects compared to patients with other ALS-related genes.
PMID: 22691937
Trk and cAMP-dependent survival activity of adenosine A(2A) agonist CGS21680 on rat motoneurons in culture.
The survival activity of adenosine A(2A) agonist CGS21680 on motoneurons in culture through the transactivation of neurotrophin receptor TrkB has been reported previously; however, since adenosine A(2A) receptor belongs to a Gs-protein-coupled receptor, we investigated the involvement of the cAMP pathway in the survival activity of CGS21680 using purified motoneurons in culture.
CGS21680 alone showed only small survival activity, but the activity was significantly enhanced by the addition of a phosphodiesterase inhibitor, IBMX.
This survival activity was partially inhibited by a protein kinase A inhibitor H89 or a neurotrophin receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor K252a, and was completely inhibited by their combination.
These results indicate that the survival activity of CGS21680 on motoneurons is exerted by the mixed effect of the adenylate cyclase-cAMP-PKA pathway and transactivation of Trk neurotrophin receptor.
Under conditions in which the maximum survival of motoneurons was supported by sufficient concentrations of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), a TrkB ligand, the addition of 100μM AMPA for 3 days led to significant cell death.
Treatment with CGS21680 and IBMX protected motoneurons from the toxicity of AMPA, further supporting the presence of a TrkB-independent pathway of CGS21680 activity and suggesting a novel therapeutic approach to motoneuron diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22369784
Olesoxime delays muscle denervation, astrogliosis, microglial activation and motoneuron death in an ALS mouse model.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease.
The pathology is mimicked to a striking degree in transgenic mice carrying familial ALS-linked SOD1 gene mutations.
Olesoxime (TRO19622), a novel neuroprotective and reparative compound identified in a high-throughput screen based on motoneuron (MN) survival, delays disease onset and improves survival in mutant SOD1(G93A) mice, a model for ALS.
The present study further analyses the cellular basis for the protection provided by olesoxime at the neuromuscular junctions (NMJ) and the spinal cord.
Studies were carried out at two disease stages, 60 days, presymptomatic and 104 days, symptomatic.
Cohorts of wild type and SOD1(G93A) mice were randomized to receive olesoxime-charged food pellets or normal diet from day 21 onward.
Analysis showed that olesoxime initially reduced denervation from 60 to 30% compared to SOD1(G93A) mice fed with control food pellets while at the symptomatic stage only a few NMJs were still preserved.
Immunostaining of cryostat sections of the lumbar spinal cord with VAChT to visualize MNs, GFAP for astrocytes and Iba1 for microglial cells showed that olesoxime strongly reduced astrogliosis and microglial activation and prevented MN loss.
These studies suggest that olesoxime exerts its protective effect on multiple cell types implicated in the disease process in SOD1(G93A) mice, slowing down muscle denervation, astrogliosis, microglial activation and MN death.
A Phase 3 clinical study in ALS patients will determine whether olesoxime could be beneficial for the treatment of ALS.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21986681
Guam dementia syndrome revisited in 2011.
This review covers the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)/parkinsonism dementia complex (PDC) of Guam.
Clinical and epidemiological characteristics, genetic possible and environmental causes, and neuropathological features of the disease are discussed.
Recent studies of clinical syndromes and neuropathological studies are compared with previous descriptions of the disease.
The latest genetic and environmental studies are also reviewed.
In recent years, understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases has evolved.
ALS/PDC shares neuropathological features found in many neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease, Lewy body disease, and frontotemporal lobar degeneration.
Thus, examining ALS/PDC may provide further explanations on how various proteins seen in neurodegenerative disorders may be interrelated.
PMID: 22750289
Effect of inhibition of superoxide dismutase on motor neurons during growth: comparison of phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated neurofilament-containing spinal neurons by histogram distribution.
We reported recently that non-phosphorylated neurofilaments (NF)-positive neurons were more sensitive to the growth inhibitory effects of Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) than phosphorylated NF-positive neurons.
The findings suggested that non-phosphorylated NF-positive neurons, presumed to represent spinal motor neurons, are more vulnerable to oxidative stress than other neurons, and thus explain in part the selective degeneration of motor neurons in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The present investigation is an extension to our previous study and examined the neurite growth process in the presence of diethyldithiocarbamate (DDC), an SOD1 inhibitor.
Non-phosphorylated NF, representing spinal motor neurons, and phosphorylated NF, representing other spinal neurons, were stained with SMI-32 and SMI-31 antibodies, respectively.
The distribution histogram of neurite length after treatment with 0 nM DDC (control) for 72 h appeared flatter compared with that of 24h.
Although the addition of DDC (1 nM, 10 nM, 100 nM, or 1000 nM) to the culture medium for 72 h shifted the histogram of neurite length to a shorter range in a concentration-dependent manner, the neurite of SMI-31-immunoreactive neurons grew under DDC.
On the other hand, DDC-treatment for 72 h altered the neurite growth of SMI-32-immunoreactive neurons compared with that for 24-h.
The results suggest that SOD1 inhibition, representing accumulation of endogenous oxidative stress, suppresses neurite growth of spinal motor neurons, and that the growth of spinal motor neurons is more sensitive to oxidative stress than other types of neurons.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21892620
The multiple faces of valosin-containing protein-associated diseases: inclusion body myopathy with Paget's disease of bone, frontotemporal dementia, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Inclusion body myopathy associated with Paget's disease of bone and frontotemporal dementia (IBMPFD) is a progressive, fatal genetic disorder with variable penetrance, predominantly affecting three main tissue types: muscle (IBM), bone (PDB), and brain (FTD).
IBMPFD is caused by mutations in the ubiquitously expressed valosin-containing protein (VCP) gene, a member of the AAA-ATPase superfamily.
The majority of individuals who develop IBM have progressive proximal muscle weakness.
Muscle biopsies reveal rimmed vacuoles and inclusions that are ubiquitin- and TAR DNA binding protein-43 (TDP-43)-positive using immunohistochemistry.
PDB, seen in half the individuals, is caused by overactive osteoclasts and is associated clinically with pain, elevated serum alkaline phosphatase, and X-ray findings of coarse trabeculation and sclerotic lesions.
FTD diagnosed at a mean age of 55 years in a third of individuals is characterized clinically by comprehension deficits, dysnomia, dyscalculia, and social unawareness.
Ubiquitin- and TDP-43-positive neuronal inclusions are also found in the brain.
Genotype-phenotype correlations are difficult with marked intra-familial and inter-familial variations being seen.
Varied phenotypes within families include frontotemporal dementia, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinsonism, myotonia, cataracts, and anal incompetence, among others.
Cellular and animal models indicate pathogenetic disturbances in IBMPFD tissues including altered protein degradation, autophagy pathway alterations, apoptosis, and mitochondrial dysfunction.
Currently, mouse and drosophila models carrying VCP mutations provide insights into the human IBMPFD pathology and are useful as tools for preclinical studies and testing of therapeutic strategies.
In this review, we will explore the pathogenesis and clinical phenotype of IBMPFD caused by VCP mutations.
PMID: 22820369
[Charcot and his legacy to medicine].
Jean-Martin Charcot (1825-1893) was a French physician whose professional life is divided into two phases: the first dedicated to neurology, and the second dedicated to the psychiatry area.
Charcot is considered the father of modern neurology.
In the Hospice de la Salpêtrière he began his research on neurological diseases, founded a laboratory of pathology (including microscopy and photography), and gave hospital classes based on pathological anatomy related to clinical manifestations based in the field of neurology.
His research led to the description and study of different neurological diseases, such as multiple sclerosis, lateral amyotrophic sclerosis, hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy, motor ataxia, Parkinson`s disease, Gilles de la Tourette syndrome, epilepsy, visual aphasia and agnosia, to name a few.
Some signs and diseases took their name as an eponym, and some are still mentioned in the current medicine, while others are left in oblivion.
PMID: 21736505
Mesenchymal stromal cells prolong the lifespan in a rat model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the loss of brain and spinal cord motor neurons (MN).
The intraspinal and systemic grafting of mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) was used to treat symptomatic transgenic rats overexpressing human superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) in order to alleviate the disease course and prolong the animals' lifespan.
At the age of 16 weeks (disease onset) the rats received two grafts of MSC expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP(+) MSC) on the same day, intraspinally (10(5) cells) and intravenously (2 × 10(6) cells).
Sham-treated animals were injected with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS).
Motor activity, grip strength and body weight were tested, followed by immunohistochemical analysis.
The combined grafting of MSC into symptomatic rats had a significant effect on motor activity and grip strength starting 4 weeks after transplantation.
The lifespan of animals in the treated group was 190 ± 3.33 days compared with 179 ± 3.6 days in the control group of animals.
Treated rats had a larger number of MN at the thoracic and lumbar levels; these MN were of larger size, and the intensity of terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick-end labeling (TUNEL) staining in the somas of apoptotic MN at the thoracic level was much lower than in sham-treated animals.
Transplanted GFP(+) MSC survived in the spinal cord until the end stage of the disease and migrated both rostrally and caudally from the injection site.
Intraspinal and intravenous transplantation of MSC has a beneficial and possibly synergistic effect on the lifespan of ALS animals.
PMID: 21963313
A neurophysiological analysis of working memory in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Frontal lobe functions, in particular working memory (WM) and verbal fluency, have been found to be deficient in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
To study the neural correlates of WM-impairment, ALS patients and healthy age-matched controls were subjected to two working memory tasks following the 2-back paradigm, one requiring the storage of figural information, the other storage of spatial information.
A significant proportion of ALS patients were unable to perform the WM-tasks.
Those who could showed worse performance in the spatial task than the controls.
Event-related brain potentials recorded during the task revealed a topographical change of the working memory effect in the ALS patients.
Thus, behavioral and electrophysiological data suggest an alteration of working memory, in particular for spatial information, in ALS.
Additionally, the patients also took part in two Go/Nogo tasks (spatial, figural) using the same stimulus material but defining targets prior to the experiment instead of a working memory manipulation.
Here, an anteriorization of the nogo-P3 was found which has been established as an index of impaired inhibitory functions.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22801498
Oligodendroglia metabolically support axons and contribute to neurodegeneration.
Oligodendroglia support axon survival and function through mechanisms independent of myelination, and their dysfunction leads to axon degeneration in several diseases.
The cause of this degeneration has not been determined, but lack of energy metabolites such as glucose or lactate has been proposed.
Lactate is transported exclusively by monocarboxylate transporters, and changes to these transporters alter lactate production and use.
Here we show that the most abundant lactate transporter in the central nervous system, monocarboxylate transporter 1 (MCT1, also known as SLC16A1), is highly enriched within oligodendroglia and that disruption of this transporter produces axon damage and neuron loss in animal and cell culture models.
In addition, this same transporter is reduced in patients with, and in mouse models of, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, suggesting a role for oligodendroglial MCT1 in pathogenesis.
The role of oligodendroglia in axon function and neuron survival has been elusive; this study defines a new fundamental mechanism by which oligodendroglia support neurons and axons.
PMID: 21872275
Trauma does not accelerate neuronal degeneration in Fig4 insufficient mice.
Fig4 null reduces phosphatidylinositol-3,5-diphosphate concentration and causes severe neuronal degeneration in both pale-tremor (plt) mice and patients with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 4J (CMT4J), an inherited condition with recessive mutations in FIG4.
Our previous study shows that minor trauma is associated with an accelerated course of motor neuron degeneration in patients with CMT4J.
Heterozygous loss of FIG4 function has been suggested to be a risk factor in developing sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
We therefore hypothesize that minor trauma may trigger or exacerbate motor neuron degeneration in mice with fig4 haploinsufficiency (plt+/-).
We have studied 18 wild-type and 18 plt+/- mice and created nerve injury by compressing the sciatic nerve.
Outcomes in the mice were evaluated by nerve conduction study, Rotarod, and nerve morphology.
No differences were found between wild-type and plt+/- mice.
Taken together, our results demonstrate that haploinsufficiency of fig4 does not impose risks in rodents to develop neuronal degeneration in either naïve or traumatic conditions.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21989221
Links between electrophysiological and molecular pathology of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Multiple deficits have been described in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), from the first changes in normal functioning of the motoneurons and glia to the eventual loss of spinal and cortical motoneurons.
In this review, current results, including changes in size, and electrical properties of motoneurons, glutamate excitotoxicity, calcium buffering, deficits in mitochondrial and cellular transport, impediments to proteostasis which lead to stress of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and glial contributions to motoneuronal vulnerability are recapitulated.
Results are mainly drawn from the mutant SOD1 mouse model of ALS, and emphasis is placed on early changes that precede the onset of symptoms and the interplay between molecular and electrical processes.
PMID: 21936838
Using yeast models to probe the molecular basis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease attributable to the death of motor neurons.
Associated with ALS are mutations in the genes encoding SOD1 (superoxide dismutase 1), FUS (fused in Sarcoma) protein and TDP-43 (TAR DNA-binding protein-43) each of which leads to aggregation of the respective protein.
For example, the ALS-associated mutations in the hSOD1 (human SOD1) gene typically destabilize the native SOD homodimer, leading to misfolding, aggregation and degradation of SOD1.
The ALS-associated pathology is not a consequence of the functional inactivation of SOD1 itself, but is rather due to a toxic gain-of-function triggered by mutant SOD1.
Recently, the molecular basis of a number of human neurodegenerative diseases resulting from protein misfolding and aggregation, including fALS (familial ALS), was probed by using the baker's yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, as a highly tractable model.
Such studies have, for example, identified novel mutant SOD1-specific interactions and demonstrated that mutant SOD1 disrupts mitochondrial homoeostasis.
Features of ALS associated with TDP-43 aggregation have also been recapitulated in S. cerevisiae including the identification of modulators of the toxicity of TDP-43.
In this paper, we review recent studies of ALS pathogenesis using S. cerevisiae as a model organism and summarize the potential mechanisms involved in ALS progression.
PMID: 22643836
Targeting NOX enzymes in the central nervous system: therapeutic opportunities.
Among the pathogenic mechanisms underlying central nervous system (CNS) diseases, oxidative stress is almost invariably described.
For this reason, numerous attempts have been made to decrease reactive oxygen species (ROS) with the administration of antioxidants as potential therapies for CNS disorders.
However, such treatments have always failed in clinical trials.
Targeting specific sources of reactive oxygen species in the CNS (e.g. NOX enzymes) represents an alternative promising option.
Indeed, NOX enzymes are major generators of ROS, which regulate progression of CNS disorders as diverse as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, schizophrenia, Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, and stroke.
On the other hand, in autoimmune demyelinating diseases, ROS generated by NOX enzymes are protective, presumably by dampening the specific immune response.
In this review, we discuss the possibility of developing therapeutics targeting NADPH oxidase (NOX) enzymes for the treatment of different CNS pathologies.
Specific compounds able to modulate the activation of NOX enzymes, and the consequent production of ROS, could fill the need for disease-modifying drugs for many incurable CNS pathologies.
PMID: 22891158
The potential of GPNMB as novel neuroprotective factor in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is an incurable and fatal neurodegenerative disease characterized by the loss of motor neurons.
Despite substantial research, the causes of ALS remain unclear.
Glycoprotein nonmetastatic melanoma protein B (GPNMB) was identified as an ALS-related factor using DNA microarray analysis with mutant superoxide dismutase (SOD1(G93A)) mice.
GPNMB was greatly induced in the spinal cords of ALS patients and a mouse model as the disease progressed.
It was especially expressed in motor neurons and astrocytes.
In an NSC34 cell line, glycosylation of GPNMB was inhibited by interaction with SOD1(G93A), increasing motor neuron vulnerability, whereas extracellular fragments of GPNMB secreted from activated astrocytes attenuated the neurotoxicity of SOD1(G93A) in neural cells.
Furthermore, GPNMB expression was substantial in the sera of sporadic ALS patients than that of other diseased patients.
This study suggests that GPNMB can be a target for therapeutic intervention for suppressing motor neuron degeneration in ALS.
PMID: 23844338
Clinical outcomes and serum uric acid levels in elderly patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis aged ≥ 70 years.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a slowly progressive fetal neurodegenerative disease in which clinical phenotype and nutritional status are considered prognostic factors.
Advanced age has also been reported to carry a poor prognosis in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The elderly population is expected to increase in Japan, as well as in other countries in the near future.
Whether late-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis affects the average lifespan or survival of patients and the nutritional status was related to survival remains an open question.
We studied the survival of elderly 34 patients with clinically definite amyotrophic lateral sclerosis aged ≥ 70 years and investigated serum triglycerides, cholesterol, LDL/HDL ratio, and glucose.
Serum uric acid was examined.
The average age at respiratory disorders or death as a whole was 77.5 ± 4.3 years.
Survival did not differ significantly between different clinical phenotypes or between patients with and those without riluzole usage.
Survival differed significantly between patients with and those without other complications.
No biochemical parameter is correlated with outcome in this series, including elevated triglyceride or cholesterol levels and an increased LDL/HDL ratio.
The survival correlated with the serum uric acid level (r = 0.407, p = 0.017).
The onset of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis at ≥ 70 years of age might not be the key determinant of survival in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
PMID: 23458846
Target- and mechanism-based therapeutics for neurodegenerative diseases: strength in numbers.
The development of new therapeutics for the treatment of neurodegenerative pathophysiologies currently stands at a crossroads.
This presents an opportunity to transition future drug discovery efforts to target disease modification, an area in which much still remains unknown.
In this Perspective we examine recent progress in the areas of neurodegenerative drug discovery, focusing on some of the most common targets and mechanisms: N-methyl-d-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptors, voltage gated calcium channels (VGCCs), neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS), oxidative stress from reactive oxygen species, and protein aggregation.
These represent the key players identified in neurodegeneration and are part of a complex, intertwined signaling cascade.
The synergistic delivery of two or more compounds directed against these targets, along with the design of small molecules with multiple modes of action, should be explored in pursuit of more effective clinical treatments for neurodegenerative diseases.
PMID: 22764223
ALS-associated ataxin 2 polyQ expansions enhance stress-induced caspase 3 activation and increase TDP-43 pathological modifications.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating neurodegenerative disease caused by the loss of motor neurons.
The degenerating motor neurons of ALS patients are characterized by the accumulation of cytoplasmic inclusions containing phosphorylated and truncated forms of the RNA-binding protein TDP-43.
Ataxin 2 intermediate-length polyglutamine (polyQ) expansions were recently identified as a risk factor for ALS; however, the mechanism by which they contribute to disease is unknown.
Here, we show that intermediate-length ataxin 2 polyQ expansions enhance stress-induced TDP-43 C-terminal cleavage and phosphorylation in human cells.
We also connect intermediate-length ataxin 2 polyQ expansions to the stress-dependent activation of multiple caspases, including caspase 3.
Caspase activation is upstream of TDP-43 cleavage and phosphorylation since caspase inhibitors block these pathological modifications.
Analysis of the accumulation of activated caspase 3 in motor neurons revealed a striking association with ALS cases harboring ataxin 2 polyQ expansions.
These findings indicate that activated caspase 3 defines a new pathological feature of ALS with intermediate-length ataxin 2 polyQ expansions.
These results provide mechanistic insight into how ataxin 2 intermediate-length polyQ expansions could contribute to ALS--by enhancing stress-induced TDP-43 pathological modifications via caspase activation.
Because longer ataxin 2 polyQ expansions are associated with a different disease, spinocerebellar ataxia 2, these findings help explain how different polyQ expansions in the same protein can have distinct cellular consequences, ultimately resulting in different clinical features.
Finally, since caspase inhibitors are effective at reducing TDP-43 pathological modifications, this pathway could be pursued as a therapeutic target in ALS.
PMID: 23844337
Tocilizumab infusion therapy normalizes inflammation in sporadic ALS patients.
Patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (sALS) show inflammation in the spinal cord and peripheral blood.
The inflammation is driven by stimulation of macrophages by aggregated superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) through caspase1, interleukin 1 (IL1), IL6 and chemokine signaling.
Inflammatory gene activation is inhibited in vitro by tocilizumab, a humanized antibody to IL6 receptor (IL6R).
Tocilizumab inhibits global interleukin-6 (IL6) signaling, a key mechanism in chronic rheumatoid disorders.
Here we studied in vivo baseline inflammatory gene transcription in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of 10 sALS patients, and the effects of tocilizumab (Actemra(R)) infusions.
At baseline, one half of ALS subjects had strong inflammatory activation (Group 1) (8 genes up regulated &gt;4-fold, P&lt;0.05 vs. controls) and the other half (Group 2) had weak activation.
All patients showed greater than four-fold up regulation of MMP1, CCL7, CCL13 and CCL24.
Tocilizumab infusions in the Group 1 patients resulted in down regulation of inflammatory genes (in particular IL1β), whereas in the Group 2 patients in up regulation of inflammatory genes.
Post-infusion serum and CSF concentrations of tocilizumab inhibited caspase1 activation in vitro.
Three of 5 patients receiving tocilizumab infusions showed time-limited attenuation of clinical progression.
In conclusion, inflammation of sALS patients at baseline is up- or down-regulated in comparison to controls, but is partially normalized by tocilizumab infusions.
PMID: 23138004
Characterization of β-domains in C-terminal fragments of TDP-43 by scanning tunneling microscopy.
The TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) has been identified as a critical player in a range of neurodegenerative diseases, including frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Recent discoveries demonstrate the important role of carboxyl-terminal fragments of TDP-43 in its proteinopathy.
Herein, we report the characterization of β-domains in the C-terminal fragments of TDP-43 using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM).
Careful comparison of the wild-type TDP-43 (Wt) and the three mutant TDP-43 peptides: an ALS-related mutant peptide: phosphorylated A315T mutant TDP-43 (A315T(p)) and two model peptides: A315T mutant TDP-43 (A315T), A315E mutant TDP-43 (A315E) reveals that A315T(p) has a longer core region of the β-domain than Wt.
A315E possesses the longest core region of the β-domain and A315T(p) mutant TDP-43 has the second longest core region of the β-domain.
The core regions of the β-domains for A315T and Wt TDP-43 have the same length.
This observation provides a supportive evidence of a higher tendency in beta-sheet formation of A315T(p) containing TDP-43 fragment, and structural mechanism for the higher cytotoxicity and accelerated fibril formation of the A315T(p) mutation-containing TDP-43 peptide as compared with Wt TDP-43.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22533463
Predictors of emergent feeding tubes and tracheostomies in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Predictable decline in ALS makes unplanned gastrostomy and tracheostomy avoidable.
We determined whether gastrostomy or tracheostomy insertion during emergent hospitalization is associated with patient or hospital characteristics, changed Medicare policy in 2001, or proximity to specialized ALS care.
We performed a retrospective analysis of hospitalizations and procedures for ALS/MND patients in Pennsylvania between 1996 and 2009.
We identified predictors of gastrostomy/tracheostomy during emergent hospitalization and trends over time.
Patients underwent 1748 gastrostomies and 373 tracheostomies.
Thirty-two percent of gastrostomies and 67% of tracheostomies were placed emergently.
Emergent hospitalizations involving gastrostomy were more expensive with fewer home discharges.
Black patients and Medicaid patients had higher odds of emergent gastrostomy placement.
Conversely, academic hospital affiliation decreased odds of emergent gastrostomy or tracheostomy placement (AOR 0.49, AOR 0.37, p &lt; 0.001).
After Medicare policy changes, gastrostomy use increased, while emergent gastrostomies decreased.
Surprisingly, proximity to specialized care was associated with increased emergent gastrostomy placement.
In conclusion, black patients and Medicaid patients were more likely to undergo emergent gastrostomy insertion.
Patients receiving gastrostomy during emergent admissions had fewer home discharges and higher costs.
Academic hospital affiliation decreased odds of emergent gastrostomy or tracheostomy.
After Medicare changes broadening access, while gastrostomy use increased, the proportion of emergent procedures decreased.
PMID: 22533462
Juvenile and adult-onset ALS/MND among Africans: incidence, phenotype, survival: a review.
We reviewed the epidemiology of ALS among subjects of African origin, considering incidence, phenotype and prognosis.
We searched Medline, Scopus, Science direct, Bibliothèque Virtuelle de Neurologie Africaine (BVNA), ( http://www-ient.unilim.fr/ ) and African journal OnLine databases using the following search terms amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), motor neuron disease (MND) or Charcot disease, in combination with Africa, ethnic groups, blacks or epidemiology.
Of 1264 references examined, 35 were included in this review.
Among the 35 references, 19 studies were performed in the African continent and dealt with MND/ALS; four other studies focused on ALS-like syndromes; finally, 12 studies were not performed in Africa but focused on either incidence and mortality or survival of ALS in subjects of African origin.
Several characteristics of ALS among Africans or subjects of African origin were identified: (i) lower incidence rates among people of African origin living in western countries, (ii) higher incidence of classic ALS among men, (iii) presence of juvenile form, (iv) younger age at onset of classic ALS.
We cannot draw firm conclusions about (i) the prognosis in African ALS patients, (ii) prognostic factors, (iii) genetic or behavioral factors affecting incidence or clinical phenotype.
Further multicenter prospective studies with homogeneous methodological approaches need to be performed in Africa to clarify the situation.
PMID: 22654722
Impact and Therapeutic Potential of PPARs in Alzheimer's Disease.
Peroxisome proliferator activated receptors (PPARs) are well studied for their role of peripheral metabolism, but they also may be involved in the pathogenesis of various disorders of the central nervous system (CNS) including multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Alzheimer's and, Parkinson's disease.
The observation that PPARs are able to suppress the inflammatory response in peripheral macrophages and in several models of human autoimmune diseases, lead to the idea that PPARs might be beneficial for CNS disorders possessing an inflammatory component.
The neuroinflammatory response during the course of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is triggered by the deposition of the β-amyloid peptide in extracellular plaques and ongoing neurodegeneration.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have been considered to delay the onset and reduce the risk to develop Alzheimer's disease, while they also directly activate PPARγ.
This led to the hypothesis that NSAID protection in AD may be partly mediated by PPARγ.
Several lines of evidence have supported this hypothesis, using AD related transgenic cellular and animal models.
Stimulation of PPARγ by synthetic agonist (thiazolidinediones) inducing anti-inflammatory, anti-amyloidogenic and insulin sensitizing effects may account for the observed effects.
Several clinical trials already revealed promising results using PPARγ agonists, therefore PPARγ represents an attractive therapeutic target for the treatment of AD.
PMID: 22016712
Does α-amino-β-methylaminopropionic acid (BMAA) play a role in neurodegeneration?
The association of α-amino-β-methylaminopropionic acid (BMAA) with elevated incidence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/Parkinson's disease complex (ALS/PDC) was first identified on the island of Guam.
BMAA has been shown to be produced across the cyanobacterial order and its detection has been reported in a variety of aquatic and terrestrial environments worldwide, suggesting that it is ubiquitous.
Various in vivo studies on rats, mice, chicks and monkeys have shown that it can cause neurodegenerative symptoms such as ataxia and convulsions.
Zebrafish research has also shown disruption to neural development after BMAA exposure.
In vitro studies on mice, rats and leeches have shown that BMAA acts predominantly on motor neurons.
Observed increases in the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and Ca(2+) influx, coupled with disruption to mitochondrial activity and general neuronal death, indicate that the main mode of activity is via excitotoxic mechanisms.
The current review pertaining to the neurotoxicity of BMAA clearly demonstrates its ability to adversely affect neural tissues, and implicates it as a potentially significant compound in the aetiology of neurodegenerative disease.
When considering the potential adverse health effects upon exposure to this compound, further research to better understand the modes of toxicity of BMAA and the environmental exposure limits is essential.
PMID: 22194369
A distinct MR imaging phenotype in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: correlation between T1 magnetization transfer contrast hyperintensity along the corticospinal tract and diffusion tensor imaging analysis.
In the search for a diagnostic marker in ALS, we focused our attention on the hyperintense signal intensity in T1 MTC MR images along the CST, detected in some patients and not found in other patients with ALS and in control subjects.
The aim of this study was to investigate the relationship between the hyperintense signal intensity in T1 MTC images and white matter damage.
To this purpose, we studied potential heterogeneities in DTI values within our patients by using TBSS without a priori anatomic information.
In 43 patients with ALS and 43 healthy control subjects, the presence or absence of T1 MTC hyperintense signal intensity was evaluated.
With a DTI analysis with a TBSS approach, differences in FA distribution between the 2 groups (patients with T1 MTC hyperintense signal intensity and patients without it) compared with each other and with control subjects were investigated.
We found regional differences in white matter FA between patients with T1 MTC hyperintense signal intensity (37.2%) and patients without it.
Patients with T1 MTC abnormal signal intensity showed lower FA strictly limited to the motor network and the posterior aspect of the body of the CC without extramotor FA reductions, whereas patients without this sign showed FA reductions in several confluent regions within and outside the CST and in the whole CC.
T1 MTC hyperintense signal intensity in the CST and posterior CC, when present, is specific for ALS and represents, among patients with ALS, a possible distinct phenotype of presentation of the disease with prominent UMN involvement.
PMID: 21527311
The ALS/PDC syndrome of Guam: potential biomarkers for an enigmatic disorder.
The ALS/parkinsonism-dementia complex of Guam is a long latency disease with a diverse phenotypic expression characteristic of classical ALS, parkinsonism and dementia.
It is remarkably similar to a syndrome localized to the Kii Peninsula of Japan.
There are as yet no identified pathological features that will clearly distinguish the Guam or Kii ALS/PDC syndrome from other degenerative neurological disorders.
At present, ALS/PDC of Guam and the Kii Peninsula can be confirmed only by postmortem examination.
The most prominent pathological hallmark is the widespread occurrence of neurofibrillary tangles which express the same balance of 3R and 4R tau that is found in Alzheimer disease.
They both show an increased prevalence of a peculiar retinal disorder termed linear retinal pigmentary epitheliopathy.
The disorders are both highly familial.
Several environmental factors have been proposed but no supportive evidence for an environmental or dietary factor has been found.
Genome searches have so far failed to identify causative genes although two single nuclear polymorphisms related to MAPT that increase the risk of the Guam syndrome have been located.
The two syndromes are clearly unique, and clues as to their causation could be beneficial in understanding the etiology of similar, but much more prevalent disorders in North America, Europe and Asia.
Identification of biomarkers for premortem diagnosis would be helpful in management as well as in revealing the true etiology.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22075069
Integration of structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis as a system failure is a concept supported by the finding of consistent extramotor as well as motor cerebral pathology.
The functional correlates of the structural changes detected using advanced magnetic resonance imaging techniques such as diffusion tensor imaging and voxel-based morphometry have not been extensively studied.
A group of 25 patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis was compared to healthy control subjects using a multi-modal neuroimaging approach comprising T(1)-weighted, diffusion-weighted and resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
Using probabilistic tractography, a grey matter connection network was defined based upon the prominent corticospinal tract and corpus callosum involvement demonstrated by white matter tract-based spatial statistics.
This 'amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-specific' network included motor, premotor and supplementary motor cortices, pars opercularis and motor-related thalamic nuclei.
A novel analysis protocol, using this disease-specific grey matter network as an input for a dual-regression analysis, was then used to assess changes in functional connectivity directly associated with this network.
A spatial pattern of increased functional connectivity spanning sensorimotor, premotor, prefrontal and thalamic regions was found.
A composite of structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging measures also allowed the qualitative discrimination of patients from controls.
An integrated structural and functional connectivity approach therefore identified apparently dichotomous processes characterizing the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis cerebral network failure, in which there was increased functional connectivity within regions of decreased structural connectivity.
Patients with slower rates of disease progression showed connectivity measures with values closer to healthy controls, raising the possibility that functional connectivity increases might not simply represent a physiological compensation to reduced structural integrity.
One alternative possibility is that increased functional connectivity reflects a progressive loss of inhibitory cortical influence as part of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis pathogenesis, which might then have relevance to future therapeutic strategies.
PMID: 24046729
RNA pathogenesis via Toll-like receptor-activated inflammation in expanded repeat neurodegenerative diseases.
Previously, we hypothesized that an RNA-based pathogenic pathway has a causal role in the dominantly inherited unstable expanded repeat neurodegenerative diseases.
In support of this hypothesis we, and others, have characterized rCAG.rCUG 100 repeat double-strand RNA (dsRNA) as a previously unidentified agent capable of causing pathogenesis in a Drosophila model of neurodegenerative disease.
Dicer, Toll, and autophagy pathways have distinct roles in this Drosophila dsRNA pathology.
Dicer dependence is accompanied by cleavage of rCAG.rCUG 100 repeat dsRNA down to r(CAG) 7 21-mers.
Among the molecular hallmarks of this pathway that have been identified in Drosophila, some [i.e., r(CAG) 7 and elevated tumor necrosis factor] correlate with observations in affected people (e.g., Huntington's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) or in related animal models (i.e., autophagy).
The Toll pathway is activated in the presence of repeat-containing dsRNA and toxicity is also dependent on this pathway.
How might the endogenously expressed dsRNA mediate Toll-dependent toxicity in neuronal cells? Endogenous RNAs are normally shielded from Toll pathway activation as part of the mechanism to distinguish self from non-self RNAs.
This typically involves post-transcriptional modification of the RNA.
Therefore, it is likely that rCAG.rCUG 100 repeat dsRNA has a characteristic property that interferes with or evades this normal mechanism of shielding.
We predict that repeat expansion leads to an alteration in RNA structure and/or form that perturbs RNA modification, causing the unshielded repeat RNA (in the form of its Dicer-cleaved products) to be recognized by Toll-like receptors (TLRs), with consequent activation of the Toll pathway leading to loss of cell function and then ultimately cell death.
We hypothesize that the proximal cause of expanded repeat neurodegenerative diseases is the TLR recognition (and resultant innate inflammatory response) of repeat RNA as non-self due to their paucity of self modification.
PMID: 23036583
C9ORF72 repeat expansions not detected in a group of patients with schizophrenia.
A hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 was recently found to cause some cases of frontotemporal lobar degeneration, frontotemporal dementia (FTD)-amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Patients with frontotemporal lobar degeneration with the C9ORF72 repeat expansion are more likely than those without to present with psychosis.
In this study, we screened DNA samples from 192 unrelated subjects with schizophrenia for the C9ORF72 repeat expansion.
None of the subjects with schizophrenia had the pathogenic expansion.
C9ORF72 repeat expansions either do not cause schizophrenia, or do so rarely (less than 1% of cases).
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23062601
A novel optineurin truncating mutation and three glaucoma-associated missense variants in patients with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in Germany.
Mutations in the optineurin (OPTN) gene have been associated with normal tension glaucoma and with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Here, we screened German familial ALS cases for OPTN mutations to gain additional insight into the spectrum and pathogenic relevance of this gene for ALS.
One hundred familial German ALS cases and 148 control subjects were screened for OPTN mutations by sequence analysis of the complete OPTN coding sequence, and phenotypes of OPTN mutant patients were described.
We identified a novel heterozygous truncating OPTN mutation p.Lys440Asnfs*8 in 1 ALS family with an aggressive ALS disease phenotype.
This mutation abolishes protein domains crucial for nuclear factor κB signaling.
Moreover, we detected 3 different nonsynonymous sequence variants, which have been described previously as risk factors for primary retinal ganglion cell degeneration in normal tension glaucoma.
Two of them were detected on the same allele in a family that also carries a p.Asn352Ser disease mutation in the ALS gene TARDBP.
All OPTN mutant patients presented with typical spinal onset ALS.
Taken together, we detected a novel truncating OPTN mutation associated with an aggressive form of ALS and confirmed that OPTN mutations are a rare cause of ALS.
In addition our data suggest that in some cases plausibly more than 1 mutation in OPTN or another ALS gene might be needed to cause ALS.
Finally, our findings show that motoneurons and retinal ganglion cells, which are both projecting central nervous system neurons, might share common susceptibility factors.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23062600
Mutation analysis of PFN1 in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients.
Mutations in the profilin 1 (PFN1) gene, encoding a member of the profilin family of small actin-binding proteins, have been recently reported in patients with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
In this study we aimed to determine the prevalence of PFN1 mutations by sequencing the coding region of this gene in a cohort of 94 familial ALS patients from France and Quebec.
No mutations were identified in our cohort suggesting that PFN1 gene mutations are a very rare cause of familial ALS among patients with predominantly European ancestry.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22594565
Single-dose pharmacokinetics and tolerability of oral delta-9- tetrahydrocannabinol in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Cannabinoids exert neuroprotective and symptomatic effects in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
We assessed the pharmacokinetics (PK) and tolerability of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in ALS patients.
Nine patients received THC single oral doses of 5mg and 10mg, separated by a wash-out period of two weeks.
Blood samples for the determination of THC, 11-nor-9-carboxy-THC (THC-COOH) and hydroxy-THC (THC-OH) were taken up to 8 hours after intake.
Adverse events were assessed by visual analogue scales (VAS).
Plasma concentrations of the active metabolite THC-OH were submitted to sequential pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic population modeling on individual heart rate as a proxy for THC's cardiovasculatory effects.
Drowsiness, euphoria, orthostasis, sleepiness, vertigo and weakness were significantly more frequent in patients receiving 10mg compared to 5 mg THC.
A marked interindividual variability was found for the absorption of oral THC (84%) and elimination of THC-COOH (45%).
PK data did not support any clinically relevant deviation from linear PK in the investigated range of concentrations.
Plasma concentrations of THC-OH were positively correlated with the individual heart rate.
An E(max-model) was successfully fitted to individual heart rate, with a THC-OH plasma concentration of 3.2 x 10(-4) μmol/L for EC(50) and an E(max) of 93 bpm for heart rate.
The higher 10mg dose of THC was dose-limiting in patients with ALS.
High interindividual PK variability requires individuell titration of THC for potential therapeutic use in patients with ALS.
PMID: 22993064
The small heat shock proteins αB-crystallin and Hsp27 suppress SOD1 aggregation in vitro.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a devastating neurodegenerative disease.
The mechanism that underlies amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) pathology remains unclear, but protein inclusions are associated with all forms of the disease.
Apart from pathogenic proteins, such as TDP-43 and SOD1, other proteins are associated with ALS inclusions including small heat shock proteins.
However, whether small heat shock proteins have a direct effect on SOD1 aggregation remains unknown.
In this study, we have examined the ability of small heat shock proteins αB-crystallin and Hsp27 to inhibit the aggregation of SOD1 in vitro.
We show that these chaperone proteins suppress the increase in thioflavin T fluorescence associated with SOD1 aggregation, primarily through inhibiting aggregate growth, not the lag phase in which nuclei are formed.
αB-crystallin forms high molecular mass complexes with SOD1 and binds directly to SOD1 aggregates.
Our data are consistent with an overload of proteostasis systems being associated with pathology in ALS.
PMID: 22323210
Uric acid levels predict survival in men with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Elevated uric acid levels have recently been found to be associated with slower disease progression in Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, multiple system atrophy, and mild cognitive impairment.
The aim of this study is to determine whether serum uric acid levels predict survival in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
A total of 251 people with ALS enrolled in two multicenter clinical trials were included in our analysis.
The main outcome measure was survival time, which was calculated as time to death, tracheostomy, or permanent assistive ventilation, with any event considered a survival endpoint.
Cox proportional hazards models were used to estimate the hazard ratio (HR) of reaching a survival endpoint according to baseline uric acid levels after adjusting for markers of disease severity (FVC, total ALSFRS-R score, time since symptom onset, diagnostic delay, BMI, bulbar vs. spinal onset, age, and riluzole use).
There was a dose-dependent survival advantage in men, but not women, with higher baseline uric acid levels (logrank test: p = 0.018 for men, p = 0.81 for women).
There was a 39% reduction in risk of death during the study for men with each 1 mg/dl increase in uric acid levels (adjusted HR: 0.61, 95% CI 0.39-0.96, p = 0.03).
This is the first study to demonstrate that serum uric acid is associated with prolonged survival in ALS, after adjusting for markers of disease severity.
Similar to previous reports in Parkinson's disease, this association was seen in male subjects only.
PMID: 22819005
Pesticide exposure as a risk factor for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a meta-analysis of epidemiological studies: pesticide exposure as a risk factor for ALS.
Exposure to pesticides and agricultural chemicals has been linked to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) although findings have been inconsistent.
A meta-analysis of studies published through May, 2011 was conducted to investigate the association of pesticide exposure and risk of ALS.
Six peer-reviewed studies that met criteria were included in a meta-analysis of men involving 1,517 ALS deaths from one retrospective cohort study and 589 ALS or motor neuron disease cases from five case-control studies.
A random effects model was used to calculate sex-specific pooled odds ratios (ORs).
Evidence was found for an association of exposure to pesticides and risk of ALS in male cases compared to controls (OR=1.88, 95% CI: 1.36-2.61), although the chemical or class of pesticide was not specified by the majority of studies.
This meta-analysis supports the relationship of exposure to pesticides and development of ALS among male cases compared to controls.
The weight of evidence links pesticide exposure to ALS; however, additional prospective studies with a target exposure group are necessary to better elucidate the relationship.
Future research should focus on more accurate exposure assessment and the use of job exposure matrices.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22955124
Neurodegenerative causes of death among retired National Football League players.
To analyze neurodegenerative causes of death, specifically Alzheimer disease (AD), Parkinson disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), among a cohort of professional football players.
This was a cohort mortality study of 3,439 National Football League players with at least 5 pension-credited playing seasons from 1959 to 1988.
Vital status was ascertained through 2007.
For analysis purposes, players were placed into 2 strata based on characteristics of position played: nonspeed players (linemen) and speed players (all other positions except punter/kicker).
External comparisons with the US population used standardized mortality ratios (SMRs); internal comparisons between speed and nonspeed player positions used standardized rate ratios (SRRs).
Overall player mortality compared with that of the US population was reduced (SMR 0.53, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.48-0.59).
Neurodegenerative mortality was increased using both underlying cause of death rate files (SMR 2.83, 95% CI 1.36-5.21) and multiple cause of death (MCOD) rate files (SMR 3.26, 95% CI 1.90-5.22).
Of the neurodegenerative causes, results were elevated (using MCOD rates) for both ALS (SMR 4.31, 95% CI 1.73-8.87) and AD (SMR 3.86, 95% CI 1.55-7.95).
In internal analysis (using MCOD rates), higher neurodegenerative mortality was observed among players in speed positions compared with players in nonspeed positions (SRR 3.29, 95% CI 0.92-11.7).
The neurodegenerative mortality of this cohort is 3 times higher than that of the general US population; that for 2 of the major neurodegenerative subcategories, AD and ALS, is 4 times higher.
These results are consistent with recent studies that suggest an increased risk of neurodegenerative disease among football players.
PMID: 23143660
Ribonuclease 4 protects neuron degeneration by promoting angiogenesis, neurogenesis, and neuronal survival under stress.
Altered RNA processing is an underlying mechanism of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Missense mutations in a number of genes involved in RNA function and metabolisms are associated with ALS.
Among these genes is angiogenin (ANG), the fifth member of the vertebrate-specific, secreted ribonuclease superfamily.
ANG is an angiogenic ribonuclease, and both its angiogenic and ribonucleolytic activities are important for motor neuron health.
Ribonuclease 4 (RNASE4), the fourth member of this superfamily, shares the same promoters with ANG and is co-expressed with ANG.
However, the biological role of RNASE4 is unknown.
To determine whether RNASE4 is involved in ALS pathogenesis, we sequenced the coding region of RNASE4 in ALS and control subjects and characterized the angiogenic, neurogenic, and neuroprotective activities of RNASE4 protein.
We identified an allelic association of SNP rs3748338 with ALS and demonstrated that RNASE4 protein is able to induce angiogenesis in in vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo assays.
RNASE4 also induces neural differentiation of P19 mouse embryonal carcinoma cells and mouse embryonic stem cells.
Moreover, RNASE4 not only stimulates the formation of neurofilaments from mouse embryonic cortical neurons, but also protects hypothermia-induced degeneration.
Importantly, systemic treatment with RNASE4 protein slowed weight loss and enhanced neuromuscular function of SOD1 (G93A) mice.
PMID: 21998727
Evidence of social understanding impairment in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The present study aims at clarifying the nature of the Theory of Mind (ToM) deficits associated with Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS).
ToM is the ability to attribute mental states such as intentions and beliefs to others in order to understand and predict their behaviour and to behave accordingly.
Several neuroimaging studies reported the prefrontal cortices as the brain region underlying a key ToM ability, i.e. the comprehension of social intentions.
Dysfunction of the prefrontal cortices in patients with ALS has been indicated by a range of neuroimaging studies.
The frontal syndrome that appears to characterize up to 50% of ALS has been noted to be similar to the profile that characterizes patients with frontotemporal dementia (FTD), a neurodegenerative condition characterised by ToM deficits.
In the present paper, we hypothesize that the performance of patients with ALS is significantly worse than healthy controls' performance on tasks requiring the comprehension of social contexts, whereas patients' performance is comparable to healthy controls' performance on tasks not requiring the comprehension of social contexts.
To this end, we tested 15 patients with ALS with an experimental protocol that distinguishes between private (non-social) intentions and social intentions.
The pattern of results followed the experimental hypothesis: the performance of patients with ALS and healthy controls significantly differed on the comprehension of social context only, with an impairment in patients with ALS.
Single case analysis confirmed the findings at an individual level.
The present study is the first which has examined and compared the understanding of social and non-social contexts in patients with ALS and shown a specific and selective deficit in the former only.
The current findings further support the notion of a continuum of cognitive dysfunction ranging from ALS to FTD, with parallel cognitive profiles in both disorders.
PMID: 22721255
Respiratory function of people with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and caregiver distress level: a correlational study.
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is a rare, fatal neurodegenerative disorder with no curative treatment characterized by degeneration of motor neurons involving a progressive impairment of motor and respiratory functions.
Most patients die of ventilator respiratory failure.
Caregivers have a great influence on the patients quality of life as well as on the quality of care.
Home influence of the caregiver on patient care is notable.
To date, no study has investigated how psychological issues of caregivers would influence respiratory variables of ALS patients.
The study aimed at finding out if there is a relationship between the respiratory function of ALS patients and the level of distress of their caregivers.
A cross-sectional study was conducted to investigate respiratory issues (PCF and FVC) and the perception of social support of ALS patients.
Caregivers filled questionnaires about trait anxiety, depression, and burden of care.
Forty ALS patients and their caregivers were recruited.
FVC and PCF were positively related to patient perception of social support and negatively related to caregiver anxiety, depression, and burden.
The distress of ALS caregivers is related to patient respiratory issues.
The first and more intuitive explanation emphasizes the impact that the patient's clinical condition has with respect to the caregiver.
However, it is possible to hypothesize that if caregivers feel psychologically better, their patient's quality of life improves and that a condition of greater well-being and relaxation could also increase ventilatory capacity.
Furthermore, care management could be carried out more easily by caregivers who pay more attention to the patient's respiratory needs.
Patient perception of social support and caregiver distress are related to respiratory issues in ALS.
PMID: 22290118
Absence of evidence for bornavirus infection in schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and major depressive disorder.
In 1983, reports of antibodies in subjects with major depressive disorder (MDD) to an as-yet uncharacterized infectious agent associated with meningoencephalitis in horses and sheep led to molecular cloning of the genome of a novel, negative-stranded neurotropic virus, Borna disease virus (BDV).
This advance has enabled the development of new diagnostic assays, including in situ hybridization, PCR and serology based on recombinant proteins.
Since these assays were first implemented in 1990, more than 80 studies have reported an association between BDV and a wide range of human illnesses that include MDD, bipolar disorder (BD), schizophrenia (SZ), anxiety disorder, chronic fatigue syndrome, multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, dementia and glioblastoma multiforme.
However, to date there has been no blinded case-control study of the epidemiology of BDV infection.
Here, in a United States-based, multi-center, yoked case-control study with standardized methods for clinical assessment and blinded serological and molecular analysis, we report the absence of association of psychiatric illness with antibodies to BDV or with BDV nucleic acids in serially collected serum and white blood cell samples from 396 subjects, a study population comprised of 198 matched pairs of patients and healthy controls (52 SZ/control pairs, 66 BD/control pairs and 80 MDD/control pairs).
Our results argue strongly against a role for BDV in the pathogenesis of these psychiatric disorders.
PMID: 22226999
Profound downregulation of the RNA editing enzyme ADAR2 in ALS spinal motor neurons.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is the most common adult-onset fatal motor neuron disease.
In spinal motor neurons of patients with sporadic ALS, normal RNA editing of GluA2, a subunit of the L-α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptor, is inefficient.
Adenosine deaminase acting on RNA 2 (ADAR2) specifically mediates RNA editing at the glutamine/arginine (Q/R) site of GluA2 and motor neurons expressing Q/R site-unedited GluA2 undergo slow death in conditional ADAR2 knockout mice.
Therefore, investigation into whether inefficient ADAR2-mediated GluA2 Q/R site-editing occurs universally in motor neurons of patients with ALS would provide insight into the pathogenesis of ALS.
We analyzed the extents of GluA2 Q/R site-editing in an individual laser-captured motor neuron of 29 ALS patients compared with those of normal and disease control subjects.
In addition, we analyzed the enzymatic activity of three members of the ADAR family (ADAR1, ADAR2 and ADAR3) in ALS motor neurons expressing unedited GluA2 mRNA and those expressing only edited GluA2 mRNA.
Q/R site-unedited GluA2 mRNA was expressed in a significant proportion of motor neurons from all of the ALS cases examined.
Conversely, motor neurons of the normal and disease control subjects expressed only edited GluA2 mRNA.
ADAR2, but not ADAR1 or ADAR3, was significantly downregulated in all the motor neurons of ALS patients, more extensively in those expressing Q/R site-unedited GluA2 mRNA than those expressing only Q/R site-edited GluA2 mRNA.
These results indicate that ADAR2 downregulation is a profound pathological change relevant to death of motor neurons in ALS.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22673113
A hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 causes familial and sporadic ALS in Taiwan.
A GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat expansion in the C9ORF72 gene was recently identified as an important cause of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia in Caucasian populations.
The role of the C9ORF72 repeat expansion in ALS in Chinese populations has received little attention.
We therefore performed mutation analyses in a Taiwanese cohort of 22 unrelated familial ALS (FALS) patients and 102 sporadic ALS patients of Han Chinese descent.
The C9ORF72 mutation was found in 4 FALS (18.2%; 4/22) and 2 sporadic ALS patients (2.0%; 2/102).
The C9ORF72 repeat numbers in the 300 healthy controls and the 118 ALS patients without the C9ORF72 mutation ranged from 3 to 15.
Needle biopsy in the left frontal cortex of 1 patient with FALS-frontotemporal dementia revealed numerous cytoplasmic TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) inclusions and minimal neuritis, consistent with type B frontotemporal lobar degeneration with TDP-43 (FTLD-TDP) pathology.
This study clearly demonstrates the existence and importance of the C9ORF72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion in a Taiwanese ALS cohort of Chinese origin, and supports the global presence of the C9ORF72 repeat expansion in ALS.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21948886
Psychopharmacological neuroprotection in neurodegenerative diseases, part III: criteria-based assessment: a report of the ANPA committee on research.
Neuroprotective therapies for neurodegenerative diseases (NDDs) have proven elusive.
The established psychotropic agents commonly used to treat the neuropsychiatric manifestations of NDDs are potential neuroprotective therapies, and neuropsychiatrists and others may benefit from a knowledge of the neuroprotective properties of these medications.
This report identifies FDA-approved, first-line psychotropic drugs affecting intracellular mechanisms and meriting disease-modifying clinical trials in NDDs.
The authors evaluated evidence for neuroprotection according to 1) preclinical; and 2) clinical criteria.
Despite low-to-moderate preclinical evidence scores and scant clinical evidence, the most promising investigative priorities are 1) lithium and paroxetine in Alzheimer's disease (AD); 2) lithium in tauopathies (frontotemporal lobar degeneration [FTLD], FTDP-17); 3) lithium-plus-valproate in AD and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; 4) pramipexole and valproate in Parkinson's disease; 5) amantadine and buspirone in multiple system atrophy; and 6) antidepressants in Huntington's disease.
Preliminary clinical results signal caution regarding olanzapine use in AD and poor tolerability of lithium in progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration.
These preliminary findings can lead to further clinical drug trials on the use of these well-known medications, not only for their psychotropic effects, but also for neuroprotection in NDDs.
PMID: 23575853
The neuroprotective drug riluzole acts via small conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channels to ameliorate defects in spinal muscular atrophy models.
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), a recessive neuromuscular disorder, is caused by diminished function of the Survival Motor Neuron (SMN) protein.
To define the cellular processes pertinent to SMA, parallel genetic screens were undertaken in Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans SMA models to identify modifiers of the SMN loss of function phenotypes.
One class of such genetic modifiers was the small conductance, Ca(2+)-activated K(+) (SK) channels.
SK channels allow efflux of potassium ions when intracellular calcium increases and can be activated by the neuroprotective drug riluzole.
The latter is the only drug with proven, albeit modest, efficacy in the treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
It is unclear if riluzole can extend life span or ameliorate symptoms in SMA patients as previous studies were limited and of insufficient power to draw any conclusions.
The critical biochemical target of riluzole in motor neuron disease is not known, but the pharmacological targets of riluzole include SK channels.
We examine here the impact of riluzole in two different SMA models.
In vertebrate neurons, riluzole treatment restored axon outgrowth caused by diminished SMN.
Additionally, riluzole ameliorated the neuromuscular defects in a C. elegans SMA model and SK channel function was required for this beneficial effect.
We propose that riluzole improves motor neuron function by acting on SK channels and suggest that SK channels may be important therapeutic targets for SMA patients.
PMID: 21947534
Disparities in NIH funding for epilepsy research.
Using data from NIH Research Portfolio Online Reporting Tools (RePORT) and recently assembled prevalence estimates of 6 major neurologic diseases, we compared the relative prevalences and the annual NIH support levels for 6 major neurologic disorders: Alzheimer disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), epilepsy, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson disease, and stroke.
Compared to these other major neurologic disorders, epilepsy research is funded at a persistently lower rate based on relative disease prevalences.
Relative NIH funding for these other disorders in 2010 adjusted for prevalence ranged from 1.7x (stroke) to 61.1x (ALS) greater than epilepsy.
The disparity cannot be explained by differences in the overall impact of these diseases on US citizens.
Greater transparency in the review and funding process is needed to disclose the reason for this disparity.
PMID: 21934272
Muscle gene expression is a marker of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis severity.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal adult-onset degenerative disease characterized by the loss of upper and lower motor neurons leading to progressive muscle atrophy and paralysis.
The lack of molecular markers of the progression of disease is detrimental to clinical practice and therapeutic trials.
This study was designed to identify gene expression changes in skeletal muscle that could reliably define the degree of disease severity.
Gene expression profiles were obtained from the deltoid muscles of ALS patients and healthy subjects.
Changes in differentially expressed genes were compared to the status of deltoid muscle disability, as determined by manual muscle testing, electrophysiology and the degree of myofiber atrophy.
Functionally related genes were grouped by annotation analysis, and deltoid muscle injury was predicted using binary tree classifiers.
Two sets of 25 and 70 transcripts appeared differentially regulated exclusively in early and advanced states of deltoid muscle impairment, respectively.
The expression of another set of 198 transcripts correlated with a composite score of muscle injury combining manual muscle testing and histological examination.
From the totality of these expression changes, 155 transcripts distinguished advanced from early deltoid muscle impairment with 80% sensitivity and 100% specificity.
Nine of these transcripts, known also to be regulated in ALS mouse and surgically denervated muscle, predicted the advanced disease status with 100% sensitivity and specificity.
We provide robust gene expression changes that can be of practical use when monitoring ALS status and the effects of disease-modifying drugs.
Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.
PMID: 23063648
Screening of the PFN1 gene in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and in frontotemporal dementia.
Mutations in the profilin 1 (PFN1) gene, encoding a protein regulating filamentous actin growth through its binding to monomeric G-actin, have been recently identified in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Functional studies performed on ALS-associated PFN1 mutants demonstrated aggregation propensity, alterations in growth cone, and cytoskeletal dynamics.
Previous screening of PFN1 gene in sporadic ALS (SALS) cases led to the identification of the p.E117G mutation, which is likely to represent a less pathogenic variant according to both frequency data in control subjects and cases, and functional experiments.
To determine the effective contribution of PFN1 mutations in SALS, we analyzed a large cohort of 1168 Italian SALS patients and also included 203 frontotemporal dementia (FTD) cases because of the great overlap between these 2 neurodegenerative diseases.
We detected the p.E117G variant in 1 SALS patient and the novel synonymous change p.G15G in another patient, but none in a panel of 1512 control subjects.
Our results suggest that PFN1 mutations in sporadic ALS and in FTD are rare, at least in the Italian population.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23248642
Discovery of Novel DENN Proteins: Implications for the Evolution of Eukaryotic Intracellular Membrane Structures and Human Disease.
The tripartite DENN module, comprised of a N-terminal longin domain, followed by DENN, and d-DENN domains, is a GDP-GTP exchange factor (GEFs) for Rab GTPases, which are regulators of practically all membrane trafficking events in eukaryotes.
Using sequence and structure analysis we identify multiple novel homologs of the DENN module, many of which can be traced back to the ancestral eukaryote.
These findings provide unexpected leads regarding key cellular processes such as autophagy, vesicle-vacuole interactions, chromosome segregation, and human disease.
Of these, SMCR8, the folliculin interacting protein-1 and 2 (FNIP1 and FNIP2), nitrogen permease regulator 2 (NPR2), and NPR3 are proposed to function in recruiting Rab GTPases during different steps of autophagy, fusion of autophagosomes with the vacuole and regulation of cellular metabolism.
Another novel DENN protein identified in this study is C9ORF72; expansions of the hexanucleotide GGGGCC in its first intron have been recently implicated in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and fronto-temporal dementia (FTD).
While this mutation is proposed to cause a RNA-level defect, the identification of C9ORF72 as a potential DENN-type GEF raises the possibility that at least part of the pathology might relate to a specific Rab-dependent vesicular trafficking process, as has been observed in the case of some other neurological conditions with similar phenotypes.
We present evidence that the longin domain, such as those found in the DENN module, are likely to have been ultimately derived from the related domains found in prokaryotic GTPase-activating proteins of MglA-like GTPases.
Thus, the origin of the longin domains from this ancient GTPase-interacting domain, concomitant with the radiation of GTPases, especially of the Rab clade, played an important role in the dynamics of eukaryotic intracellular membrane systems.
PMID: 22431338
Riluzole blocks human muscle acetylcholine receptors.
Riluzole, the only drug available against amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), has recently been shown to block muscle ACh receptors (AChRs), raising concerns about possible negative side-effects on neuromuscular transmission in treated patients.
In this work we studied riluzole's impact on the function of muscle AChRs in vitro and on neuromuscular transmission in ALS patients, using electrophysiological techniques.
Human recombinant AChRs composed of α(1)β(1)δ subunits plus the γ or ε subunit (γ- or ε-AChR) were expressed in HEK cells or Xenopus oocytes.
In both preparations, riluzole at 0.5 μm, a clinically relevant concentration, reversibly reduced the amplitude and accelerated the decay of ACh-evoked current if applied before coapplication with ACh.
The action on γ-AChRs was more potent and faster than on ε-AChRs.
In HEK outside-out patches, riluzole-induced block of macroscopic ACh-evoked current gradually developed during the initial milliseconds of ACh presence.
Single channel recordings in HEK cells and in human myotubes from ALS patients showed that riluzole prolongs channel closed time, but has no effect on channel conductance and open duration.
Finally, compound muscle action potentials (CMAPs) evoked by nerve stimulation in ALS patients remained unaltered after a 1 week suspension of riluzole treatment.
These data indicate that riluzole, while apparently safe with regard to synaptic transmission, may affect the function of AChRs expressed in denervated muscle fibres of ALS patients, with biological consequences that remain to be investigated.
PMID: 22124037
Non-viral gene delivery of the GDNF, either alone or fused to the C-fragment of tetanus toxin protein, prolongs survival in a mouse ALS model.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive, fatal neurodegenerative disease with no effective therapy.
Glial-cell line derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) has been translated to clinical trials for treatment of ALS and its selective delivery to the motoneurons could improve its therapeutic abilities.
To test this idea, we genetically fused GDNF to the C-fragment of tetanus toxin (TTC), a peptide able to specifically deliver molecules to motoneurons.
Single intramuscular administration of naked-DNA encoding GDNF or GDNF-TTC significantly delayed the onset of symptoms and functional deficits into the SODG93A mouse model of ALS, prolonging their lifespan.
We have demonstrated a neuroprotective effect of GDNF-TTC as shown by the activation of survival pathways and inhibition of apoptotic proteins, such as Akt phosphorylation, or reduced caspase-3 activation respectively.
However, the GDNF fusion with TTC did not improve the therapeutic effects when compared to GDNF alone.
PMID: 22670878
REM behavior disorder associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The association between RBD and synucleinopathies is well known.
However, the association between RBD and other neuromuscular diseases has not been as well described.
Our case study describes two siblings with familial ALS, confirmed by the identification of the L84F mutation in the SOD1 gene, and RDB.
We hope this case study will promote future studies on the prevalence of this association and will stimulate research in identifying the underlying pathogenic mechanism.
PMID: 21958920
The neurology quality-of-life measurement initiative.
To describe the development and calibration of the banks and scales of the Quality of Life in Neurological Disorders (Neuro-QOL) project, commissioned by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke to develop a bilingual (English/Spanish), clinically relevant, and psychometrically robust health-related quality-of-life (HRQOL) assessment tool.
Classic and modern test construction methods were used, including input from essential stakeholder groups.
An online patient panel testing service and 11 academic medical centers and clinics from across the United States and Puerto Rico that treat major neurologic disorders.
Adult and pediatric patients representing different neurologic disorders specified in this study, proxy respondents for select conditions (stroke, pediatric conditions), and English- and Spanish-speaking participants from the general population.
Not applicable.
Multiple generic and condition-specific measures used to provide construct validity evidence for the new Neuro-QOL tool.
Neuro-QOL has developed 14 generic item banks and 8 targeted scales to assess HRQOL in 5 adult (stroke, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, epilepsy, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) and 2 pediatric conditions (epilepsy, muscular dystrophies).
The Neuro-QOL system will continue to evolve, with validation efforts in clinical populations and new bank development in health domains not presently included.
The potential for Neuro-QOL measures in rehabilitation research and clinical settings is discussed.
Copyright © 2011 American Congress of Rehabilitation Medicine.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22235134
Cellular model of TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) aggregation based on its C-terminal Gln/Asn-rich region.
TDP-43 is one of the major components of the neuronal and glial inclusions observed in several neurodegenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration.
These characteristic aggregates are a landmark of the disease, but their role in the pathogenesis is still obscure.
In previous works, we have shown that the C-terminal Gln/Asn-rich region (residues 321-366) of TDP-43 is involved in the interaction of this protein with other members of the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein protein family.
Furthermore, we have shown that the interaction through this region is important for TDP-43 splicing inhibition of cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator exon 9, and there were indications that it was involved in the aggregation process.
Our experiments show that in cell lines and primary rat neuronal cultures, the introduction of tandem repeats carrying the 331-369-residue Gln/Asn region from TDP-43 can trigger the formation of phosphorylated and ubiquitinated aggregates that recapitulate many but not all the characteristics observed in patients.
These results establish a much needed cell-based TDP-43 aggregation model useful to investigate the mechanisms involved in the formation of inclusions and the gain- and loss-of-function consequences of TDP-43 aggregation within cells.
In addition, it will be a powerful tool to test novel therapeutic strategies/effectors aimed at preventing/reducing this phenomenon.
PMID: 22670877
Combined fulminant frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis associated with an I113T SOD1 mutation.
Mutations in the gene for superoxide dismutase type 1 cause amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), but are not thought to be associated with frontotemporal dementia (FTD).
A lack of detailed case reports is one reason, among others, for this skepticism.
This case report comments on a patient with familial ALS caused by I113T mutation in the SOD1 gene presenting with progressive cognitive and behavioral decline two years before developing progressive motor degeneration.
In conclusion, this case provides evidence that SOD1 mutations can be associated with FTD.
PMID: 22027050
Which equation best predicts energy expenditure in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis?
The purpose of this study was to compare measured resting energy expenditure (REE) with estimates from three common prediction equations with the goal of determining which equation best estimates REE in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Cross-sectional measurements of REE from indirect calorimetry were compared to calculations from the Harris Benedict, Mifflin-St Jeor, and Ireton-Jones equations.
Additional measurements to identify predictors of REE included pulmonary function tests, fat-free mass by bioelectrical impedance, and anthropometrics.
Participants were 56 men and women with ALS.
For comparison, subjects were categorized by disease progression into three groups.
Pearson correlations and paired t tests were used to compare measured REE with predicted REE from each equation, and the accuracy of each equation was quantified by the root mean squared prediction error and the percentage of REE estimates within 10% of measured values.
Bias for each equation was calculated as the mean percentage difference between calculated and measured REE.
Multiple linear regression was used to determine the best predictor variables for REE.
Across the disease spectrum, the Harris Benedict and Mifflin-St Jeor equations provided clinically acceptable estimates of REE, whereas the Ireton-Jones equations consistently overestimated REE.
The best predictors of REE among this cohort were fat-free mass, sex, and age.
When estimating energy requirements for patients with ALS, clinicians should choose prediction equations that incorporate sex and age as predictor variables, such as the Harris Benedict and Mifflin-St Jeor equations.
Copyright © 2011 American Dietetic Association.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22214359
ALSUntangled No. 14: Mototab.
In conclusion, given the lack of demonstrated effectiveness, and the above-documented concerns about product safety and supplier identity and reliability, ALSUntangled does not support the use of mototab for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or any other motor neuron disease.
If Oslo Health Solutions ever contacts us with additional useful information on this product we will gladly publish an addendum to this investigation.
PMID: 22496912
Directed induction of functional motor neuron-like cells from genetically engineered human mesenchymal stem cells.
Cell replacement using stem cells is a promising therapeutic approach to treat degenerative motor neuron (MN) disorders, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and spinal cord injury.
Human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) are a desirable cell source for autologous cell replacement therapy to treat nervous system injury due to their plasticity, low immunogenicity, and a lower risk of tumor formation than embryonic stem cells.
However, hMSCs are inefficient with regards to differentiating into MN-like cells.
To solve this limitation, we genetically engineered hMSCs to express MN-associated transcription factors, Olig2 and Hb9, and then treat the hMSCs expressing Olig2 and Hb9 with optimal MN induction medium (MNIM).
This method of induction led to higher expression (&gt;30% of total cells) of MN markers.
Electrophysiological data revealed that the induced hMSCs had the excitable properties of neurons and were able to form functional connections with muscle fibers in vitro.
Furthermore, when the induced hMSCs were transplanted into an injured organotypic rat spinal cord slice culture, an ex vivo model of spinal cord injury, they exhibited characteristics of MNs.
The data strongly suggest that induced Olig2/Hb9-expressing hMSCs were clearly reprogrammed and directed toward a MN-like lineage.
We propose that methods to induce Olig2 and Hb9, followed by further induction with MNIM have therapeutic potential for autologous cell replacement therapy to treat degenerative MN disorders.
PMID: 22214353
Non-invasive ventilation and gastrostomy may not impact overall quality of life in patients with ALS.
Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV) may improve health-related quality of life (HRQoL) in patients with ALS.
The effect of percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) on HRQoL is not known.
Instruments measuring QoL more broadly have not been used to assess effects of these interventions.
This study was undertaken to do so via the ALS-Specific Quality of Life Instrument-revised (ALSSQOL-R).
A retrospective review was carried out of ALS patients who had undergone one QoL assessment prior to NIPPV or PEG initiation and two assessments following one of these interventions.
Random coefficients models were developed.
Twenty-two patients met criteria for inclusion: six NIPPV, 11 PEG, and five NIPPV + PEG.
The ALSSQoL-R did not change significantly following NIPPV or PEG or both.
Function declined in all three groups over the same time-period.
In conclusion, overall QoL in ALS does not appear to change after NIPPV or PEG.
This may reflect the impact of non-health-related factors or may be due to a response shift.
QoL instruments that include domains outside of health status may not be sensitive to changes from single interventions.
Larger, prospective studies are needed.
PMID: 22214352
Respiratory exercise in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
We have evaluated the potential role of respiratory exercise by implementing specific inspiratory muscle training in a selected population of early-affected amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients.
We studied 26 patients with ALS with normal respiratory function using two groups of patients in a parallel, control-group, randomized, delayed-start design.
Patients in the first group (G1) started the active inspiratory exercise programme at entry and were followed for eight months, while the second group (G2) of patients followed a placebo exercise programme for the first four months and then active exercise for the second four-month period.
The primary outcome measure was the ALSFRS.
Respiratory tests, neurophysiological measurements, fatigue and quality of life scales were secondary outcomes.
Analysis of covariance was used to compare changes between and within groups.
Results showed that there was no significant difference between the two patient groups.
Within-group analysis suggested that inspiratory exercise promotes a transient improvement in the respiratory subscore and in the maximal voluntary ventilation, peak expiratory flow, and sniff inspiratory pressure.
In conclusion, there was no clear positive or negative outcome of the respiratory exercise protocol we have proposed, but we cannot rule out a minor positive effect.
Exercise regimes merit more detailed clinical evaluation in ALS.
PMID: 22214351
Spatial clustering of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and the potential role of BMAA.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative syndrome which has no known cause, except for a small proportion of cases which are genetically inherited.
The development of ALS likely involves both genetic and environmental risk factors.
Environmental risk factors implicated in ALS have included heavy metals, trauma, pesticides, electrical injuries, electromagnetic radiation and the cyanobacterial-derived neurotoxin beta-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA).
To investigate possible environmental risks, a number of epidemiological studies of ALS have been conducted.
Some of these studies employ spatial analysis techniques that examine for spatial clusters of ALS and can help guide further research into identifying environmental exposures.
Despite identifying geographical disparities in the distribution of ALS cases, these studies have not provided any clear associations with environmental factors.
We review the literature on important studies of spatial clustering of ALS and explore the hypothesized link between the neurotoxin BMAA and ALS.
PMID: 22214350
Roadmap and standard operating procedures for biobanking and discovery of neurochemical markers in ALS.
Despite major advances in deciphering the neuropathological hallmarks of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), validated neurochemical biomarkers for monitoring disease activity, earlier diagnosis, defining prognosis and unlocking key pathophysiological pathways are lacking.
Although several candidate biomarkers exist, translation into clinical application is hindered by small sample numbers, especially longitudinal, for independent verification.
This review considers the potential routes to the discovery of neurochemical markers in ALS, and provides a consensus statement on standard operating procedures that will facilitate multicenter collaboration, validation and ultimately clinical translation.
PMID: 22214357
Clinical analysis and outcomes of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with demyelinating polyneuropathy.
Abnormalities of both motor and sensory nerve action potentials, similar to those found in demyelinating polyneuropathy, may occur in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
We analyzed the clinical features of unusual ALS patients with demyelinating polyneuropathy (DPN) to delineate the characteristics and outcomes of this rare condition.
We reviewed three ALS patients with DPN who were confirmed to meet the electrophysiological nerve conduction criteria for DPN among 157 patients with ALS.
At the initial neurological examination, one patient had both subjective sensory symptoms and abnormal results of sensory examinations, and one patient had sensory symptoms.
Motor weakness of the limbs was present in all patients, and fasciculation was present in two patients.
Anti-GalNAc-GD1a IgG antibodies were evident in one.
Sural nerve biopsy showed a moderate, marginal reduction in myelin thickness, and teased fiber analysis revealed segmental demyelination and remyelination, but axonal degeneration was found in one patient.
The mean interval from disease onset to respiratory failure or death in our three patients and seven previously documented ALS patients with DPN was 43.1 ± 18.7 months.
Our findings suggest that survival in ALS with DPN is similar to that in classic ALS.
PMID: 22214356
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia: A behavioural and cognitive continuum.
Our objective was to compare the cognitive and behavioural profile of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD), and to explore the continuum between these disorders according to neuropsychological and behavioural performance using novel methods of testing and analysis.
Twenty patients with ALS, 20 bvFTD patients and 20 healthy controls completed a neuropsychiatric and neuropsychological assessment including cognitive screening, working memory, inhibitory control, decision making and emotion recognition.
The resulting neuropsychological and behavioural data were analysed by Rasch analysis.
ALS patients showed a similar profile to bvFTD patients on tests of working memory, inhibitory control and behavioural measures.
Nine ALS patients (45%) had cognitive impairment and five (25%) met criteria for bvFTD.
Even in a subset of MND patients with no impairment on the ACE-R, subtle impairment of inhibitory control together with moderate to severe apathy, were found.
The Rasch analysis confirmed that all patients could be ranked on the same continuum, based on their neuropsychological performance and behaviour.
Thus, the cognitive and behavioural profiles of ALS mirror those seen in bvFTD.
Impaired inhibitory control and behavioural changes suggest subtle orbitofrontal dysfunction in ALS.
The Rasch analysis revealed a clear overlap between bvFTD and ALS.
PMID: 22214355
No evidence for a large difference in ALS frequency in populations of African and European origin: a population based study in inner city London.
Abstract   Previous studies have suggested a lower incidence of ALS in people of African origin.
We used a population based register in an urban setting from inner city London postcodes where there is a large population of people of African ancestry to compare the frequency of ALS in people of European and African origin.
Population statistics stratified by age, gender and ethnicity were obtained from the 2001 census.
Incidence and prevalence were calculated in each ethnic group.
Results showed that in a population of 683,194, of which 22% were of African ancestry, 88 individuals with ALS were identified over a seven-year period, including 14 people with African ancestry.
The adjusted incidence in people of African ancestry was 1.35 per 100,000 person-years (95% CI 0.72-2.3) and in those of European ancestry 1.97 per 100,000 person-years (95% CI 1.55-2.48).
In conclusion, in this small population based study we could not detect a difference in rates of ALS between people of African ancestry and those of European ancestry.
PMID: 22214354
Formal ventilation patient education for ALS predicts real-life choices.
Our objective was to evaluate a single-session, hands-on education programme on mechanical ventilation for ALS patients and caregivers in terms of knowledge, change in affect and to determine whether ventilator decisions made after the education sessions predict those made later in life.
Questionnaires were administered to 26 patients and 26 caregivers on four separate occasions.
The questionnaires assessed knowledge of ventilatory support, feedback on the nature of the education programme, as well as self-reported emotional well-being.
All patients were followed until their death or until initiation of invasive ventilation.
Both groups demonstrated significant improvements in knowledge as a result of the education session which was retained after one month.
There was no change in patient or caregiver reports' self-reported emotional well-being.
The choices of ventilatory support expressed at one month (T4) accurately predicted the real-life clinical choices made by 76% of patients.
Any difference resulted from choosing palliative care.
Hands-on patient and caregiver education results in improved knowledge, assists in decision-making with respect to ventilatory support, and is not associated with a worsening of affect.
It also provides for an accurate prediction of real-life choices and avoids undesired life support interventions and critical care admissions.
PMID: 23736259
The ALS8 protein VAPB interacts with the ER-Golgi recycling protein YIF1A and regulates membrane delivery into dendrites.
The vesicle-associated membrane protein (VAMP) associated protein B (VAPB) is an integral membrane protein localized to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER).
The P56S mutation in VAPB has been linked to motor neuron degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis type 8 (ALS8) and forms ER-like inclusions in various model systems.
However, the role of wild-type and mutant VAPB in neurons is poorly understood.
Here, we identified Yip1-interacting factor homologue A (YIF1A) as a new VAPB binding partner and important component in the early secretory pathway.
YIF1A interacts with VAPB via its transmembrane regions, recycles between the ER and Golgi and is mainly localized to the ER-Golgi intermediate compartments (ERGICs) in rat hippocampal neurons.
VAPB strongly affects the distribution of YIF1A and is required for intracellular membrane trafficking into dendrites and normal dendritic morphology.
When VAPB-P56S is present, YIF1A is recruited to the VAPB-P56S clusters and loses its ERGIC localization.
These data suggest that both VAPB and YIF1A are important for ER-to-Golgi transport and that missorting of YIF1A may contribute to VAPB-associated motor neuron disease.
PMID: 22228268
Clinically definite ALS presenting weeks after mild electric injury: causality or coincidence?
Motor neuron syndromes including typical ALS develop very rarely after electrotrauma, with possible causality discussed but not confirmed.
We report on a 44-year-old male who developed clinically definite ALS by the revised El Escorial criteria with onset weeks after mild electric injury.
He presented with asymmetric upper limb amyotrophy and weakness beginning around the entry point of the current.
Over 1 year he developed generalized wasting, weakness and fasciculations, including the bulbar and thoracic muscles, with prominent spasticity and pyramidal tract signs.
Electrodiagnostic studies confirmed widespread denervation, very unstable neurogenic motor units in the bulbar, cervical, thoracic and lumbosacral segments with normal motor velocities and normal sensory parameters.
This is a well-documented case of fast-progressive ALS that seems related to electric injury.
PMID: 22678056
Amyloid precursor protein (APP) contributes to pathology in the SOD1(G93A) mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), the progressive loss of motor neurons is accompanied by extensive muscle denervation, resulting in paralysis and ultimately death.
Upregulation of amyloid beta (A4) precursor protein (APP) in muscle fibres coincides with symptom onset in both sporadic ALS patients and the SOD1(G93A) mouse model of familial ALS.
We have further characterized this response in SOD1(G93A) mice and also revealed elevated levels of β-amyloid (Aβ) peptides in the SOD1(G93A) spinal cord, which were predominantly localized within motor neurons and their surrounding glial cells.
We therefore examined the effect of genetic ablation of APP on disease progression in SOD1(G93A) mice, which significantly improved multiple disease parameters, including innervation, motor function, muscle contractile characteristics, motor unit and motor neuron survival.
These results therefore strongly suggest that APP actively contributes to SOD1(G93A)-mediated pathology.
Together with observations from ALS cases, this study indicates that APP may contribute to human ALS pathology.
PMID: 22983450
[Treatment of nausea and vomiting with 5HT3 receptor antagonists, steroids, antihistamines, anticholinergics, somatostatinantagonists, benzodiazepines and cannabinoids in palliative care patients : a systematic review].
Various recommendations exist for the treatment of nausea and vomiting in palliative care but only few studies and even less systematic reviews look into antiemetic therapy for patients receiving palliative care.
This systematic review aims to analyze the current evidence for antiemetic treatment with 5HT3 receptor antagonists, steroids, antihistamines, anticholinergics, somatostatin analogs, benzodiazepines and cannabinoids in palliative care patients with far advanced cancer not receiving chemotherapy or radiotherapy, acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), progressive heart failure, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) or multiple sclerosis (MS).
Results regarding evidence of treatment with prokinetic and neuroleptic agents will be published separately.
The electronic databases PubMed and EmBase were systematically searched for studies (published 1966-2011) dealing with antiemetic therapy in palliative care and electronic retrieval was completed by manual searching.
Studies with patients undergoing chemotherapy or radiotherapy, pediatric studies and studies published in languages other than English or German were excluded.
Studies addressing therapy with 5HT3 receptor antagonists, steroids, antihistamines, anticholinergics, somatostatin analogs, benzodiazepines or cannabinoids were identified and selected for this systematic review.
In the general search 75 relevant studies were found.
Of those 36 addressed 5HT3 receptor antagonists, steroids, antihistamines, anticholinergics, somatostatin analogs, benzodiazepines and cannabinoids, 13 considered 5HT3 receptor antagonists, 10 somatostatin antagonists, 9 steroids, 5 cannabinoids, 4 anticholinergics, 1 antihistamines and none benzodiazepines.
Furthermore six systematic reviews exist.
Evidence for any drug used as an antiemetic is low.
Concerning 5HT3 receptor antagonists data are insufficient for recommendations on the treatment of patients with AIDS and MS due to the small size of included patient groups.
For patients with cancer contradictory results were published: the larger studies showed a positive effect of 5HT3 receptor antagonists and better efficacy, as compared to metoclopramide, dexamethasone and neuroleptics.
Heterogeneous results were found for steroids, with a positive trend for patients with cancer.
Data are insufficient for antihistamines.
Studies prove effectiveness of butylscopolammonium in the treatment of nausea and vomiting caused by malignant gastrointestinal obstruction, whereas octreotide is superior to butylscopolammonium.
Regarding benzodiazepines for symptom control of nausea and vomiting in palliative care patients no studies were detected.
Cannabinoids were found to relieve nausea and vomiting in patients with cancer and AIDS but with notable side effects.
Furthermore, the studies compared cannabinoids to less recent antiemetic drugs but not, for example to 5HT3 receptor antagonists.
Regarding symptom control of nausea and vomiting in patients with COPD, progressive heart failure and ALS no studies were undertaken in patients receiving palliative care.
In palliative care patients with nausea and vomiting 5HT3 receptor antagonists can be used if treatment with other antiemetics, such as metoclopramide and neuroleptics is not sufficient.
There is a trend that steroids in combination with other antiemetics improve symptom relief.
Cannabinoids rather have a status as a second line antiemetic.
In cases of nausea and vomiting caused by malignant gastrointestinal obstruction octreotide showed the best and butylscopolammonium bromide the second best results.
Concerning antihistamines and benzodiazepines insufficient data was found.
Recommendations in the literature are mainly based on studies in patients with cancer.
The overall strength of evidence is low.
More well designed studies in palliative care patients are needed in order to provide evidence-based therapy.
The English full text version of this article will be available in SpringerLink as of November 2012 (under Supplemental).
PMID: 23393617
Prediction of functional loss of human angiogenin mutants associated with ALS by molecular dynamics simulations.
Several missense mutations in the coding region of angiogenin (ANG) gene have been identified in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) patients.
These mutations lead to loss of either ribonucleolytic activity or nuclear translocation activity or both of ANG (protein encoded by ANG gene) causing ALS.
We present here a cohesive and comprehensive picture of the molecular origins of functional loss of all ALS associated ANG mutants, emerging via extensive molecular dynamics simulations.
Our method effectively predicts that conformational change of His114 results in loss of ribonucleolytic activity and that reduction of solvent accessible surface area of nuclear localization signal residues (31)RRR(33) results in loss of nuclear translocation activity.
These predictions hold true, without exception, for all ANG mutants studied and can be employed to infer whether a new ANG mutation is causative of ALS or benign ahead of experimental findings.
PMID: 21544925
Involvement of oxidative stress in methyl parathion and parathion-induced toxicity and genotoxicity to human liver carcinoma (HepG₂) cells.
Methyl parathion (C₈H₁₀NO₅PS) and parathion (C₁₀H14 NO₅PS) are both organophosphate insecticides (OPI) widely used for household and agricultural applications.
They are known for their ability to irreversibly inhibit acetylcholinesterase which often leads to a profound effect on the nervous system of exposed organisms.
Many recently published studies have indicated that human exposure to OPI may be associated with neurologic, hematopoietic, cardiovascular, and reproductive adverse effects.
Studies have also linked OPI exposure to a number of degenerative diseases including Parkinson's, Alzheimer's, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Also, oxidative stress (OS) has been reported as a possible mechanism of OPI toxicity in humans.
Hence, the aim of the present investigation was to use human liver carcinoma (HepG₂) cells as a test model to evaluate the role of OS in methyl parathion- and parathion-induced toxicity.
To achieve this goal, we performed the MTT [3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide] assay for cell viability, lipid peroxidation assay for malondialdehyde (MDA) production, and Comet assay for DNA damage, respectively.
Results from MTT assay indicated that methyl parathion and parathion gradually reduce the viability of HepG₂ cells in a dose-dependent manner, showing 48 h-LD₅₀ values of 26.20 mM and 23.58 mM, respectively.
Lipid peroxidation assay resulted in a significant increase (P &lt; 0.05) of MDA level in methyl parathion- and parathion-treated HepG₂ cells compared with controls, suggesting that OS plays a key role in OPI-induced toxicity.
Comet assay indicated a significant increase in genotoxicity at higher concentrations of OPI exposure.
Overall, we found that methyl-parathion is slightly less toxic than parathion to HepG₂ cells.
The cytotoxic effect of these OPI was found to be associated, at least in part, with oxidative cell/tissue damage.
Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22967507
Compartmentalization of superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1G93A) aggregates determines their toxicity.
Neurodegenerative diseases constitute a class of illnesses marked by pathological protein aggregation in the brains of affected individuals.
Although these disorders are invariably characterized by the degeneration of highly specific subpopulations of neurons, protein aggregation occurs in all cells, which indicates that toxicity arises only in particular cell biological contexts.
Aggregation-associated disorders are unified by a common cell biological feature: the deposition of the culprit proteins in inclusion bodies.
The precise function of these inclusions remains unclear.
The starting point for uncovering the origins of disease pathology must therefore be a thorough understanding of the general cell biological function of inclusions and their potential role in modulating the consequences of aggregation.
Here, we show that in human cells certain aggregate inclusions are active compartments.
We find that toxic aggregates localize to one of these compartments, the juxtanuclear quality control compartment (JUNQ), and interfere with its quality control function.
The accumulation of SOD1G93A aggregates sequesters Hsp70, preventing the delivery of misfolded proteins to the proteasome.
Preventing the accumulation of SOD1G93A in the JUNQ by enhancing its sequestration in an insoluble inclusion reduces the harmful effects of aggregation on cell viability.
PMID: 21554031
Mirror movements in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive motor syndrome with clinical evidence of upper and lower motor neuron dysfunction.
Mirror movements (MM) in ALS have been reported and attributed to a disturbed transcallosal inhibition (TI).
Hence, occurrence of MM in ALS might be explained by involvement of transcallosal projecting fibre tracts into the degenerative process of the motor system.
Twenty-six consecutive ALS patients were studied by clinical investigation of MM and by transcranial magnetic stimulation testing of TI using evaluation of the ipsilateral silent period.
MM were observed in 39% of ALS patients.
There was a significant correlation between the revised Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Functional Rating Scale (ALSFRS-R) and occurrence of MM (correlation coefficient -0.315; p = 0.044).
In conclusion, all MM patients had pathological TI at least in one hemisphere, which indicates involvement of transcallosally projecting output neurons in ALS patients, which in turn may be an early feature of the disease process with the potential of a diagnostic biomarker.
PMID: 22371074
Interplay of cannabinoid 2 (CB2) receptors with nitric oxide synthases, oxidative and nitrative stress, and cell death during remote neurodegeneration.
Remote neuronal degeneration and death/injury, which often occur in regions remote but functionally connected to the primary lesion site, may play a pivotal role in extending neuronal damage/dysfunction following traumatic brain injury, stroke, or peripheral nerve injury, as well as in chronic neurodegenerative diseases such as multiple sclerosis and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Even though the precise mechanisms of remote neuronal injury are poorly understood and no efficacious treatment options are available, it involves glial activation, inflammation, oxidative/nitrative stress, and apoptotic cell death.
The newly discovered endocannabinoid signaling system consisting of endocannabinoids (endogenous bioactive lipid mediators), their synthetic and metabolizing enzymes, and their primary G protein-coupled cannabinoid 1 and 2 (CB(1) and CB(2)) receptors has been implicated in the regulation of numerous physiological and pathological processes/functions, including those associated with neurodegeneration.
Using a well-characterized rodent model of remote neuronal degeneration, Oddi et al.
(J Mol Med 2012, in press, DOI                             10.1007/s00109-012-0884-1                                                     ) have demonstrated that targeting CB(2) cannabinoid receptors may represent a promising novel approach to attenuate this pathological process.
This editorial discusses the clinical significance of these interesting observations and the mechanisms of the possible interplay of CB(2) receptors with nitric oxide synthases, oxidative and nitrative stress, and cell death during remote neurodegeneration.
PMID: 23039060
Tracheostomy with invasive ventilation for ALS patients: neurologists' roles in the US and Japan.
Our objective was to determine whether substantial differences in rates of TIV utilization in the U.S. and Japan are associated with the role of the treating neurologist.
Questionnaires in English and Japanese were sent to neurologists who treated ALS patients in both countries.
Questions included queries about rates of TIV use in their practices, level of encouragement of TIV use, the role of the neurologist in TIV decision making, management of patient/family requests to discontinue TIV once initiated, and personal choices if neurologists themselves had ALS.
Results showed that 84% of American neurologists reported fewer than 10% of their patients had TIV, compared to 32% of Japanese.
Americans less often encouraged TIV use (79% of American and 36% of Japanese seldom or never suggested or encouraged TIV).
Finally, neurologists were asked whether they would choose TIV for themselves in the hypothetical scenario where they had ALS: over 70% of both groups declined TIV for themselves.
In conclusion, consistent with past findings, Japanese neurologists were more likely to recommend TIV and more of their patients received TIV.
Both groups believed their recommendations influence patient decisions.
While Americans seldom recommended TIV to patients and most would not choose TIV for themselves, Japanese neurologists' recommendations and personal choices diverged.
PMID: 22323869
Oral solubilized ursodeoxycholic acid therapy in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a randomized cross-over trial.
To evaluate the efficacy and safety of ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) with oral solubilized formula in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients, patients with probable or definite ALS were randomized to receive oral solubilized UDCA (3.5 g/140 mL/day) or placebo for 3 months after a run-in period of 1 month and switched to receive the other treatment for 3 months after a wash-out period of 1 month.
The primary outcome was the rate of progression, assessed by the Appel ALS rating scale (AALSRS), and the secondary outcomes were the revised ALS functional rating scale (ALSFRS-R) and forced vital capacity (FVC).
Fifty-three patients completed either the first or second period of study with only 16 of 63 enrolled patients given both treatments sequentially.
The slope of AALSRS was 1.17 points/month lower while the patients were treated with UDCA than with placebo (95% CI for difference 0.08-2.26, P = 0.037), whereas the slopes of ALSFRS-R and FVC did not show significant differences between treatments.
Gastrointestinal adverse events were more common with UDCA (P &lt; 0.05).
Oral solubilized UDCA seems to be tolerable in ALS patients, but we could not make firm conclusion regarding its efficacy, particularly due to the high attrition rate in this cross-over trial.
PMID: 22118904
UNC13A is a modifier of survival in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
A large genome-wide screen in patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) showed that the common variant rs12608932 in gene UNC13A was associated with disease susceptibility.
UNC13A regulates the release of neurotransmitters, including glutamate.
Genetic risk factors that, in addition, modify survival, provide promising therapeutic targets in ALS, a disease whose etiology remains largely elusive.
We examined whether UNC13A was associated with survival of ALS patients in a cohort of 450 sporadic ALS patients and 524 unaffected controls from a population-based study of ALS in The Netherlands.
Additionally, survival data were collected from individuals of Dutch, Belgian, or Swedish descent (1767 cases, 1817 controls) who had participated in a previously published genome-wide association study of ALS.
We related survival to rs12608932 genotype.
In both cohorts, the minor allele of rs12608932 in UNC13A was not only associated with susceptibility but also with shorter survival of ALS patients.
Our results further corroborate the role of UNC13A in ALS pathogenesis.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23204922
Identification of pharmacological targets in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis through genomic analysis of deregulated genes and pathways.
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive and disabling neurodegenerative disorder characterized by upper and lower motor neuron loss, leading to respiratory insufficiency and death after 3-5 years.
Riluzole is currently the only FDA approved drug for ALS, but it has only modest effects on survival.
The majority of ALS cases are sporadic and probably associated to a multifactorial etiology.
With the completion of genome sequencing in humans and model organisms, together with the advent of DNA microarray technology, the transcriptional cascades and networks underlying neurodegeneration in ALS are being elucidated providing new potential pharmacological targets.
The main challenge now is the effective screening of the myriad of targets to identify those with the most therapeutic utility.
The present review will illustrate how the identification, prioritization and validation of preclinical therapeutics can be achieved through genomic analysis of critical pathways and networks deregulated in ALS pathology.
PMID: 23522111
Validation of the analytical procedure for the determination of the neurotoxin β-N-methylamino-L-alanine in complex environmental samples.
The neurotoxic l-2-amino-3-methylaminopropionic acid (BMAA) was hypothesized to be involved in sporadic cases of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Studies highlighting a possible implication of environmental factors in the incidence of sporadic ALS have become more numerous over recent years.
Over the past years, the most widely used method for quantifying BMAA was based on the derivatization of this polar and basic molecule with a fluorescent compound (6-aminoquinolonyl-N-hydroxysuccinimidyl, 6-AQC).
This derivatization allows the retention of the conjugate by reversed-phase liquid chromatography and its detection by fluorescence.
Nevertheless, recent findings have shown that this method applied to complex samples may cause false positive responses.
We therefore developed an analytical procedure for the determination of underivatized BMAA at trace level in complex environmental matrices (river water, cyanobacteria and biofilm) using solid-phase extraction (SPE) based on mixed mode sorbent to concentrate and clean up real samples.
Analyzes were performed by hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) coupled to electrospray ionization and tandem mass spectrometry used in multiple reaction monitoring scan mode.
Analytical procedures were validated for the different natural samples using the total error approach.
BMAA can be quantified by these reliable and highly selective analytical methods in a range of only a few ng mL(-1) in river water and a few ng mg(-1) dry weight in cyanobacteria and biofilm matrices.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22019869
[A case of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with bilateral vocal cord paralysis necessitating tracheotomy].
Vocal cord movement disorders are increasingly recognized in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
We describe a patient with limb-onset ALS who developed vocal cord paralysis.
A 74-year-old Japanese male consulted our clinic with a 6-month history of weakness in both arms.
His family history was unremarkable.
There were fasciculations and mild atrophy of the tongue and both arms.
In the legs, muscle strength was almost normal but widespread fasciculations were present.
All tendon reflexes were hypoactive and pathological reflexes were absent.
Thereafter, he developed weakness of the legs and showed increased eating time.
Babinski sign was positive bilaterally at this stage.
The forced vital capacity dropped from 90% at the initial evaluation to 62% of the predicted value 14 months later.
Two years after disease onset, the patient developed aspiration pneumonia with hoarseness and had difficulty clearing his throat of phlegm.
Laryngoscopy demonstrated severe vocal cord paresis on both sides, particularly in the abductor muscles possibly leading to obstruction.
Tracheotomy was performed because of the risk that the patient could choke to death.
A review of the literature suggests that severe impairment of vocal cord abduction could be a prelude to sudden death in ALS.
Follow up by laryngoscopic examination is necessary.
PMID: 23035801
Clinical and electrophysiologic variability in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis within a kindred harboring the C9ORF72 repeat expansion.
Our objective was to characterize the motor neuron disease features within a large c9FTD/ALS kindred.
We analyzed clinical, electrophysiologic and neuropathologic data in a c9FTD/ALS kindred of Scandinavian ancestry.
Results showed that of six family members affected, three had only ALS, two had FTD and one had FTD and ALS.
Each patient with motor neuron disease had a different clinical presentation: one patient had only bulbar symptoms, one had bulbar and limb involvement, one had limb symptoms, and one had primarily upper motor neuron disease.
Later in the course of disease, all ALS patients developed bulbar involvement and died from respiratory causes.
Survival was uniformly short (two to five years).
Electrophysiologic studies recorded progressive lower motor neuron dysfunction except in the patient with predominantly upper motor neuron features.
In conclusion, this kindred demonstrates that the presentation of ALS within c9FTD/ALS families may vary considerably and electrophysiologic findings reflect this heterogeneity.
PMID: 21717132
Comparative effects between bone marrow and mesenchymal stem cell transplantation in GDNF expression and motor function recovery in a motorneuron degenerative mouse model.
Motorneuron degenerative diseases, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), are characterized by the progressive and rapid loss of motor neurons in the brain and spinal cord, leading to paralysis and death.
GDNF (glial cell line derived neurotrophic factor) has been previously shown to be capable of protecting motor-neurons in ALS animal models although its delivery to the spinal cord after systemic administration is blocked by the blood brain barrier.
Thus, it is necessary to develop new neurotrophic approaches to protect these motor neurons from death.
Bone marrow-derived stem cells have been shown to be capable of improving a large variety of neurodegenerative disorders through neurotrophic mediated mechanisms.
Here we analyzed the effect of transplanting whole bone marrow or cultured mesenchymal stem cells into the spinal cord of a motor neuron degenerative mouse model.
Motor functions were analyzed using various behavior tests for several weeks after transplantation.
We observed that bone marrow, and to a lesser degree mesenchymal stem cell, treated mice improved significantly in the motor tests performed, coinciding with a higher GDNF immunoreactivity in the grafted spinal cord.
In several cases, the treated spinal cords were extracted, the engrafted bone marrow cells isolated and cultured, and finally re-transplanted into the spleen of immunodeficient mice.
Re-grafted cells were detected in the host spleen, bloodstream and bone marrow, demonstrating a phenotypic stability.
Thus, bone marrow cells do not suffer significant phenotypic modifications and is an efficient procedure to ameliorate motor-neuron degeneration, making it a possible therapeutic approach.
PMID: 23711824
The modest impact of transcription factor Nrf2 on the course of disease in an ALS animal model.
Oxidative stress is associated with the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2)-antioxidant response element (ARE) pathway is one of the major cellular defense mechanisms against oxidative stress.
However, the role of Nrf2-mediated neuroprotection (antioxidant defense) in the disease development of ALS remains unclear.
To further investigate the role of Nrf2 in ALS, we genetically eliminate the Nrf2 gene from SOD1-G93A mice, a commonly used ALS mouse model, by generating a double mutant (Nrf2-/- SOD1-G93A mice).
We found that it only had a modest impact on the course of disease by knocking out Nrf2 gene in these mice.
Further studies demonstrated that, among previously known Nrf2-regulated phase II enzymes, only NAD(P)H: quinone oxidoreductase 1 induction was significantly affected by the elimination of Nrf2 gene in SOD1-G93A mice.
Taken together, our data suggested that Nrf2 is not the sole mediator for the induction of antioxidant genes in SOD1-G93A mice, and Nrf2-mediated neuroprotection is not the key protective mechanism against neurodegeneration in those mice.
PMID: 22531420
Multimodal comparative studies of neurodegenerative diseases.
Here we provide a brief description of our program to improve diagnostic accuracy in cases with phenotypically similar presentations that are due to distinct histopathologic abnormalities.
We propose a staged approach to diagnosis, beginning with a screening assessment of specific, quantitative neuropsychological measures, and followed by assessments of imaging and biofluid biomarkers.
Our goal is to determine the specific histopathologic abnormalities contributing to an individual's neurodegenerative condition.
PMID: 20852312
Physical fitness, but not muscle strength, is a risk factor for death in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis at an early age.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a rare neurodegenerative disorder mainly characterised by motor symptoms.
Extensive physical activity has been implicated in the aetiology of ALS.
Differences in anthropometrics, physical fitness and isometric strength measured at 18-19 years were assessed to determine if they are associated with subsequent death in ALS.
Data on body weight and height, physical fitness, resting heart rate and isometric strength measured at conscription were linked with data on death certificates in men born in 1951-1965 in Sweden (n=809 789).
Physical fitness was assessed as a maximal test on an electrically braked bicycle ergometer.
Muscle strength was measured as the maximal isometric strength in handgrip, elbow flexion and knee extension in standardised positions, using a dynamometer.
Analyses were based on 684 459 (84.5%) men because of missing data.
A matched case control study within this sample was performed.
The population was followed until 31 December 2006, and 85 men died from ALS during this period.
Weight adjusted physical fitness (W/kg), but not physical fitness per se, was a risk factor for ALS (OR 1.98, 95% CI 1.32 to 2.97), whereas resting pulse rate, muscle strength and other variables were not.
Physical fitness, but not muscle strength, is a risk factor for death at early age in ALS.
This may indicate that a common factor underlies both fitness (W/kg) and risk of ALS.
PMID: 22257502
Comparison of phosphorylated TDP-43-positive inclusions in oculomotor neurons in patients with non-ALS and ALS disorders.
TDP-43 has been identified as a major component of the pathological inclusions in most forms of frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive inclusions and in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
In the present study, paraffin sections of the midbrain in 112 patients with various non-ALS disorders and 27 patients with sporadic ALS were immunostained with antibody against phosphorylated TDP-43 (pTDP-43). pTDP-43-positive inclusions in oculomotor neurons were detected in 18 of 112 patients with non-ALS disorders (16.1%).
The appearance of the inclusions showed fine filamentous structures rather than the skein-like inclusions seen in the anterior horn cells of ALS spinal cords.
The incidence was increased in the age range of 80-89 years old (10/37 cases; 27.0%), in which 6 of 10 cases demonstrated AD pathology in the temporal lobes.
Twenty-seven ALS patients were examined and the findings were compared with those of non-ALS patients.
There were 13 cases demonstrating pTDP-43-positive inclusions (48.1%) which showed stronger immunoreactivities in ALS cases.
This is the first report demonstrating fine filamentous pTDP-43-positive inclusions in oculomotor neurons in non-ALS disorders.
Although the mechanisms underlying pTDP-43 in oculomotor neurons are currently unknown, its detection is of interest, and the expression may occur not only in ALS but also during the aging process.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23211499
Parkinson disease:  research update and clinical management.
More than 1 million people in the United States have Parkinson disease (PD), more than are diagnosed as having multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, muscular dystrophy, and myasthenia gravis combined.
PD affects approximately 1 in 100 Americans older than 60 years.
It burdens patients, their care partners, and the overall healthcare system.
This article reviews the epidemiology, clinical features, putative environmental risk and protective factors, neuropathological aspects, heterogeneity, medical management, and recent studies regarding genetics and PD.
The article suggests that based on new research, the prevalence of PD varies in different regions of the United States.
Some progress has been made in identifying the risk and protective factors of PD, and a newly emphasized area of study in PD is genetics.
Patient care recommendations, based on American Academy of Neurology practice guidelines, are outlined to show the state of contemporary medical management of PD and related disorders.
PMID: 22303913
Current and prospective disease-modifying therapies for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating illness of unclear etiology affecting motor neurons.
It causes unremitting muscle paralysis, atrophy and death usually within 3 - 5 years from diagnosis.
The human and economic costs for those affected are sobering.
To date, tremendous efforts have failed to find a cure.
An extensive literature search was undertaken using Medline and the Cochrane Systematic Review and Clinical Trial databases.
Riluzole and investigational ALS drugs are discussed.
Riluzole is the only approved disease-modifying therapy despite its modest effect on survival.
Recent research has produced promising agents aimed at better disease control if not a cure.
This review discusses agents targeting neuronal glutamate excitotoxicity, protein misfolding and accumulation, autophagy, apoptosis, mitochondrial dysfunction, free radical oxidative injury, immunomodulation, mutant mRNA counteraction, muscle physiology, neurotrophic factors and stem cell applications.
The challenges in ALS drug development are highlighted.
Riluzole should be used for patients with definite, probable, suspected or possible ALS by World Federation of Neurology diagnostic criteria.
Systematic monitoring for hepatic dysfunction, neutropenia and other serious adverse effects should be done routinely as outlined.
All ALS patients should consider genetic screening and enrollment in ALS trials guided by the data reviewed.
PMID: 23093800
Astrocyte signaling and neurodegeneration: new insights into CNS disorders.
Growing evidence indicates that astrocytes cannot be just considered as passive supportive cells deputed to preserve neuronal activity and survival, but rather they are involved in a striking number of active functions that are critical to the performance of the central nervous system (CNS).
As a consequence, it is becoming more and more evident that the peculiar properties of these cells can actively contribute to the extraordinary functional complexity of the brain and spinal cord.
This new perception of the functioning of the CNS opens up a wide range of new possibilities to interpret various physiological and pathological events, and moves the focus beyond the neuronal compartment toward astrocyte-neuron interactions.
With this in mind, here we provide a synopsis of the activities astrocytes perform in normal conditions, and we try to discuss what goes wrong with these cells in specific pathological conditions, such as Alzheimer Disease, prion diseases and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
PMID: 22697423
Does a loss of TDP-43 function cause neurodegeneration?
In 2006, TAR-DNA binding protein 43 kDa (TDP-43) was discovered to be in the intracellular aggregates in the degenerating cells in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), two fatal neurodegenerative diseases [1,2].
ALS causes motor neuron degeneration leading to paralysis [3,4].
FTLD causes neuronal degeneration in the frontal and temporal cortices leading to personality changes and a loss of executive function [5].
The discovery triggered a flurry of research activity that led to the discovery of TDP-43 mutations in ALS patients and the widespread presence of TDP-43 aggregates in numerous neurodegenerative diseases.
A key question regarding the role of TDP-43 is whether it causes neurotoxicity by a gain of function or a loss of function.
The gain-of-function hypothesis has received much attention primarily based on the striking neurodegenerative phenotypes in numerous TDP-43-overexpression models.
In this review, I will draw attention to the loss-of-function hypothesis, which postulates that mutant TDP-43 causes neurodegeneration by a loss of function, and in addition, by exerting a dominant-negative effect on the wild-type TDP-43 allele.
Furthermore, I will discuss how a loss of function can cause neurodegeneration in patients where TDP-43 is not mutated, review the literature in model systems to discuss how the current data support the loss-of-function mechanism and highlight some key questions for testing this hypothesis in the future.
PMID: 23452771
[Have ALS centers changed the care and management of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis?].
The multidisciplinary care of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients in clinics with expertise in the disease was created in the 1980s and 1990 s specifically to manage the severe functional impairment caused by the disorder.
This specialized care for both diagnosis and management led to the creation of the ALS centers.
To facilitate the continuity of care through close liaisons between primary-care physicians and community-based services, a specialized network was also developed.
French ALS centers are now 10 years old, and their efficient national coordination has provided an improved and homogeneous care delivery in our country, while their recommendations for care have been published both nationally and internationally.
Several studies have indicated positive effects on ALS patients'survival after attending ALS centers and receiving such specialized palliative treatments as assisted ventilation.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22033150
Dysfunction of constitutive and inducible ubiquitin-proteasome system in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: implication for protein aggregation and immune response.
The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) is the major intracellular proteolytic mechanism controlling the degradation of misfolded/abnormal proteins.
A common hallmark in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and in other neurodegenerative disorders is the accumulation of misfolded/abnormal proteins into the damaged neurons, leading to the formation of cellular inclusions that are mostly ubiquitin-positive.
Although proteolysis is a complex mechanism requiring the participation of different pathways, the abundant accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins strongly suggests an important contribution of UPS to these neuropathological features.
The use of cellular and animal models of ALS, particularly those expressing mutant SOD1, the gene mutation most represented in familiar ALS, has provided significant evidence for a role of UPS in protein inclusions formation and motor neuron death.
This review will specifically discuss this piece of evidence and provide suggestions of potential strategies for therapeutic intervention.
We will also discuss the finding that, unlike the constitutive proteasome subunits, the inducible subunits are overexpressed early during disease progression in SOD1 mice models of ALS.
These subunits form the immunoproteasome and generate peptides for the major histocompatibility complex class I molecules, suggesting a role of this system in the immune responses associated with the pathological features of ALS.
Since recent discoveries indicate that innate and adaptive immunity may influence the disease process, in this review we will also provide evidence of a possible connection between immune-inflammatory reactions and UPS function, in the attempt to better understand the etiopathology of ALS and to identify appropriate targets for novel treatment strategies of this devastating disease.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22594630
Factors related to respiration influencing survival and respiratory function in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a retrospective study.
Various breathing abnormalities (Neurology 2009; 73: 1218) have been proposed as indicators for the introduction of non-invasive positive-pressure ventilation (NIV) in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
We were interested in the usefulness of symptoms of respiratory insufficiency and abnormal results of daytime arterial gas analyses (AGA) as predictors of survival and the effect of NIV on respiratory volumes and pressures.
Reported symptoms, respiratory subscore of the ALS Functional Rating Scale (ALSFRS-r), Norris scale (Norris-r), and AGA were retrospectively analyzed in 189 ALS patients.
Longitudinal follow-up of forced vital capacity (FVC), maximal inspiratory and expiratory pressure (MIP, MEP), and sniff nasal pressure (SNP) were analyzed with regard to the introduction of NIV.
Respiratory symptoms were a bad prognostic sign (P = 0.007).
Abnormalities in Norris-r, ALSFRS-r, pO(2), pCO(2), and oxygen saturation tended to be associated with a shorter survival, although they were not statistically significant.
NIV prolonged survival and reduced the decline in FVC (P = 0.007), MIP, MEP, and SNP (the last three were not statistically significant).
Symptoms, abnormal FVC, and AGA do not always coincide, and they can appear in a different sequence.
Any respiratory abnormality should prompt the clinician to start discussing NIV with the patient.
NIV prolongs survival and improves respiratory function.
© 2012 The Author(s) European Journal of Neurology © 2012 EFNS.
PMID: 23613806
Design and initial results of a multi-phase randomized trial of ceftriaxone in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Ceftriaxone increases expression of the astrocytic glutamate transporter, EAAT2, which might protect from glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity.
A trial using a novel three stage nonstop design, incorporating Phases I-III, tested ceftriaxone in ALS.
Stage 1 determined the cerebrospinal fluid pharmacokinetics of ceftriaxone in subjects with ALS.
Stage 2 evaluated safety and tolerability for 20-weeks.
Analysis of the pharmacokinetics, tolerability, and safety was used to determine the ceftriaxone dosage for Stage 3 efficacy testing.
In Stage 1, 66 subjects at ten clinical sites were enrolled and randomized equally into three study groups receiving intravenous placebo, ceftriaxone 2 grams daily or ceftriaxone 4 grams daily divided BID.
Participants provided serum and cerebrospinal fluid for pharmacokinetic analysis on study day 7.
Participants continued their assigned treatment in Stage 2.
The Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) reviewed the data after the last participants completed 20 weeks on study drug.
Stage 1 analysis revealed linear pharmacokinetics, and CSF trough levels for both dosage levels exceeding the pre-specified target trough level of 1 µM (0.55 µg/mL).
Tolerability (Stages 1 and 2) results showed that ceftriaxone at dosages up to 4 grams/day was well tolerated at 20 weeks.
Biliary adverse events were more common with ceftriaxone but not dose-dependent and improved with ursodeoxycholic (ursodiol) therapy.
The goals of Stages 1 and 2 of the ceftriaxone trial were successfully achieved.
Based on the pre-specified decision rules, the DSMB recommended the use of ceftriaxone 4 g/d (divided BID) for Stage 3, which recently closed.
ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00349622.
PMID: 21907581
P525L FUS mutation is consistently associated with a severe form of juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Some FUS mutations have been observed in patients with the juvenile form of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis starting before 25 years.
We report an 11-year-old girl affected by sporadic juvenile ALS with a rapid course resulting in tracheostomy after 14 months from the onset.
Sequencing FUS gene revealed a de novo P525L mutation.
Our findings, together with literature data, indicate that this mutation is consistently associated with a specific phenotype characterized by juvenile onset, severe course and high proportion of de novo mutations in sporadic cases.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23717256
Comparison of movement related cortical potential in healthy people and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients.
Objective: To understand the brain motor functions and neurophysiological changes due to motor disorder by comparing electroencephalographic data between healthy people and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients.
Methods: The movement related cortical potential (MRCP) was recorded from seven healthy subjects and four ALS patients.
They were asked to imagine right wrist extension at two speeds (fast and slow).
The peak negativity (PN) and rebound rate (RR) were extracted from MRCP for comparison.
Results: The statistical analysis has showed that there was no significant difference in PN between the healthy and the ALS subjects.
However, the healthy subjects presented faster RR than ALS during both fast and slow movement imagination.
Conclusions: The weaker RR of ALS patients might reflect the impairment of motor output pathways or the degree of motor degeneration.
Significance: The comparison between healthy people and ALS patients provides a way to explain the movement disorder through brain electrical signal.
In addition, the characteristics of MRCP could be used to monitor and guide brain plasticity in patients.
PMID: 23604587
TDP-43 deposition in prospectively followed, cognitively normal elderly individuals: correlation with argyrophilic grains but not other concomitant pathologies.
TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) has been heavily researched in recent years due to its involvement in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration.
Several studies have also sought to investigate the frequency of TDP-43 deposition in other neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases, but there has been relatively little work focused on the prevalence, distribution and histopathological associations of abnormal TDP-43 deposits in the brains of cognitively normal elderly subjects.
We screened thick, free-floating coronal sections of mesial temporal lobe from 110 prospectively followed and autopsied cognitively normal subjects (age range 71-100 years) using an immunohistochemical method for phosphorylated TDP-43.
We found a 36.4 % prevalence of pathologic TDP-43, mostly in the form of neurites while perikaryal cytoplasmic neuronal inclusions were uncommon and intranuclear inclusions were rare.
With respect to other concomitant pathologies commonly found in elderly individuals, cases with TDP-43 had a greater prevalence of argyrophilic grains (ARG) (40 vs. 18.6 %) and overall ARG density (moderate vs. sparse).
There were no additional associations with other concomitant pathologies, including cerebral white matter rarefaction, incidental Lewy bodies, neurofibrillary tangles or amyloid plaques.
These results indicate deposition of TDP-43 occurs in a substantial subset of cognitively normal elderly subjects and is more common in those with ARG, supporting some previous studies linking pathological TDP-43 deposition with ARG and other pathological tau protein deposits.
PMID: 22880116
The cortical signature of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The aim of this study was to explore the pattern of regional cortical thickness in patients with non-familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and to investigate whether cortical thinning is associated with disease progression rate.
Cortical thickness analysis was performed in 44 ALS patients and 26 healthy controls.
Group differences in cortical thickness and the age-by-group effects were assessed using vertex-by-vertex and multivariate linear models.
The discriminatory ability of MRI variables in distinguishing patients from controls was estimated using the Concordance Statistics (C-statistic) within logistic regression analyses.
Correlations between cortical thickness measures and disease progression rate were tested using the Pearson coefficient.
Relative to controls, ALS patients showed a bilateral cortical thinning of the primary motor, prefrontal and ventral frontal cortices, cingulate gyrus, insula, superior and inferior temporal and parietal regions, and medial and lateral occipital areas.
There was a significant age-by-group effect in the sensorimotor cortices bilaterally, suggesting a stronger association between age and cortical thinning in ALS patients compared to controls.
The mean cortical thickness of the sensorimotor cortices distinguished patients with ALS from controls (C-statistic ≥ 0.74).
Cortical thinning of the left sensorimotor cortices was related to a faster clinical progression (r = -0.33, p = 0.03).
Cortical thickness measurements allowed the detection and quantification of motor and extramotor involvement in patients with ALS.
Cortical thinning of the precentral gyrus might offer a marker of upper motor neuron involvement and disease progression.
PMID: 23401527
Astrocyte pathology and the absence of non-cell autonomy in an induced pluripotent stem cell model of TDP-43 proteinopathy.
Glial proliferation and activation are associated with disease progression in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar dementia.
In this study, we describe a unique platform to address the question of cell autonomy in transactive response DNA-binding protein (TDP-43) proteinopathies.
We generated functional astroglia from human induced pluripotent stem cells carrying an ALS-causing TDP-43 mutation and show that mutant astrocytes exhibit increased levels of TDP-43, subcellular mislocalization of TDP-43, and decreased cell survival.
We then performed coculture experiments to evaluate the effects of M337V astrocytes on the survival of wild-type and M337V TDP-43 motor neurons, showing that mutant TDP-43 astrocytes do not adversely affect survival of cocultured neurons.
These observations reveal a significant and previously unrecognized glial cell-autonomous pathological phenotype associated with a pathogenic mutation in TDP-43 and show that TDP-43 proteinopathies do not display an astrocyte non-cell-autonomous component in cell culture, as previously described for SOD1 ALS.
This study highlights the utility of induced pluripotent stem cell-based in vitro disease models to investigate mechanisms of disease in ALS and other TDP-43 proteinopathies.
PMID: 22366795
Neuroimaging signatures of frontotemporal dementia genetics: C9ORF72, tau, progranulin and sporadics.
A major recent discovery was the identification of an expansion of a non-coding GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat in the C9ORF72 gene in patients with frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Mutations in two other genes are known to account for familial frontotemporal dementia: microtubule-associated protein tau and progranulin.
Although imaging features have been previously reported in subjects with mutations in tau and progranulin, no imaging features have been published in C9ORF72.
Furthermore, it remains unknown whether there are differences in atrophy patterns across these mutations, and whether regional differences could help differentiate C9ORF72 from the other two mutations at the single-subject level.
We aimed to determine the regional pattern of brain atrophy associated with the C9ORF72 gene mutation, and to determine which regions best differentiate C9ORF72 from subjects with mutations in tau and progranulin, and from sporadic frontotemporal dementia.
A total of 76 subjects, including 56 with a clinical diagnosis of behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and a mutation in one of these genes (19 with C9ORF72 mutations, 25 with tau mutations and 12 with progranulin mutations) and 20 sporadic subjects with behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia (including 50% with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis), with magnetic resonance imaging were included in this study.
Voxel-based morphometry was used to assess and compare patterns of grey matter atrophy.
Atlas-based parcellation was performed utilizing the automated anatomical labelling atlas and Statistical Parametric Mapping software to compute volumes of 37 regions of interest.
Hemispheric asymmetry was calculated.
Penalized multinomial logistic regression was utilized to create a prediction model to discriminate among groups using regional volumes and asymmetry score.
Principal component analysis assessed for variance within groups.
C9ORF72 was associated with symmetric atrophy predominantly involving dorsolateral, medial and orbitofrontal lobes, with additional loss in anterior temporal lobes, parietal lobes, occipital lobes and cerebellum.
In contrast, striking anteromedial temporal atrophy was associated with tau mutations and temporoparietal atrophy was associated with progranulin mutations.
The sporadic group was associated with frontal and anterior temporal atrophy.
A conservative penalized multinomial logistic regression model identified 14 variables that could accurately classify subjects, including frontal, temporal, parietal, occipital and cerebellum volume.
The principal component analysis revealed similar degrees of heterogeneity within all disease groups.
Patterns of atrophy therefore differed across subjects with C9ORF72, tau and progranulin mutations and sporadic frontotemporal dementia.
Our analysis suggested that imaging has the potential to be useful to help differentiate C9ORF72 from these other groups at the single-subject level.
PMID: 22366794
Clinical characteristics of patients with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis carrying the pathogenic GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat expansion of C9ORF72.
A large hexanucleotide (GGGGCC) repeat expansion in the first intron of C9ORF72, a gene located on chromosome 9p21, has been recently reported to be responsible for ~40% of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis cases of European ancestry.
The aim of the current article was to describe the phenotype of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis cases carrying the expansion by providing a detailed clinical description of affected cases from representative multi-generational kindreds, and by analysing the age of onset, gender ratio and survival in a large cohort of patients with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
We collected DNA and analysed phenotype data for 141 index Italian familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis cases (21 of Sardinian ancestry) and 41 German index familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis cases.
Pathogenic repeat expansions were detected in 45 (37.5%) patients from mainland Italy, 12 (57.1%) patients of Sardinian ancestry and nine (22.0%) of the 41 German index familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis cases.
The disease was maternally transmitted in 27 (49.1%) pedigrees and paternally transmitted in 28 (50.9%) pedigrees (P = non-significant).
On average, children developed disease 7.0 years earlier than their parents [children: 55.8 years (standard deviation 7.9), parents: 62.8 (standard deviation 10.9); P = 0.003].
Parental phenotype influenced the type of clinical symptoms manifested by the child: of the 13 cases where the affected parent had an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-frontotemporal dementia or frontotemporal dementia, the affected child also developed amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-frontotemporal dementia in nine cases.
When compared with patients carrying mutations of other amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-related genes, those with C9ORF72 expansion had commonly a bulbar onset (42.2% compared with 25.0% among non-C9ORF72 expansion cases, P = 0.03) and cognitive impairment (46.7% compared with 9.1% among non-C9ORF72 expansion cases, P = 0.0001).
Median survival from symptom onset among cases carrying C9ORF72 repeat expansion was 3.2 years lower than that of patients carrying TARDBP mutations (5.0 years; 95% confidence interval: 3.6-7.2) and longer than those with FUS mutations (1.9 years; 95% confidence interval: 1.7-2.1).
We conclude that C9ORF72 hexanucleotide repeat expansions were the most frequent mutation in our large cohort of patients with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis of Italian, Sardinian and German ancestry.
Together with mutation of SOD1, TARDBP and FUS, mutations of C9ORF72 account for ~60% of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in Italy.
Patients with C9ORF72 hexanucleotide repeat expansions present some phenotypic differences compared with patients with mutations of other genes or with unknown mutations, namely a high incidence of bulbar-onset disease and comorbidity with frontotemporal dementia.
Their pedigrees typically display a high frequency of cases with pure frontotemporal dementia, widening the concept of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
PMID: 23421098
[Marihuana and cannobinoids as medicaments].
Biological activity of cannabinoids is caused by binding to two cannabinoid receptors CB1 and CB2.
Psychoactive is not only tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) but also: cannabidiol, cannabigerol or cannabichromen.
Formerly, the usefulness of hemp was assessed in the relation to temporary appeasement of the symptoms of some ailments as nausea or vomiting.
Present discoveries indicates that cannabis-based drugs has shown ability to alleviate of autoimmunological disorders such as: Multiple sclerosis (MS), Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) or inflammatory bowel disease.
Another studies indicates that cannabinoids play role in treatment of neurological disorders like Alzheimer disease or Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) or even can reduce spreading of tumor cells.
Cannabinoids stand out high safety profile considering acute toxicity, it is low possibility of deadly overdosing and side-effects are comprise in range of tolerated side-effects of other medications.
In some countries marinol and nabilone are used as anti vomiting and nausea drug.
First cannabis-based drug containg naturally occurring cannabinoids is Sativex.
Sativex is delivered in an mucosal spray for patients suffering from spasticity in MS, pain relevant with cancer and neuropathic pain of various origin.
Despite the relatively low acute toxicity of cannabinoids they should be avoid in patients with psychotic disorders, pregnant or breastfeeding woman.
Cannabinoids prolong a time of reaction and decrease power of concentration that's why driving any vehicles is forbidden.
Cannabis side-effects varies and depend from several factors like administrated dose, rout of administration and present state of mind.
After sudden break from long-lasting use, withdrawal symptoms can appear, although they entirely disappear after a week or two.
PMID: 22366793
Characterization of frontotemporal dementia and/or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis associated with the GGGGCC repeat expansion in C9ORF72.
Numerous kindreds with familial frontotemporal dementia and/or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis have been linked to chromosome 9, and an expansion of the GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat in the non-coding region of chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 has recently been identified as the pathogenic mechanism.
We describe the key characteristics in the probands and their affected relatives who have been evaluated at Mayo Clinic Rochester or Mayo Clinic Florida in whom the hexanucleotide repeat expansion were found.
Forty-three probands and 10 of their affected relatives with DNA available (total 53 subjects) were shown to carry the hexanucleotide repeat expansion.
Thirty-six (84%) of the 43 probands had a familial disorder, whereas seven (16%) appeared to be sporadic.
Among examined subjects from the 43 families (n = 63), the age of onset ranged from 33 to 72 years (median 52 years) and survival ranged from 1 to 17 years, with the age of onset &lt;40 years in six (10%) and &gt;60 in 19 (30%).
Clinical diagnoses among examined subjects included behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia with or without parkinsonism (n = 30), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (n = 18), frontotemporal dementia/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with or without parkinsonism (n = 12), and other various syndromes (n = 3).
Parkinsonism was present in 35% of examined subjects, all of whom had behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia or frontotemporal dementia/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis as the dominant clinical phenotype.
No subject with a diagnosis of primary progressive aphasia was identified with this mutation.
Incomplete penetrance was suggested in two kindreds, and the youngest generation had significantly earlier age of onset (&gt;10 years) compared with the next oldest generation in 11 kindreds.
Neuropsychological testing showed a profile of slowed processing speed, complex attention/executive dysfunction, and impairment in rapid word retrieval.
Neuroimaging studies showed bilateral frontal abnormalities most consistently, with more variable degrees of parietal with or without temporal changes; no case had strikingly focal or asymmetric findings.
Neuropathological examination of 14 patients revealed a range of transactive response DNA binding protein molecular weight 43 pathology (10 type A and four type B), as well as ubiquitin-positive cerebellar granular neuron inclusions in all but one case.
Motor neuron degeneration was detected in nine patients, including five patients without ante-mortem signs of motor neuron disease.
While variability exists, most cases with this mutation have a characteristic spectrum of demographic, clinical, neuropsychological, neuroimaging and especially neuropathological findings.
PMID: 22296327
A technology-aided program to support leisure engagement and communication by a man with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
To assess a technology-aided programme for promoting leisure engagement and communication in a man with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
The programme involved a laptop computer equipped with a Clicker 5 software package, an optic microswitch and an interface device.
The participant could choose between two leisure options (i.e. songs and videos), could write requests and general messages through a virtual keyboard and a microswitch and could have the written text read out to caregivers and staff.
The use of the programme increased the mean frequency of words written to about 15 per 20-minute session during the second intervention phase.
Those words were used by the participant for formulating a mean of over two requests/messages per session.
The participant also listened to songs and watched videos.
A simple technology-aided programme may allow ALS patients to manage leisure engagement and communication.
PMID: 23781715
[Present and future of the transcranial magnetic stimulation].
Magnetic stimulation has called the attention of neuroscientists and the public due to the possibility to stimulate and control the nervous system in a non-invasive way.
It has helped to make more accurate diagnosis, and apply more effective treatments and rehabilitation protocols in several diseases that affect the nervous system.
Likewise, this novel tool has increased our knowledge about complex neural behavior, its connections as well as its plastic modulation.
Magnetic stimulation applied in simple or paired-pulse protocols is a useful alternative in the diagnosis of diseases such as multiple sclerosis, Parkinson disease, epilepsy, dystonia, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, cerebrovascular disease, and sleep disorders.
From the therapeutic perspective, magnetic stimulation applied repetitively has been found useful, with different degrees of efficacy, in treating resistant depression, tinnitus, psychogenic dysphonia, Alzheimer disease, autism, Parkinson disease, dystonia, stroke, epilepsy, generalized anxiety as well as post traumatic stress disorder, auditory hallucinations, chronic pain, aphasias, obsessive-compulsive disorders, L-dopa induced dyskynesia, mania and Rasmussen syndrome, among others.
The potential of magnetic stimulation in neurorehabilitation is outstanding, with excellent range of safety and, in practical terms, without side effects.
PMID: 22943439
Leukocyte-derived microparticles and scanning electron microscopic structures in two fractions of fresh cerebrospinal fluid in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a case report.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by degeneration of motoneuron cells in anterior spinal horns.
There is a need for early and accurate diagnosis with this condition.
In this case report we used two complementary methods: scanning electron microscopy and fluorescence-activated cell sorting.
This is the first report to our knowledge of microparticles in the cerebrospinal fluid of a patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
An 80-year-old Swedish man of Caucasian ethnicity presented to our facility with symptoms of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis starting a year before his first hospital examination, such as muscle weakness and twitching in his right hand progressing to arms, body and leg muscles.
Electromyography showed classical neurophysiological findings of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Routine blood sample results were normal.
A lumbar puncture was performed as a routine investigation and his cerebrospinal fluid was normal with regard to cell count and protein levels, and there were no signs of inflammation.
However, scanning electron microscopy and fluorescence-activated cell sorting showed pronounced abnormalities compared to healthy controls.
Flow cytometry analysis of two fractions of cerebrospinal fluid from our patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis was used to measure the specific binding of antibodies to CD42a, CD144 and CD45, and of phosphatidylserine to lactadherin.
Our patient displayed over 100 times more phosphatidylserine-positive microparticles and over 400 times more cell-derived microparticles of leukocyte origin in his cerebrospinal fluid compared to healthy control subjects.
The first cerebrospinal fluid fraction contained about 50% more microparticles than the second fraction.
The scanning electron microscopy filters used with cerebrospinal fluid from our patient were filled with compact aggregates of spherical particles of lipid appearance, sticking together in a viscous batter.
The quantitative increase in scanning electron microscopy findings corresponded to the flow cytometry result of an increase in leukocyte-derived microparticles.
Microparticles represent subcellular arrangements that can influence the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and may serve as biomarkers for underlying cellular disturbances.
The increased number of leukocyte-derived microparticles with normal cell counts in cerebrospinal fluid may contribute to the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis inflammatory process by formation of immune complexes of prion-like propagation, possibly due to misfolded proteins.
The two complementary methods used in this report may be additional tools for revealing the etiology of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, for early diagnostic purposes and for evaluation of clinical trials, long-term follow-up studies and elucidating the pathophysiology in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
PMID: 21889591
Gene therapy for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Gene therapy continues to be a potential option for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
This chapter will inform the reader about promising therapeutic transgenes and proof-of-principle studies in transgenic rodent models of ALS.
Challenges regarding the disease targets and time for therapeutic intervention will be also discussed.
Finally, restorative therapy for ALS, as well as gene therapy for other motor neuron diseases will be briefly reviewed.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23306556
Acidotoxicity and acid-sensing ion channels contribute to motoneuron degeneration.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurological condition with no cure.
Mitochondrial dysfunction, Ca(2+) overloading and local hypoxic/ischemic environments have been implicated in the pathophysiology of ALS and are conditions that may initiate metabolic acidosis in the affected tissue.
We tested the hypothesis that acidotoxicity and acid-sensing ion channels (ASICs) are involved in the pathophysiology of ALS.
We found that motoneurons were selectively vulnerable to acidotoxicity in vitro, and that acidotoxicity was partially reduced in asic1a-deficient motoneuron cultures.
Cross-breeding of SOD1(G93A) ALS mice with asic1a-deficient mice delayed the onset and progression of motor dysfunction in SOD1 mice.
Interestingly, we also noted a strong increase in ASIC2 expression in motoneurons of SOD1 mice and sporadic ALS patients during disease progression.
Pharmacological pan-inhibition of ASIC channels with the lipophilic amiloride derivative, 5-(N,N-dimethyl)-amiloride hydrochloride, potently protected cultured motoneurons against acidotoxicity, and, given post-symptom onset, significantly improved lifespan, motor performance and motoneuron survival in SOD1 mice.
Together, our data provide strong evidence for the involvement of acidotoxicity and ASIC channels in motoneuron degeneration, and highlight the potential of ASIC inhibitors as a new treatment approach for ALS.
PMID: 23085933
Grey matter correlates of clinical variables in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS): a neuroimaging study of ALS motor phenotype heterogeneity and cortical focality.
Body region of onset and functional disability are key components of disease heterogeneity in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
To evaluate patterns of grey matter pathology in the motor cortex and correlate focal structural changes with functional disability.
We conducted a single-centre neuroimaging study of a cohort of 33 cognitively normal patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and 44 healthy controls.
A voxel-wise generalised linear model was used to investigate the distribution of disease burden within the motor cortex in relation to clinical disability.
Patients with bulbar onset have bilateral focal atrophy in the bulbar segment of the motor homunculus compared with patients with limb onset who have focal cortical changes in the limb segment of their motor strip.
Furthermore, the extent to which different body regions are affected in ALS corresponds to the extent of focal grey matter loss in the primary motor cortex.
Cortical ALS pathology also extends beyond the motor cortex affecting frontal, occipital and temporal regions.
Focal grey matter atrophy within the motor homunculus corresponds with functional disability in ALS.
The findings support the existing concepts of cortical focality and motor phenotype heterogeneity in ALS.
PMID: 21881207
The ALS-associated proteins FUS and TDP-43 function together to affect Drosophila locomotion and life span.
The fatal adult motor neuron disease amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) shares some clinical and pathological overlap with frontotemporal dementia (FTD), an early-onset neurodegenerative disorder.
The RNA/DNA-binding proteins fused in sarcoma (FUS; also known as TLS) and TAR DNA binding protein-43 (TDP-43) have recently been shown to be genetically and pathologically associated with familial forms of ALS and FTD.
It is currently unknown whether perturbation of these proteins results in disease through mechanisms that are independent of normal protein function or via the pathophysiological disruption of molecular processes in which they are both critical.
Here, we report that Drosophila mutants in which the homolog of FUS is disrupted exhibit decreased adult viability, diminished locomotor speed, and reduced life span compared with controls.
These phenotypes were fully rescued by wild-type human FUS, but not ALS-associated mutant FUS proteins.
A mutant of the Drosophila homolog of TDP-43 had similar, but more severe, deficits.
Through cross-rescue analysis, we demonstrated that FUS acted together with and downstream of TDP-43 in a common genetic pathway in neurons.
Furthermore, we found that these proteins associated with each other in an RNA-dependent complex.
Our results establish that FUS and TDP-43 function together in vivo and suggest that molecular pathways requiring the combined activities of both of these proteins may be disrupted in ALS and FTD.
PMID: 23593276
Myelosuppressive conditioning using busulfan enables bone marrow cell accumulation in the spinal cord of a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Myeloablative preconditioning using irradiation is the most commonly used technique to generate rodents having chimeric bone marrow, employed for the study of bone marrow-derived cell accumulation in the healthy and diseased central nervous system.
However, irradiation has been shown to alter the blood-brain barrier, potentially creating confounding artefacts.
To better study the potential of bone marrow-derived cells to function as treatment vehicles for neurodegenerative diseases alternative preconditioning regimens must be developed.
We treated transgenic mice that over-express human mutant superoxide dismutase 1, a model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, with busulfan to determine whether this commonly used chemotherapeutic leads to stable chimerism and promotes the entry of bone marrow-derived cells into spinal cord.
Intraperitoneal treatment with busulfan at 60 mg/kg or 80 mg/kg followed by intravenous injection of green fluorescent protein-expressing bone marrow resulted in sustained levels of chimerism (~80%).
Bone marrow-derived cells accumulated in the lumbar spinal cord of diseased mice at advanced stages of pathology at both doses, with limited numbers of bone marrow derived cells observed in the spinal cords of similarly treated, age-matched controls; the majority of bone marrow-derived cells in spinal cord immunolabelled for macrophage antigens.
Comparatively, significantly greater numbers of bone marrow-derived cells were observed in lumbar spinal cord following irradiative myeloablation.
These results demonstrate bone marrow-derived cell accumulation in diseased spinal cord is possible without irradiative preconditioning.
PMID: 23791192
Remodeling neurodegeneration: somatic cell reprogramming-based models of adult neurological disorders.
Epigenetic reprogramming of adult human somatic cells to alternative fates, such as the conversion of human skin fibroblasts to induced pluripotency stem cells (iPSC), has enabled the generation of novel cellular models of CNS disorders.
Cell reprogramming models appear particularly promising in the context of human neurological disorders of aging such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), for which animal models may not recapitulate key aspects of disease pathology.
In addition, recent developments in reprogramming technology have allowed for more selective cell fate interconversion events, as from skin fibroblasts directly to diverse induced neuron (iN) subtypes.
Challenges to human reprogramming-based cell models of disease are the heterogeneity of the human population and the extended temporal course of these disorders.
A major goal is the accurate modeling of common nonfamilial sporadic forms of brain disorders.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22674575
Cdc37/Hsp90 protein complex disruption triggers an autophagic clearance cascade for TDP-43 protein.
The RNA-binding protein, trans-active response DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43), is normally found in the nucleus, but in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, frontal temporal dementia, and some cases of Alzheimer disease it is cleaved and mislocalized to the cytosol, leading to accumulation.
The mechanisms contributing to this are largely unknown.
Here, we show that part of the normal clearance cascade for TDP-43 involves the Cdc37/Hsp90 complex.
An Hsp90 inhibitor that disrupts the Cdc37/Hsp90 complex reduced TDP-43 levels to a greater extent than a standard Hsp90 ATPase inhibitor.
When Cdc37 was depleted, TDP-43 underwent proteolytic clearance that was dependent on nuclear retrotranslocation and autophagic uptake.
Accumulation of the microtubule-associated protein tau prevented the clearance of cleaved TDP-43, but not its production.
This caused cleaved TDP-43 to accumulate, a feature observed in the brain of persons with Alzheimer disease.
Clearance of cleaved TDP-43 was also prevented by knockdown of the autophagic inducer beclin1.
Thus, in cells where TDP-43 clearance is normally needed, a system that employs manipulation of the Hsp90 complex and autophagy exists.
But when tau accumulation is occurring, cleaved TDP-43 can no longer be cleared, perhaps explaining the emergence of these co-pathologies.
PMID: 22663966
The growing role of noninvasive ventilation in patients requiring prolonged mechanical ventilation.
For many patients with chronic respiratory failure requiring ventilator support, noninvasive ventilation (NIV) is preferable to invasive support by tracheostomy.
Currently available evidence does not support the use of nocturnal NIV in unselected patients with stable COPD.
Several European  studies have reported benefit for high intensity NIV, in which setting of inspiratory pressure and respiratory rate are selected to achieve normocapnia.
There have also been studies reporting benefit for the use of NIV as an adjunct to exercise training.
NIV may be useful as an adjunct to  airway clearance techniques in patients with cystic fibrosis.
Accumulating evidence supports the use of NIV in patients with obesity hypoventilation syndrome.
There is considerable observational evidence supporting the use of NIV in patients with chronic respiratory failure related to neuromuscular  disease, and one randomized controlled trial reported that the use of NIV was life-prolonging in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
A variety of interfaces can be used to provide NIV in patients with stable chronic respiratory failure.
The mouthpiece is an interface that is unique  in this patient population, and has been used with success in patients with neuromuscular disease.
Bi-level pressure ventilators are commonly used for NIV, although there are now a new generation of intermediate ventilators that are portable, have a long battery life, and can be used for NIV  and invasive applications.
Pressure support ventilation, pressure controlled ventilation, and volume controlled ventilation have been used successfully for chronic applications of NIV.
New modes have recently become available, but their benefits await evidence to support their widespread use.
The success of NIV in a given patient population depends on selection of an appropriate patient, selection of an appropriate interface, selection of an appropriate ventilator and ventilator settings, the skills of the clinician, the motivation of the patient, and the support of the family.
2012 Daedalus Enterprises
PMID: 22132186
The heritability of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in a clinically ascertained United States research registry.
The genetic basis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is not entirely clear.
While there are families with rare highly penetrant mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase 1 and several other genes that cause apparent Mendelian inheritance of the disease, most ALS occurs in families without another affected individual.
However, twin studies suggest that all ALS has a substantial genetic basis.
Herein, we estimate the genetic contribution to ALS in a clinically ascertained case series from the United States.
We used the database of the Emory ALS Center to ascertain individuals with ALS along with their family histories to determine the concordance among parents and offspring for the disease.
We found that concordance for all parent-offspring pairs was low (&lt;2%).
With this concordance we found that ALS heritability, or the proportion of the disease explained by genetic factors, is between 40 and 45% for all likely estimates of ALS lifetime prevalence.
We found the lifetime risk of ALS is 1.1% in first-degree relatives of those with ALS.
Environmental and genetic factors appear nearly equally important for the development of ALS.
PMID: 22399793
Atypical, slowly progressive behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia associated with C9ORF72 hexanucleotide expansion.
Some patients meeting behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) diagnostic criteria progress slowly and plateau at mild symptom severity.
Such patients have mild neuropsychological and functional impairments, lack characteristic bvFTD brain atrophy and have thus been referred to as bvFTD 'phenocopies' or slowly progressive (bvFTD-SP).
The few patients with bvFTD-SP that have been studied at autopsy have demonstrated no evidence of FTD pathology, suggesting that bvFTD-SP is neuropathologically distinct from other forms of FTD.
Here, two patients with bvFTD-SP with chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 (C9ORF72) hexanucleotide expansions are described.
384 patients with an FTD clinical spectrum and Alzheimer's disease diagnoses were screened for C9ORF72 expansion.
Two bvFTD-SP mutation carriers were identified.
Neuropsychological and functional data, as well as brain atrophy patterns, assessed using voxel based morphometry (VBM), were compared with 44 patients with sporadic bvFTD and 85 healthy controls.
Both patients were aged 48 years at baseline and met possible bvFTD criteria.
In the first patient, VBM revealed thalamic and posterior insula atrophy.
Over 7 years, his neuropsychological performance and brain atrophy remained stable.
In the second patient, VBM revealed cortical atrophy with subtle frontal and insular volume loss.
Over 2 years, her neuropsychological and functional scores as well as brain atrophy remained stable.
C9ORF72 mutations can present with a bvFTD-SP phenotype.
Some bvFTD-SP patients may have neurodegenerative pathology, and C9ORF72 mutations should be considered in patients with bvFTD-SP and a family history of dementia or motor neuron disease.
PMID: 23376471
Targeting dysregulation of brain iron homeostasis in Parkinson's disease by iron chelators.
Brain iron accumulation has been implicated in a host of chronic neurological diseases, including Parkinson's disease (PD).
The elevated iron levels observed in the substantia nigra of PD subjects have been suggested to incite the generation of reactive oxygen species and intracellular α-synuclein aggregation, terminating in the oxidative neuronal destruction of this brain area.
Thus, elucidation of the molecular mechanisms involved in iron dysregulation and oxidative stress-induced neurodegeneration is a crucial step in deciphering PD pathology and in developing novel iron-complexing compounds aimed at restoring brain iron homeostasis and attenuating neurodegeneration.
This review discusses the involvement of dysregulation of brain iron homeostasis in PD pathology, with an emphasis on the potential effectiveness of naturally occurring compounds and novel iron-chelating/antioxidant therapeutic hybrid molecules, exerting a spectrum of neuroprotective interrelated activities: antioxidant/monoamine oxidase inhibition, activation of the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1 signaling pathway, induction of HIF-1 target iron-regulatory and antioxidative genes, and inhibition of α-synuclein accumulation and aggregation.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22399794
Absence of consensus in diagnostic criteria for familial neurodegenerative diseases.
A small proportion of cases seen in neurodegenerative conditions such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer disease are familial.
These familial cases are usually clinically indistinguishable from sporadic cases.
Identifying familial cases is important both in terms of clinical guidance for family members and for gene discovery.
Surveys assessing the definition of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS) were completed by clinicians with an interest in ALS.
95 surveys were completed by respondents from 15 countries.
A third of total respondents stated that they thought that neurologists were using the same definition for FALS (33.3%, 30).
No consensus was achieved among clinicians when provided with five different definitions for FALS.
However, the preferred definition was 'a patient with ALS with either a first or second degree relative also with ALS' (37.8%, 31).
There is no consensus on a standard definition for FALS among clinicians.
It is likely that similar inconsistencies apply to other conditions, such as Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer disease, in which both familial and sporadic diseases occur.
Inconsistent classification could hinder gene discovery.
PMID: 22233269
Fatigue, sleep, and nocturnal complaints in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Fatigue is a common symptom in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Although sleep disturbances are a candidate factor that may interfere with fatigue in patients with ALS, the role of sleep-related abnormalities in determining fatigue in ALS is unknown.
To evaluate the frequency and determinants of fatigue in a group of 91 consecutive patients with ALS, with special attention to the relationship between fatigue and sleep problems.
Measures included the Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS), Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI), Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS), ALS Functional Rating Scale-Revised (ALSFRS-R), and Beck Depression Inventory (BDI).
Results:  The mean FSS score was 4.35 ± 1.1, and 48 patients with ALS (52.75%) reported clinical significant fatigue.
FSS score correlated with ALSFRS-R score, forced vital capacity, ESS, BDI, and global PSQI score.
Patients with fatigue were significantly more disabled and more frequently reported difficulties staying asleep and nocturnal complaints, such as nocturia and disturbing muscle cramps.
After multivariate analysis, patients' disability and nocturnal complaints were significantly associated with fatigue.
  In this study, we demonstrated that fatigue, a troublesome and disabling symptom in ALS, is associated with physical impairment and night-time complaints (such as nocturia and muscle cramps), suggesting that treating sleep problems might be useful in alleviating fatigue in these patients.
© 2012 The Author(s).
European Journal of Neurology © 2012 EFNS.
PMID: 22340490
Maintaining muscle mitochondria via transsynaptic signaling.
Dominant VAPB mutations are implicated in neurodegenerative disease, including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and spinal muscular atrophy.
In the current issue, Han et al. (2012) uncover a mechanism through which the secreted VAPB MSP domain regulates actin organization and mitochondrial function in muscle cells through LAR and Robo receptor activation.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22349304
A practical guide to diagnostic transcranial magnetic stimulation: report of an IFCN committee.
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is an established neurophysiological tool to examine the integrity of the fast-conducting corticomotor pathways in a wide range of diseases associated with motor dysfunction.
This includes but is not limited to patients with multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, stroke, movement disorders, disorders affecting the spinal cord, facial and other cranial nerves.
These guidelines cover practical aspects of TMS in a clinical setting.
We first discuss the technical and physiological aspects of TMS that are relevant for the diagnostic use of TMS.
We then lay out the general principles that apply to a standardized clinical examination of the fast-conducting corticomotor pathways with single-pulse TMS.
This is followed by a detailed description of how to examine corticomotor conduction to the hand, leg, trunk and facial muscles in patients.
Additional sections cover safety issues, the triple stimulation technique, and neuropediatric aspects of TMS.
Copyright © 2012 International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology.
Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22258480
Improving survival in a large French ALS center cohort.
The aim of this work was to determine whether survival changed during 2002-2009 at a French amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) center.
We included all patients with ALS who were seen consecutively at the center from January 2002-May 2009.
Participants were followed from date of first visit through death, date of censoring, or December 31, 2009, whichever occurred first.
Cox proportional hazard models computed hazard ratios (HR; 95% confidence interval CI) of death, and flexible modeling of continuous predictors (splines) assessed trends in survival.
We analyzed a total of 2,037 ALS patients, of whom 1,471 died before the end of follow-up.
Median survival was 2.83 years from onset and 1.65 years from first visit.
Compared to patients first seen before 2004, the HR of death was 0.97 (95% CI = 0.85-1.11, p = 0.6721) for patients first seen in 2004-2005, 0.96 (95% CI = 0.83-1.10, p = 0.5125) for 2006-2007, and 0.56 (95% CI = 0.46-0.69, p &lt; 0.0001) after 2007, while adjusting for other survival predictors.
Spline analysis confirmed that survival remained stable during 2002-2006, then markedly improved.
The proportion of patients receiving non-invasive ventilation (NIV) increased from 16 (2004) to 51% (2008).
At this large ALS center, survival improved after 2006.
Because more aggressive use of NIV was the principal therapeutic adaptation, our data suggest that better survival resulted from improved respiratory care.
PMID: 22067910
Cognitive decline typical of frontotemporal lobar degeneration in transgenic mice expressing the 25-kDa C-terminal fragment of TDP-43.
Transactive response DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) is the pathological signature protein in several neurodegenerative disorders, including the majority of frontotemporal lobar degeneration cases (FTLD-TDP), motor neuron disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Pathological TDP-43 is mislocalized from its nuclear location to the cytoplasm, where it accumulates and is proteolytically cleaved to form C-terminal fragments.
Although the 25-kDa C-terminal fragment of TDP-43 (TDP-25) accumulates in affected brain regions, its role in the disease pathogenesis remains elusive.
To address this problem, we have generated a novel transgenic mouse that selectively expresses TDP-25 in neurons.
We show that transgenic mice expressing TDP-25 develop cognitive deficits associated with the build-up of soluble TDP-25.
These cognitive deficits are independent of TDP-43-positive inclusions and occur without overt neurodegeneration.
Additionally, we show that the expression of TDP-25 is sufficient to alter the processing of endogenous full-length TDP-43.
These studies represent the first in vivo demonstration of a pathological role for TDP-25 and strongly suggest that the onset of cognitive deficits in TDP-43 proteinopathies is independent of TDP-43 inclusions.
These data provide a framework for understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying the onset of cognitive deficits in FTLD-TDP and other TDP-43 proteinopathies; thus, the TDP-25 transgenic mice represent a unique tool to reach this goal.
Copyright © 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23177036
Electrodiagnosis of motor neuron disease.
Electrodiagnostic testing has proved useful in helping to establish the diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis by eliminating possible disease mimics and by demonstrating abnormalities in body areas that are clinically unaffected.
Electrodiagnosis begins with an understanding of the clinical features of the disease, because clinical correlation is essential.
To improve the sensitivity of the electrophysiologic evaluation, the Awaji criteria have been proposed as a modification to the revised El Escorial criteria.
Although techniques to evaluate corticomotor neuron abnormalities and to quantify lower motor neuron loss have been developed, they remain primarily research techniques and have not yet influenced clinical practice.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22584950
C19orf12 mutations in neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation mimicking juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Mutations in C19orf12 have been recently identified as the molecular genetic cause of a subtype of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA).
Given the mitochondrial localization of the gene product the new NBIA subtype was designated mitochondrial membrane protein-associated neurodegeneration.
Frequent features in the patients described so far included extrapyramidal signs and pyramidal tract involvement.
Here, we report three C19orf12-mutant patients from two families presenting with predominant upper and lower motor neuron dysfunction mimicking amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with juvenile onset.
While extrapyramidal signs were absent, all patients showed neuropsychological abnormalities with disinhibited or impulsive behavior.
Optic atrophy was present in the simplex case.
T2-weighted cranial MRI showed hypointensities suggestive of iron accumulation in the globi pallidi and the midbrain in all patients.
Sequence analysis of C19orf12 revealed a novel mutation, p.Gly66del, compound heterozygous with known mutations in all patients.
These patients highlight that C19orf12 defects should be considered as a differential diagnosis in patients with juvenile onset motor neuron diseases.
Patients have to be examined carefully for neuropsychological abnormalities, optic neuropathy, and signs of brain iron accumulation in MRI.
PMID: 23492769
Microglia-derived TNFα induces apoptosis in neural precursor cells via transcriptional activation of the Bcl-2 family member Puma.
Neuroinflammation is a common feature of acute neurological conditions such as stroke and spinal cord injury, as well as neurodegenerative conditions such as Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Previous studies have demonstrated that acute neuroinflammation can adversely affect the survival of neural precursor cells (NPCs) and thereby limit the capacity for regeneration and repair.
However, the mechanisms by which neuroinflammatory processes induce NPC death remain unclear.
Microglia are key mediators of neuroinflammation and when activated to induce a pro-inflammatory state produce a number of factors that could affect NPC survival.
Importantly, in the present study we demonstrate that tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα) produced by lipopolysaccharide-activated microglia is necessary and sufficient to trigger apoptosis in mouse NPCs in vitro.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that microglia-derived TNFα induces NPC apoptosis via a mitochondrial pathway regulated by the Bcl-2 family protein Bax.
BH3-only proteins are known to play a key role in regulating Bax activation and we demonstrate that microglia-derived TNFα induces the expression of the BH3-only family member Puma in NPCs via an NF-κB-dependent mechanism.
Specifically, we show that NF-κB is activated in NPCs treated with conditioned media from activated microglia and that Puma induction and NPC apoptosis is blocked by the NF-κB inhibitor BAY-117082.
Importantly, we have determined that NPC apoptosis induced by activated microglia-derived TNFα is attenuated in Puma-deficient NPCs, indicating that Puma induction is required for NPC death.
Consistent with this, we demonstrate that Puma-deficient NPCs exhibit an ∼13-fold increase in survival as compared with wild-type NPCs following transplantation into the inflammatory environment of the injured spinal cord in vivo.
In summary, we have identified a key signaling pathway that regulates neuroinflammation induced apoptosis in NPCs in vitro and in vivo that could be targeted to promote regeneration and repair in diverse neurological conditions.
PMID: 22409357
Gonadectomy and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) do not modulate disease progression in the G93A mutant SOD1 rat model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Epidemiological studies have shown a higher incidence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) in men than women.
Interestingly, there are clear gender differences in disease onset and progression in rodent models of familial ALS overexpressing mutated human superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1-G93A).
In the present study we sought to determine whether the alterations of serum steroid levels by gonadectomy or chronic treatment of neuroprotective neurosteroids can modulate disease onset and progression in a rat model of ALS (SOD1-G93A transgenic rats).
Presymptomatic SOD1-G93A rats were gonadectomized or treated with a neurosteroid dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) using silastic tubing implants.
Disease onset and progression of the animals were determined by the routine analyses of locomotor testing using the Basso-Beattie-Bresnahan (BBB) score.
Although sexual dimorphism was observed in intact and gonadectomized SOD1-G93A rats, there was no significant effect of gonadectomy on disease onset and progression.
DHEA treatment did not alter disease progression or survival in SOD1-G93A rats.
Our results indicate that gonadal steroids or neurosteroids are not one of the possible modulators for the occurrence or disease progression in a rat model of ALS.
Further analysis will be necessary to understand how sexual dimorphism is involved in ALS disease progression.
PMID: 22133803
Overexpression of TDP-43 causes partially p53-dependent G2/M arrest and p53-independent cell death in HeLa cells.
It has been hypothesized that the dysregulation of transactive response DNA-binding protein-43 (TDP-43) in neurons is closely linked to the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitinated inclusions.
However, it remains undefined whether the dysregulation of TDP-43 in non-neuronal cells, such as glial cells, contributes to the pathogenesis of these neurodegenerative diseases.
Primarily using HeLa cells, we show that a low-grade overexpression of TDP-43, 2- to 5-fold greater than endogenous expression, which is thought to mimic the gain of function of TDP-43, induced cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase and cell death in cultured non-neuronal cells.
Since the activation of p53 may induce G2/M arrest and/or cell death in many abnormal situations, we examined the mechanism underlying G2/M arrest from the standpoint of p53 regulation.
It was determined that the TDP-43-induced G2/M arrest was attenuated, while TDP-43-induced death was not attenuated, in cells in which the p53 function was compromised.
These data collectively indicate that TDP-43 causes G2/M arrest in a partially p53-dependent manner and it causes cell death in a p53-independent manner in cycling cells.
Because it is likely that the impaired proliferation in glial cells causes a decrease in the neuron-supporting ability, these findings further suggests that the gain of function of TDP-43 may cause neurotoxicity by inducing cell cycle arrest and death in glial cells.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21772256
Rapid and efficient generation of functional motor neurons from human pluripotent stem cells using gene delivered transcription factor codes.
Stem cell-derived motor neurons (MNs) are increasingly utilized for modeling disease in vitro and for developing cellular replacement strategies for spinal cord injury and diseases such as spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Human embryonic stem cell (hESC) differentiation into MNs, which involves retinoic acid (RA) and activation of the sonic hedgehog (SHH) pathway is inefficient and requires up to 60 days to develop MNs with electrophysiological properties.
This prolonged differentiation process has hampered the use of hESCs, in particular for high-throughput screening.
We evaluated the MN gene expression profile of RA/SHH-differentiated hESCs to identify rate-limiting factors involved in MN development.
Based on this analysis, we developed an adenoviral gene delivery system encoding for MN inducing transcription factors: neurogenin 2 (Ngn2), islet-1 (Isl-1), and LIM/homeobox protein 3 (Lhx3).
Strikingly, delivery of these factors induced functional MNs with mature electrophysiological properties, 11-days after gene delivery, with &gt;60-70% efficiency from hESCs and human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs).
This directed programming approach significantly reduces the time required to generate electrophysiologically-active MNs by approximately 30 days in comparison to conventional differentiation techniques.
Our results further exemplify the potential to use transcriptional coding for rapid and efficient production of defined cell types from hESCs and hiPSCs.
PMID: 22409359
Marked intrafamilial phenotypic variation in a family with SOD1 C111Y mutation.
Our objectives were to identify the disease-causing mutation in, and report on the clinical features of, a Japanese family that had coexisting phenotypes of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and spinal muscular atrophy.
The family comprised nine patients (six men and three women).
We reviewed their clinical records and performed mutation analysis of the copper/zinc superoxide dismutase (SOD1) gene in some of these patients.
The patients either had a rapid (n=7) or an extremely long (n=2) clinical course.
The mean age at onset was 39.0±13.7 years (range 20-68 years).
The initial symptoms were bulbar palsy (n=2), upper (n=4) or lower (n=2) limb muscle weakness, or leg cramps (n=1).
The total disease duration varied widely, ranging from one year to &gt;69 years.
We identified a SOD1 C111Y mutation among patients in this family.
In conclusion, the family showed a marked intrafamilial phenotypic variation associated with the SOD1 C111Y mutation.
Elucidating the biological basis of disease expression in patients with the SOD1 C111Y mutation may provide us with useful information to develop therapeutic approaches and to prevent disease progression.
PMID: 22409358
Analysis of European case-control studies suggests that common inherited variation in mitochondrial DNA is not involved in susceptibility to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
While some cases of familial ALS can be entirely attributed to known inherited variation, the majority (∼ 90%) are sporadic, where the cause(s) are not entirely understood.
Both genetic and environmental factors may contribute to susceptibility.
Mitochondrial damage, a common feature of neurodegenerative disease, is observed in most patients and inherited polymorphism in the mitochondrial genome has been suggested as a contributing factor.
We used an economic and efficient method to test whether such involvement is probable.
We genotyped 22 mtDNA coding region SNPs and sequenced the mtDNA hypervariable region 1 to determine the position of each mitochondrial genome within the genealogy of mitochondrial haplotypes in samples of ALS patients (n = 700) and controls (n = 462) from two European populations.
We compared haplotype and haplogroup distribution in cases and controls drawn from the same populations.
No statistical difference was observed between cases and controls at either the haplogroup or haplotype level (p = ≥  0.2).
In conclusion, it is unlikely that common, shared genetic variants in the mitochondrial genome contribute substantially to ALS.
Combining the data with other studies will allow meta-analysis to look for variants with modest effect sizes.
The sequencing of complete mitochondrial genomes will be required to assess the role of rare mutations.
PMID: 21730107
The VPAC2 agonist peptide histidine isoleucine (PHI) up-regulates glutamate transport in the corpus callosum of a rat model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (hSOD1G93A) by inhibiting caspase-3 mediated inactivation of GLT-1a.
Degeneration of corpus callosum appears in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) before clinical signs of upper motor neuron death.
Considering the ALS-associated impairment of astrocytic glutamate uptake, we have characterized the expression and activity of the glutamate transporter isoforms GLT-1a and GLT-1b in the corpus callosum of transgenic rats expressing a mutated form of the human superoxide dismutase 1 (hSOD1(G93A)).
We have also studied the effect of peptide histidine isoleucine (PHI), a vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP)/pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) receptor 2 (VPAC(2)) agonist on glutamate transporters both in vivo and in callosal astrocytes.
Before the onset of motor symptoms, the expression of both transporter isoforms was correlated with a constitutive activity of caspase-3.
This enzyme participates in the down-regulation of GLT-1 in ALS, and here we demonstrated its involvement in the selective degradation of GLT-1a in the white matter.
A single stereotactic injection of PHI into the corpus callosum of symptomatic rats decreased caspase-3 activity and promoted GLT-1a expression and uptake activity.
Together, with evidence for a reduced expression of prepro-VIP/PHI mRNA in the corpus callosum of transgenic animals, these data shed light on the modulatory role of the VIP/PHI system on the glutamatergic transmission in ALS.
PMID: 22390177
The unfolded protein response in models of human mutant G93A amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Recent studies indicate that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is involved in the pathogenesis of familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
ER stress occurs when the ER-mitochondria calcium cycle (ERMCC) is disturbed and misfolded proteins accumulate in the ER.
To cope with ER stress, the cell engages the unfolded protein response (UPR).
While activation of the UPR has been shown in some ALS models and tissues, ER stress elements have not been studied directly in motor neurons.
Here we investigated the expression of XBP1 and ATF6α and phosphorylation of eIF2α, and their modulation, in mutated SOD1(G93A)  NSC34 and animal model of ALS.
Expression of XBP1 and ATF6α mRNA and protein was enhanced in SOD1(G93A)  NSC34 cells.
Activation of ATF6α and XBP1 and phosphorylation of eIF2α were detectable in mutated SOD1(G93A)  motor but not in wild-type motor neurons.
Treatment with the ER stressor thapsigargin enhanced phosphorylation of eIF2α and activated proteolysis of ATF6α and splicing of XBP1 in NSC34 and motor neurons in a time-dependent manner.
The present study thus provides direct evidence of activated UPR in motor neurons which overexpress human pathogenic mutant SOD1(G93A) , providing evidence that ER stress plays a major role in ALS.
© 2012 The Authors.
European Journal of Neuroscience © 2012 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
PMID: 23242280
Keap1 is localized in neuronal and glial cytoplasmic inclusions in various neurodegenerative diseases.
Oxidative stress has been proposed as a potential mechanism for neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer disease (AD), Parkinson disease (PD), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
In response to oxidative stress, the levels of numerous cytoprotective products are increased via alteration of the Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (Keap1) and NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) system.
One of the Nrf2 targets, p62, has been known to be incorporated into a wide spectrum of cytoplasmic inclusions in neurodegenerative diseases and interact with Keap1.
However, it remains unclear whether Keap1 is associated with the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases.
In this study, we investigated the relationship between p62 and Keap1 in the brains of patients with AD, PD, dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), and ALS.
Biochemical analyses showed that p62 and Keap1 interacted with each other in AD and DLB brains and were extracted into similar detergent-soluble and -insoluble fractions.
Pathologic examination demonstrated that anti-Keap1 antibodies immunostained Lewy bodies in PD and DLB, neurofibrillary tangles in AD, and skeinlike inclusions in ALS.
Further analysis showed that the levels of common Nrf2 target genes were increased in AD compared with those in controls.
However, there were no statistical significances in the levels of Nrf2 target genes in DLB relative to controls.
Our pathologic and biochemical results suggest a molecular basis for stress response to be involved in the formation of cytoplasmic inclusions observed in several neurodegenerative diseases.
PMID: 23328118
Effect of β-N-methylamino-L-alanine on oxidative stress of liver and kidney in rat.
β-N-methylamino-(L)-alanine (L)-BMAA) is a neurotoxic amino acid, found in the majority of cyanbacterial genera tested.
Evidence for implication of (L)-BMAA in neurodegenerative disorders, like amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), relies on bioaccumulation and biomagnification from symbiotic cyanobacteria.
The involvement of (L)-BMAA in oxidative stress was demonstrated in several studies in the central nervous system.
In the present study, we investigated the effect of (L)-BMAA on the oxidative stress responses of liver and kidney in rats treated by intraperitoneal administration with this amino acid.
Oxidative stress was demonstrated by the quantification of lipid peroxidation, the measurement of both catalase and glutathione peroxidase activities, as well as the quantification of glutathione (GSH) levels and the total antioxidant capacity.
It was observed that (L)-BMAA caused a significant increase in the degree of lipid peroxidation and catalase activity in both organs.
A significant increase in glutathione peroxidase activity was obtained only in liver, whereas glutathione levels were also increased in both organs.
The total antioxidant capacity decreased in liver and increased in kidney.
These results suggest that the oxidative stress was higher in liver than in kidney, and might be crucial for (L)-BMAA toxicological action.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22938571
Neuromuscular effects of G93A-SOD1 expression in zebrafish.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal disorder involving the degeneration and loss of motor neurons.
The mechanisms of motor neuron loss in ALS are unknown and there are no effective treatments.
Defects in the distal axon and at the neuromuscular junction are early events in the disease course, and zebrafish provide a promising in vivo system to examine cellular mechanisms and treatments for these events in ALS pathogenesis.
We demonstrate that transient genetic manipulation of zebrafish to express G93A-SOD1, a mutation associated with familial ALS, results in early defects in motor neuron outgrowth and axonal branching.
This is consistent with previous reports on motor neuron axonal defects associated with familial ALS genes following knockdown or mutant protein overexpression.
We also demonstrate that upregulation of growth factor signaling is capable of rescuing these early defects, validating the potential of the model for therapeutic discovery.
We generated stable transgenic zebrafish lines expressing G93A-SOD1 to further characterize the consequences of G93A-SOD1 expression on neuromuscular pathology and disease progression.
Behavioral monitoring reveals evidence of motor dysfunction and decreased activity in transgenic ALS zebrafish.
Examination of neuromuscular and neuronal pathology throughout the disease course reveals a loss of neuromuscular junctions and alterations in motor neuron innervations patterns with disease progression.
Finally, motor neuron cell loss is evident later in the disease.
This sequence of events reflects the stepwise mechanisms of degeneration in ALS, and provides a novel model for mechanistic discovery and therapeutic development for neuromuscular degeneration in ALS.
PMID: 22640227
Atypical FTLD-FUS associated with ALS-TDP: a case report.
A 30-year-old Japanese woman without relevant family history presented with a behavioral abnormality followed by motor weakness about 14 years later.
The patient died at age 45.
Post mortem examination revealed degeneration of the frontal and temporal lobes, as well as lower motor neurons in the brainstem and spinal cord.
These features were reported previously as being consistent with a diagnosis of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
In the present study, we show abundant fused in sarcoma (FUS)-positive dystrophic neurites but only a few neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions in the frontal and temporal cortices.
TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43)-positive inclusions were absent in the cerebrum.
However, TDP-43-positive inclusions were present in the lower motor neurons of the brainstem and spinal cord.
To our knowledge, this is the first report of a case in which FTLD-FUS pathology is of a dystrophic neurites-predominant type and FTLD-FUS is associated with ALS-TDP.
© 2012 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.
PMID: 22564974
Transmission of C9orf72 hexanucleotide repeat expansions in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis:  an Australian trio study.
Abnormally expanded C9orf72 hexanucleotide repeats are found in up to 7% of patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (SALS).
It is not known whether the sporadic nature of the disease represents incomplete penetrance of the phenotype or expansion of the repeat in the SALS patient.
The sizes of C9orf72 hexanucleotide repeats were measured in blood DNA of 43 SALS patients and their parents who had no symptoms of ALS.
Two SALS patients (4.7%) had abnormally expanded (&gt;30 repeats) C9orf72 repeats.
Both of their fathers (one with dementia) also had abnormally expanded repeats.
Nine SALS patients had intermediate-normal repeat sizes (7-30 repeats); in each of these, one parent had a similar repeat size.
In the remaining 32 SALS patients, the repeat sizes were low-normal (&lt;7 repeats).
There was no evidence of repeat instability leading to abnormal numbers of repeats in any SALS patient in this trio cohort.
Our results suggest that a simple monogenic mechanism is not likely to be the cause of C9orf72 repeat-related SALS.
PMID: 23098801
Neurotoxins released from interferon-gamma-stimulated human astrocytes.
Astrocytes become activated in degenerative neurological diseases.
In order to gain a greater understanding of the inflammatory factors released upon activation, we stimulated adult human astrocytes with interferon-gamma and examined the resultant conditioned medium (CM) for toxicity against differentiated human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells.
Cell death was measured by lactate dehydrogenase release assay.
We then used various treatments of the media to determine the distribution and nature of the toxic components.
Removal of interleukin-6 by a specific antibody reduced the toxicity by 22%.
Blockade of proteases with an inhibitor cocktail reduced it by a further 22%.
When oxygen-free radical production was blocked with NADPH oxidase inhibitors, the toxicity was reduced by 15.4%.
When prostaglandin production was blocked by cyclooxygenase inhibitors, the toxicity of the CM was reduced by 14.5%.
When glutamate was removed by treatment with glutamate decarboxylase, the toxicity was reduced by 10.3%.
When the inhibitors were added together to the astrocyte culture, the total toxicity of the CM was reduced by 91%.
This was in reasonable agreement with the 85.37% total obtained by adding the individual components.
The data show that activated astrocytes release a specific combination of neurotoxic compounds.
They suggest that effective anti-inflammatory treatment of such neurodegenerative diseases as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis could be improved by using an appropriate combination of anti-inflammatory agents instead of relying on any single agent.
Copyright © 2012 IBRO.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22057717
TDP-43 toxicity is mediated by the unfolded protein response-unrelated induction of C/EBP homologous protein expression.
Transactive response DNA-binding protein-43 (TDP-43) neuronal toxicity plays an essential role in the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive inclusions.
In our previous study, we showed that low-grade overexpression of TDP-43, which is thought to mimic the gain-of-function of TDP-43, caused neuronal death, mediated by the upregulation of Bim and the downregulation of Bcl-xL in vitro.
In this study, we show that TDP-43 overexpression caused the upregulation of C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP) and that disruption of the CHOP gene markedly attenuated TDP-43-induced cell death.
These results indicate that increases in CHOP expression contribute to TDP-43-induced cell death.
We also show that the TDP-43-induced upregulation of CHOP expression is mediated by both the upregulation of the mRNA level of CHOP and the attenuation of thedegradation of CHOP, which is independent on the PERK/eIF2α/ATF4 or other pathway related to the unfolded protein response (UPR) to endoplasmic reticulum stress.
This study provides the first example of the CHOP-mediated cell death that is independent of the UPR.
© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 23678815
Antioxidant and cytoprotective effects of an ethanol extract of Acalypha wilkesiana var. macafeana from Malaysia.
In the annals of biomedical theory perhaps no single class of natural product has enjoyed more ingenious speculation than antioxidants formally aimed at counteracting oxidative insults which are involved in the pathophysiology of Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease, cancer, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, skin ageing and wound healing.
In pursuing our study of Malaysian traditional medicines with antioxidant properties, we became interested in Acalypha wilkesiana var.
macafeana hort., used traditionally to heal wounds.
To examine whether Acalypha wilkesiana var.
macafeana hort.
could suppress oxidation an ethanol extract was tested by conventional chemical in vitro assays i.e., ferric reducing antioxidant potential assay (FRAP), DPPH scavenging assay and beta-carotene bleaching (BCB) assay.
To explore whether Acalypha wilkesiana var.
macafeana hort.
protected cells against oxidative injuries, we exposed human hepatocellular liver carcinoma (HepG2) cells to tert-butylhydroperoxide (t-BHP).
In all the aforementioned experiments, the ethanol extracts elicited potent antioxidant and cytoprotective activities.
To gain a better understanding of the phytochemical nature of the antioxidant principle involved, five fractions (F1-F5) obtained from the ethanol extract were tested using FRAP, DPPH and BCB assays.
Our results provided evidence that F5 was the most active fraction with antioxidant potentials equal to 2.090 +/- 0.307 microg/mL, 0.532 +/- 0.041 microg/mL, 0.032 +/- 0.025 microg/mL in FRAP, DPPH and BCB assay, respectively.
Interestingly, F5 protected HepG2 against t-BHP oxidative insults.
To further define the chemical identity of the antioxidant principle, we first performed a series of phytochemical tests, followed by liquid-chromatography and mass spectrometry (LC/MS) profiling which showed that the major compound contained in F5 was geraniin.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report showing that the wound healing property of Acalypha wilkesiana var.
macafeana hort.
is mediated by a geraniin containing extract.
Furthermore, our data leads us to conclude that geraniin could be used as a potential pharmaceutical and/or cosmetic topical agent.
PMID: 22613760
Frontal dysfunctions of ALS-PBP patients in relation to their bulbar symptoms and rCBF decline.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive and fatal disease characterized by progressive degeneration of spinal and bulbar motor neurons.
However up to 50% ALS patients may also have cognitive dysfunction which has not been fully examined.
35 ALS patients [23 patients presenting with limb-type ALS (ALS-limb) and 12 patients presenting with primary bulbar palsy (PBP)-type ALS (ALS-PBP)] and 5 Spinal and Bulbar Muscular Atrophy (SBMA) patients have participated.
To assess cognitive function mini-mental state examination (MMSE), Hasegawa dementia scale-revised (HDS-R), and frontal assessment battery (FAB) were performed.
Additionally the time to complete card flipping with a computerized touch panel-type screening test was also examined.
To investigate regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF), single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) using a (99m)Tc labeled ethyl cysteinate dimer ((99m)Tc-ECD) were performed.
Statistical image analysis was performed using the easy Z-score imaging system (eZIS).
HDS-R and FAB scores were significantly lower in the ALS-PBP group than in age- and gender-matched control subjects or ALS-limb groups (p&lt;0.01).
The time to complete card flipping was significantly longer in the ALS-PBP group than in the control and ALS-limb groups (p&lt;0.01).
Although MMSE, HDS-R and FAB scores and the time to complete card flipping had no correlation with ALS functional rating scale-revised (ALSFRS-R) or Norris-limb scale scores, FAB score (r=0.63, p &lt;0.01) and the time to complete card flipping (r=-0.66, p&lt;0.01) were strongly correlated with Norris-bulbar score.
The eZIS showed that rCBF of the frontal lobe was more severely declined in ALS-PBP patients than in ALS-limb patients (p&lt;0.05).
These results suggest a selective decline of frontal cerebral functions in the ALS-PBP group in relation to their bulbar symptoms and rCBF decline.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23307927
Loss and gain of Drosophila TDP-43 impair synaptic efficacy and motor control leading to age-related neurodegeneration by loss-of-function phenotypes.
Cytoplasmic accumulation and nuclear clearance of TDP-43 characterize familial and sporadic forms of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration, suggesting that either loss or gain of TDP-43 function, or both, cause disease formation.
Here we have systematically compared loss- and gain-of-function of Drosophila TDP-43, TAR DNA Binding Protein Homolog (TBPH), in synaptic function and morphology, motor control, and age-related neuronal survival.
Both loss and gain of TBPH severely affect development and result in premature lethality.
TBPH dysfunction caused impaired synaptic transmission at the larval neuromuscular junction (NMJ) and in the adult.
Tissue-specific knockdown together with electrophysiological recordings at the larval NMJ also revealed that alterations of TBPH function predominantly affect pre-synaptic efficacy, suggesting that impaired pre-synaptic transmission is one of the earliest events in TDP-43-related pathogenesis.
Prolonged loss and gain of TBPH in adults resulted in synaptic defects and age-related, progressive degeneration of neurons involved in motor control.
Toxic gain of TBPH did not downregulate or mislocalize its own expression, indicating that a dominant-negative effect leads to progressive neurodegeneration also seen with mutational inactivation of TBPH.
Together these data suggest that dysfunction of Drosophila TDP-43 triggers a cascade of events leading to loss-of-function phenotypes whereby impaired synaptic transmission results in defective motor behavior and progressive deconstruction of neuronal connections, ultimately causing age-related neurodegeneration.
PMID: 22258985
Interventions for fatigue and weight loss in adults with advanced progressive illness.
Fatigue and unintentional weight loss are two of the commonest symptoms experienced by people with advanced progressive illness.
Appropriate interventions may bring considerable improvements in function and quality of life to seriously ill people and their families, reducing physical, psychological and spiritual distress.
To conduct an overview of the evidence available on the efficacy of interventions used in the management of fatigue and/or unintentional weight loss in adults with advanced progressive illness by reviewing the evidence contained within Cochrane reviews.
We searched the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (CDSR) for all systematic reviews evaluating any interventions for the management of fatigue and/or unintentional weight loss in adults with advanced progressive illness (The Cochrane Library 2010, Issue 8).
We reviewed titles of interest by abstract.
Where the relevance of a review remained unclear we reached a consensus regarding the relevance of the participant group and the outcome measures to the overview.
Two overview authors extracted the data independently using a data extraction form.
We used the measurement tool AMSTAR (Assessment of Multiple SysTemAtic Reviews) to assess the methodological quality of each systematic review.
We included 27 systematic reviews (302 studies with 31,833 participants) in the overview.
None of the included systematic reviews reported quantitative data on the efficacy of interventions to manage fatigue or weight loss specific to people with advanced progressive illness.
All of the included reviews apart from one were deemed of high methodological quality.
For the remaining review we were unable to ascertain the methodological quality of the research strategy as it was described.
None of the systematic reviews adequately described whether conflict of interests were present within the included studies.Management of fatigue Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/motor neuron disease (ALS/MND) - we identified one systematic review (two studies and 52 participants); the intervention was exercise.Cancer - we identified five systematic reviews (116 studies with 17,342 participants); the pharmacological interventions were eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and any drug therapy for the management of cancer-related fatigue and the non pharmacological interventions were exercise, interventions by breast care nurses and psychosocial interventions.Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) - we identified three systematic reviews (59 studies and 4048 participants); the interventions were self management education programmes, nutritional support and pulmonary rehabilitation.Cystic fibrosis - we identified one systematic review (nine studies and 833 participants); the intervention was physical training.Human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune deficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) - we identified two systematic reviews (21 studies and 748 participants); the interventions were progressive resistive exercise and aerobic exercise.Multiple sclerosis (MS) - we identified five systematic reviews (23 studies and 1502 participants); the pharmacological interventions were amantadine and carnitine.
The non pharmacological interventions were diet, exercise and occupational therapy.Mixed conditions in advanced stages of illness - we identified one systematic review (five studies and 453 participants); the intervention was medically assisted hydration.Management of weight loss ALS/MND - we identified one systematic review but no studies met the inclusion criteria for the systematic review; the intervention was enteral tube feeding.Cancer - we identified three systematic reviews with a fourth systematic review also containing extractable data on cancer (66 studies and 5601 participants); the pharmacological interventions were megestrol acetate and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) (this systematic review is also included in the cancer fatigue section above).
The non pharmacological interventions were enteral tube feeding and non invasive interventions for patients with lung cancer.COPD - we identified one systematic review (59 studies and 4048 participants); the intervention was nutritional support.
This systematic review is also included in the COPD fatigue section.Cystic fibrosis - we identified two systematic reviews (three studies and 131 participants); the interventions were enteral tube feeding and oral calorie supplements.HIV/AIDS - we identified four systematic reviews (42 studies and 2071 participants); the pharmacological intervention was anabolic steroids.
The non pharmacological interventions were nutritional interventions, progressive resistive exercise and aerobic exercise.
Both of the systematic reviews on exercise interventions were also included in the HIV/AIDS fatigue section.MS - we found no systematic reviews which considered interventions to manage unintentional weight loss for people with a clinical diagnosis of multiple sclerosis at any stage of illness.Mixed conditions in adva
PMID: 23280792
A novel monoclonal antibody reveals a conformational alteration shared by amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-linked SOD1 mutants.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease that is characterized by the selective loss of upper and lower motoneurons.
Although &gt;100 different Cu, Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) mutations have been identified in ALS patients, it remains controversial whether all of them are disease-causative mutations.
Therefore, it is necessary to develop molecular mechanism-based diagnosis and treatment of ALS caused by SOD1 mutations.
We previously reported that 3 pathogenic mutations of SOD1 cause chronic endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress by inducing the binding of SOD1 to Derlin-1, a component of the ER homeostatic machinery.
Here, we systematically analyzed 132 SOD1 mutants and found that most have a constitutively exposed Derlin-1-binding region (DBR) that is occluded in the wild-type protein.
To develop the novel molecular mechanism-based antibody that can specifically recognize the aberrant structure of toxic SOD1 mutants, we generated the monoclonal antibody against the DBR.
MS785, a monoclonal antibody generated against the DBR, distinguished most ALS-causative SOD1 mutants from both wild-type and nontoxic mutants.
Moreover, MS785 recognized endogenous SOD1 in B lymphocytes derived from 14 ALS patients carrying SOD1 mutations but not from 11 healthy controls.
This is the first study to address the common property of all ALS-causative SOD1 mutants.
MS785 is the first molecular mechanism-based antibody that was shown to be able to distinguish ALS-linked toxic SOD1 mutants from both wild-type and nontoxic mutants.
MS785 may thus become an innovative tool for the diagnosis of ALS.
Copyright © 2012 American Neurological Association.
PMID: 22265380
Management of respiratory problems in people with neurodegenerative conditions: a narrative review.
Respiratory failure and dysfunction are common problems in many neurodegenerative conditions.
Although physiotherapists manage these problems, it is not known which treatments have been studied and their efficacy.
To review evidence on the management of respiratory problems in people with neurodegenerative conditions using the PRISMA approach.
Comprehensive searches were conducted using the following electronic databases from inception to May 2010: HUGEnet, SIGLE, British Library Direct, CINAHL, Medline, AMED and Web of Knowledge.
Bibliographies of all studies and systematic reviews were searched by hand.
Studies were selected based on: self-ventilating participants with neurodegenerative conditions; interventions aimed at improving respiratory function; and any valid and reliable measures of respiratory function as outcomes.
Studies were appraised by one reviewer using the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme.
Data were synthesised using a narrative approach.
Thirty-five studies were included in the review.
The strongest evidence was for the use of non-invasive ventilation for people with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, although this was weak.
The evidence for the use of respiratory muscle training and methods to increase peak cough flow showed a positive effect, but was also weak.
There is weak evidence for the positive effects of physiotherapeutic interventions for respiratory problems in people with neurodegenerative conditions.
Further work is necessary in specific neurodegenerative conditions to identify why respiratory problems occur, and larger scale studies should be undertaken to investigate management of these problems.
Copyright © 2011 Chartered Society of Physiotherapy.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23486603
Analysis of the efficiency of gene-cell therapy in transgenic mice with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis phenotype.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by progressive death of cerebral and spinal motorneurons.
Using behavioral tests we studied the efficiency of gene-cell therapy in SOD1 G93A transgenic mice receiving xenotransplantation of human umbilical cord blood mononuclear cells genetically modified with adenoviral vectors encoding vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and reporter green fluorescent protein (EGFP) genes.
The cells were transplanted to mice on week 27 of life (preclinical stage of the disease).
Behavioral tests (open field, grip strength test) showed that transplantation of umbilical cord blood mononuclear cells expressing VEGF significantly improved the parameters of motor and explorative activity, grip strength, and animal survival.
Thus, gene-cell therapy based on genetically modified mononuclear cells expressing VEGF can be efficient for the treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
PMID: 23307452
Diagnostic pathway to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS): the significance of Babinski's sign in a unique patient and the necessity for a multidisciplinary approach.
In this case report, we present a patient with rare diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
In this patient, four different neurological disorders were diagnosed in a short-time period of 8 months.
The first three diagnoses, chronic low back and leg pain, a left frontal gemistocytic astrocytoma WHO grade 2 and suspected Lyme's disease, could not fully explain the signs of physical examination.
Finally, the diagnosis of ALS could reduce these signs to the same denominator.
PMID: 23521352
Handwriting-in-interaction between people with ALS/MND and their conversation partners.
The aim of this study was to examine the use and practices of handwriting-in-interaction by people with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/motor neuron disease (ALS/MND).
Handwriting has previously been described as a viable and practical means of augmentative and alternative communication, particularly for adults with acquired progressive dysarthria and intact upper limb control.
To date, however, there is extremely limited evidence documenting how handwriting is used within a conversational context.
The analysis in this paper features data from two people with ALS/MND in conversation at home with their spouses.
It is shown how recipient animation of an authored written contribution is an important element of handwriting-in-interaction, particularly in how the recipient reveals his or her stance or reaction to whatever has been written.
PMID: 23285108
Morphological characteristics of motor neurons do not determine their relative susceptibility to degeneration in a mouse model of severe spinal muscular atrophy.
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a leading genetic cause of infant mortality, resulting primarily from the degeneration and loss of lower motor neurons.
Studies using mouse models of SMA have revealed widespread heterogeneity in the susceptibility of individual motor neurons to neurodegeneration, but the underlying reasons remain unclear.
Data from related motor neuron diseases, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), suggest that morphological properties of motor neurons may regulate susceptibility: in ALS larger motor units innervating fast-twitch muscles degenerate first.
We therefore set out to determine whether intrinsic morphological characteristics of motor neurons influenced their relative vulnerability to SMA.
Motor neuron vulnerability was mapped across 10 muscle groups in SMA mice.
Neither the position of the muscle in the body, nor the fibre type of the muscle innervated, influenced susceptibility.
Morphological properties of vulnerable and disease-resistant motor neurons were then determined from single motor units reconstructed in Thy.1-YFP-H mice.
None of the parameters we investigated in healthy young adult mice - including motor unit size, motor unit arbor length, branching patterns, motor endplate size, developmental pruning and numbers of terminal Schwann cells at neuromuscular junctions - correlated with vulnerability.
We conclude that morphological characteristics of motor neurons are not a major determinant of disease-susceptibility in SMA, in stark contrast to related forms of motor neuron disease such as ALS.
This suggests that subtle molecular differences between motor neurons, or extrinsic factors arising from other cell types, are more likely to determine relative susceptibility in SMA.
PMID: 22892214
Riluzole prodrugs for melanoma and ALS: design, synthesis, and in vitro metabolic profiling.
Riluzole (1) is an approved therapeutic for the treatment of ALS and has also demonstrated anti-melanoma activity in metabotropic glutamate GRM1 positive cell lines, a mouse xenograft assay and human clinical trials.
Highly variable drug exposure following oral administration among patients, likely due to variable first pass effects from heterogeneous CYP1A2 expression, hinders its clinical use.
In an effort to mitigate effects of this clearance pathway and uniformly administer riluzole at efficacious exposure levels, several classes of prodrugs of riluzole were designed, synthesized, and evaluated in multiple in vitro stability assays to predict in vivo drug levels.
The optimal prodrug would possess the following profile: stability while transiting the digestive system, stability towards first pass metabolism, and metabolic lability in the plasma releasing riluzole.
(S)-O-Benzyl serine derivative 9 was identified as the most promising therapeutically acceptable prodrug.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22534659
TDP-43: gumming up neurons through protein-protein and protein-RNA interactions.
Since the discovery that 43 kDa TAR DNA binding protein (TDP-43) is involved in neurodegeneration, studies of this protein have focused on the global effects of TDP-43 expression modulation on cell metabolism and survival.
The major difficulty with these global searches, which can yield hundreds to thousands of variations in gene expression level and/or mRNA isoforms, is our limited ability to separate specific TDP-43 effects from secondary dysregulations occurring at the gene expression and various mRNA processing steps.
In this review, we focus on two biochemical properties of TDP-43: its ability to bind RNA and its protein-protein interactions.
In particular, we overview how these two properties may affect potentially very important processes for the pathology, from the autoregulation of TDP-43 to aggregation in the cytoplasmic/nuclear compartments.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23773928
Redox modification of proteins as essential mediators of CNS autophagy and mitophagy.
Production of cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) is typically associated with protein and DNA damage, toxicity, and death.
However, ROS are also essential regulators of signaling and work in concert with redox-sensitive proteins to regulate cell homeostasis during stress.
In this review, we focus on the redox regulation of mitophagy, a process that contributes to energetic tone as well as mitochondrial form and function.
Mitophagy has been increasingly implicated in diseases including Parkinson's, Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis, and cancer.
Although these disease states employ different genetic mutations, they share the common factors of redox dysregulation and autophagic signaling.
This review highlights key redox sensitive signaling molecules which can enhance neuronal survival by promoting temporally and spatially controlled autophagic signaling and mitophagy.
Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.
Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22444279
Misregulated RNA processing in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) research is undergoing an era of unprecedented discoveries with the identification of new genes as major genetic causes of this disease.
These discoveries reinforce the genetic, clinical and pathological overlap between ALS and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD).
Common causes of these diseases include mutations in the RNA/DNA-binding proteins, TDP-43 and FUS/TLS and most recently, hexanucleotide expansions in the C9orf72 gene, discoveries that highlight the overlapping pathogenic mechanisms that trigger ALS and FTLD.
TDP-43 and FUS/TLS, both of which participate in several steps of RNA processing, are abnormally aggregated and mislocalized in ALS and FTLD, while the expansion in the C9orf72 pre-mRNA strongly suggests sequestration of one or more RNA binding proteins in pathologic RNA foci.
Hence, ALS and FTLD converge in pathogenic pathways disrupting the regulation of RNA processing.
This article is part of a Special Issue entitled RNA-Binding Proteins.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23372158
The truncated C-terminal RNA recognition motif of TDP-43 protein plays a key role in forming proteinaceous aggregates.
TDP-43 is the major pathological protein identified in the cellular inclusions in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration.
The pathogenic forms of TDP-43 are processed C-terminal fragments containing a truncated RNA-recognition motif (RRM2) and a glycine-rich region.
Although extensive studies have focused on this protein, it remains unclear how the dimeric full-length TDP-43 is folded and assembled and how the processed C-terminal fragments are misfolded and aggregated.
Here, using size-exclusion chromatography, pulldown assays, and small angle x-ray scattering, we show that the C-terminal-deleted TDP-43 without the glycine-rich tail is sufficient to form a head-to-head homodimer primarily via its N-terminal domain.
The truncated RRM2, as well as two β-strands within the RRM2, form fibrils in vitro with a similar amyloid-negative staining property to those of TDP-43 pathogenic fibrils in diseases.
In addition to the glycine-rich region, the truncated RRM2, but not the intact RRM2, plays a key role in forming cytoplasmic inclusions in neuronal cells.
Our data thus suggest that the process that disrupts the dimeric structure, such as the proteolytic cleavage of TDP-43 within the RRM2 that removes the N-terminal dimerization domain, may produce unassembled truncated RRM2 fragments with abnormally exposed β-strands, which can oligomerize into high-order inclusions.
PMID: 23124365
TDP-43 skeins show properties of amyloid in a subset of ALS cases.
Aggregation of TDP-43 proteins to form intracellular inclusions is the primary pathology in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) with TDP-43 inclusions (FTLD-TDP).
Histologically, in the cerebral cortex and limbic regions of affected ALS and FTLD-TDP patients, these pathologies occur as a variety of cytoplasmic, neuritic and intranuclear TDP-43 inclusions.
In the spinal cord and lower brainstem of ALS patients, the lesions form cytoplasmic dashes or complex filamentous and spherical profiles in addition to skein-like inclusions (SLI).
Ultrastructurally, the morphology of TDP-43 inclusions is heterogeneous but mainly composed of loose bundles of 10- to 20-nm-diameter straight filaments associated with electron-dense granular material.
All of these TDP-43 inclusions are generally described as disordered amorphous aggregations unlike the amyloid fibrils that characterize protein accumulations in neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease.
We here report that Thioflavin-S positive SLI are present in a subset of ALS cases, while TDP-43 inclusions outside the spinal cord lack the chemical properties of amyloid.
Further, we examine the differential enrichment of fibrillar profiles in SLI of ALS cases by TDP-43 immuno-electron microscopy (immuno-EM).
The demonstration that pathological TDP-43 can be amyloidogenic in situ suggests the following conclusions: (1) the conformational changes associated with TDP-43 aggregation are more complex than previously thought; (2) Thioflavin-S positive SLI may be composed primarily of filamentous ultrastructures.
PMID: 22496581
Why are upper motor neuron signs difficult to elicit in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis?
It is often difficult to identify signs of upper motor neuron lesion in the limbs of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, in whom there is neurogenic muscle wasting of varying severity.
The reasons for this are complex and not related simply to the degree of lower motor neuron muscle wasting but, rather, depend on the pathophysiological abnormalities that develop in response to damage to descending motor pathways and to motor neurons and interneurons in the ventral horns of the spinal cord.
The different mechanisms underlying the clinical phenomenology of the functional motor defect in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, that lead to difficulty in detecting classical upper motor neuron signs, are discussed.
PMID: 23516096
Cultivating stem cells for treating amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
This editorial addresses the current challenges and future directions in the use of stem cells as an approach for treating amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
A wide variety of literature has been reviewed to enlighten the reader on the many facets of stem cell research that are important to consider before using them for a cell based therapy.
PMID: 22117132
Magnetic resonance imaging of pathological processes in rodent models of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Non-human models of neurodegenerative diseases have potential for the identification of key pathways in pathogenesis and for the more rapid assessment of therapeutic candidates.
While there are legitimate concerns about the physiological differences between the rodent and human motor systems, mice expressing the 'G93A' superoxide dismutase-1 gene mutation are a predictable and robustly-characterized model for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
This model has provided evidence for an important role of inflammatory processes during the pre-clinical phase, a stage currently inaccessible for human study in what is largely a sporadic disease.
While magnetic resonance imaging is now an established and leading modality for the identification of ALS biomarkers in humans, it can also be increasingly applied to rodent models to probe structural, functional and biochemical changes throughout the course of the disease, with additional potential to generate surrogate markers for the efficacy of therapeutic interventions.
Targeted MRI contrast agents, through tagging of various cell types and even individual molecules, will deliver an era of in vivo molecular neuroimaging, with greater specificity for the most relevant pathological processes.
These are potentially important steps towards the ultimate goal of human therapeutic translation.
PMID: 22117131
Biochemical alterations associated with ALS.
Our objective was to identify metabolic pathways affected by ALS using non-targeted metabolomics in plasma, comparing samples from healthy volunteers to those from ALS patients.
This discovery could become the basis for the identification of therapeutic targets and diagnostic biomarkers of ALS.
Two distinct cross-sectional studies were conducted.
Plasma was collected from 62 (Study 1) and 99 (Study 2) participants meeting El Escorial criteria for possible, probable, or definite ALS; 69 (Study 1) and 48 (Study 2) healthy controls samples were collected.
Global metabolic profiling was used to detect and evaluate biochemical signatures of ALS.
Twenty-three metabolites were significantly altered in plasma from ALS patients in both studies.
These metabolites include biochemicals in pathways associated with neuronal change, hypermetabolism, oxidative damage, and mitochondrial dysfunction, all of which are proposed disease mechanisms in ALS.
The data also suggest possible hepatic dysfunction associated with ALS.
In conclusion, the data presented here provide insight into the pathophysiology of ALS while suggesting promising areas of focus for future studies.
The metabolomics approach can generate novel hypotheses regarding ALS disease mechanisms with the potential to identify therapeutic targets and novel diagnostic biomarkers.
PMID: 22289290
The use of full-setting non-invasive ventilation in the home care of people with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-motor neuron disease with end-stage respiratory muscle failure: a case series.
Little has been written about the use of non-invasive ventilation in the home care of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-motor neuron disease patients with end-stage respiratory muscle failure.
Nocturnal use of non-invasive ventilation has been reported to improve daytime blood gases but continuous non-invasive ventilation dependence has not been studied in this regard.
There continues to be great variation by country, economics, physician interest and experience, local concepts of palliation, hospice requirements, and resources available for home care.
We report a case series of home-based amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-motor neuron disease patients who refused tracheostomy and advanced non-invasive ventilation to full-setting, while maintaining normal alveolar ventilation and oxygenation in the course of the disease.
Since this topic has been presented in only one center in the United States and nowhere else, it is appropriate to demonstrate that this can be done in other countries as well.
We present here the cases of three Caucasian patients (a 51-year-old Caucasian man, a 45-year-old Caucasian woman and a 57-year-old Caucasian woman) with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis who developed continuous non-invasive ventilation dependence for 15 to 27 months without major complications and were able to maintain normal CO2 and pulse oxyhemoglobin saturation despite a non-measurable vital capacity.
All patients were wheelchair-dependent and receiving riluzole 50 mg twice a day.
Patient one developed mild-to-moderate bulbar-innervated muscle weakness.
He refused tracheostomy but accepted percutaneous gastrostomy.
Patient two had two lung infections, acute bronchitis and pneumonia, which were treated with antibiotics and cough assistance at home.
Patient three had three chest infections (bronchitis and pneumonias) and asthmatic episodes treated with antibiotics, bronchodilators and cough assistance at home.
All patients had normal speech while receiving positive pressure; they died suddenly and with normal oxygen saturation.
Although warned that prognosis was poor as vital capacity diminished, our patients survived without invasive airway tubes and despite non-measurable vital capacity.
No patient opted for tracheostomy.
Our patients demonstrate the feasibility of resorting to full-setting non-invasive management to prolong survival, optimizing wellness and management at home, and the chance to die peacefully.
PMID: 23022214
Nucleus Accumbens 1, a Pox virus and Zinc finger/Bric-a-brac Tramtrack Broad protein binds to TAR DNA-binding protein 43 and has a potential role in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
Protein degradation is a critical component of cellular maintenance.
The intracellular translocation and targeting of the Ubiquitin Proteasome System (UPS) differentially coordinates a protein's half-life and thereby its function.
Nucleus Accumbens 1 (NAC1), a member of the Pox virus and Zinc finger/Bric-a-brac Tramtrack Broad complex (POZ/BTB) family of proteins, participates in the coordinated proteolysis of synaptic proteins by mediating recruitment of the UPS to dendritic spines.
Here we report a novel interaction between NAC1 and TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43), a protein identified as the primary component of ubiquitinated protein aggregates found in patients with Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS).
In vitro translated full-length TDP-43 associated with both the POZ/BTB domain and the non-POZ/BTB domain of NAC1 in GST pulldown assays.
Other POZ/BTB proteins (including zinc finger POZ/BTB proteins and atypical POZ/BTB proteins) showed weak interactions with TDP-43.
In addition, NAC1 and TDP-43 were present in the same immunocomplexes in different regions of mouse brain and spinal cord.
In primary spinal cord cultures, TDP-43 expression was mainly nuclear, whereas NAC1 was both nuclear and cytoplasmic.
In order to mimic ALS-like toxicity in the spinal cord culture system, we elevated extracellular glutamate levels resulting in the selective loss of motor neurons.
Using this model, it was found that glutamate toxicity elicited a dose-dependent translocation of TDP-43 out of the nucleus of cholinergic neurons and increased the co-localization of NAC1 and TDP-43.
These findings suggest that NAC1 may function to link TDP-43 to the proteasome; thereby, facilitating the post-translational modifications of TDP-43 that lead to the development of ALS.
Copyright © 2012 IBRO.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22819776
Mutant SOD1G93A triggers mitochondrial fragmentation in spinal cord motor neurons: neuroprotection by SIRT3 and PGC-1α.
Mutations in the Cu/Zn Superoxide Dismutase (SOD1) gene cause an inherited form of ALS with upper and lower motor neuron loss.
The mechanism underlying mutant SOD1-mediated motor neuron degeneration remains unclear.
While defects in mitochondrial dynamics contribute to neurodegeneration, including ALS, previous reports remain conflicted.
Here, we report an improved technique to isolate, transfect, and culture rat spinal cord motor neurons.
Using this improved system, we demonstrate that mutant SOD1(G93A) triggers a significant decrease in mitochondrial length and an accumulation of round fragmented mitochondria.
The increase of fragmented mitochondria coincides with an arrest in both anterograde and retrograde axonal transport and increased cell death.
In addition, mutant SOD1(G93A) induces a reduction in neurite length and branching that is accompanied with an abnormal accumulation of round mitochondria in growth cones.
Furthermore, restoration of the mitochondrial fission and fusion balance by dominant-negative dynamin-related protein 1 (DRP1) expression rescues the mutant SOD1(G93A)-induced defects in mitochondrial morphology, dynamics, and cell viability.
Interestingly, both SIRT3 and PGC-1α protect against mitochondrial fragmentation and neuronal cell death by mutant SOD1(G93A).
This data suggests that impairment in mitochondrial dynamics participates in ALS and restoring this defect might provide protection against mutant SOD1(G93A)-induced neuronal injury.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
PMID: 21824113
Expression of hepatocyte growth factor in the skin of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is one of the most potent survival-promoting factors for motor neurons.
Overexpression of neuronal HGF has been shown to result in the attenuation of neuronal cell death and progression of disease in a familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) transgenic mouse model.
HGF might be beneficial for motor neuron survival and is a good candidate agent for the treatment of ALS.
So far, studies of the skin of ALS have shown unique pathological and biochemical abnormalities.
However, there has been no study of HGF in ALS skin.
We made a quantitative immunohistochemical study of the expression of HGF in the skin from 19 patients with sporadic ALS and 16 controls.
Hepatocyte growth factor immunoreactivity was positive in the epidermis, some dermal blood vessels, and glands in patients with ALS.
These findings became more conspicuous as ALS progressed.
The optical density for HGF immunoreactivity of the nucleus and the cytoplasm in the epidermis in ALS was significantly higher (P &lt; 0.001 and P &lt; 0.001) than in controls.
There was a significant positive relation (r = 0.53, P &lt; 0.02 and r = 0.73, P &lt; 0.001) between HGF immunoreactivity and duration of illness in the nucleus and the cytoplasm in the epidermis in patients with ALS.
These findings suggest that changes in HGF in ALS skin are related to the disease process and that metabolic alterations of HGF may take place in the skin of patients with ALS.
© 2011 John Wiley &amp; Sons A/S.
PMID: 23108552
Targeting the endocannabinoid system with cannabinoid receptor agonists: pharmacological strategies and therapeutic possibilities.
Human tissues express cannabinoid CB(1) and CB(2) receptors that can be activated by endogenously released 'endocannabinoids' or exogenously administered compounds in a manner that reduces the symptoms or opposes the underlying causes of several disorders in need of effective therapy.
Three medicines that activate cannabinoid CB(1)/CB(2) receptors are now in the clinic: Cesamet (nabilone), Marinol (dronabinol; Δ(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ(9)-THC)) and Sativex (Δ(9)-THC with cannabidiol).
These can be prescribed for the amelioration of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (Cesamet and Marinol), stimulation of appetite (Marinol) and symptomatic relief of cancer pain and/or management of neuropathic pain and spasticity in adults with multiple sclerosis (Sativex).
This review mentions several possible additional therapeutic targets for cannabinoid receptor agonists.
These include other kinds of pain, epilepsy, anxiety, depression, Parkinson's and Huntington's diseases, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, stroke, cancer, drug dependence, glaucoma, autoimmune uveitis, osteoporosis, sepsis, and hepatic, renal, intestinal and cardiovascular disorders.
It also describes potential strategies for improving the efficacy and/or benefit-to-risk ratio of these agonists in the clinic.
These are strategies that involve (i) targeting cannabinoid receptors located outside the blood-brain barrier, (ii) targeting cannabinoid receptors expressed by a particular tissue, (iii) targeting upregulated cannabinoid receptors, (iv) selectively targeting cannabinoid CB(2) receptors, and/or (v) adjunctive 'multi-targeting'.
PMID: 22710962
α-Synuclein pathology in the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/parkinsonism dementia complex in the Kii Peninsula, Japan.
α-Synuclein pathology was examined in the brains and spinal cords of 10 patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)/parkinsonism-dementia complex (PDC) in the Kii Peninsula, Japan.
Various types of phosphorylated α-synuclein-positive structures including neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions, dystrophic neurites, and glial cytoplasmic inclusions were found in all ALS/PDC cases.
There were phosphorylated α-synuclein-positive neurons in 8 cases (80%), and the amygdala was most severely affected.
Phosphorylated α-synuclein was distributed mainly in the limbic system and brainstem; tau pathology was more prevalent than α-synuclein pathology in most affected areas.
In the substantia nigra, periaqueductal gray, locus coeruleus, raphe nuclei, dorsal nucleus of the vagus nerve, hypoglossal nucleus or ventral horn, and intermediolateral nucleus of the spinal cord, α-synuclein pathology was more predominant than tau pathology in only 1 or 2 patients.
Phosphorylated α-synuclein- positive structures were not found in the molecular layer of the cerebellum.
Phosphorylated α-synuclein frequently colocalized with tau in neuron cell bodies, neurites, and glia.
Immunoblots of sarkosyl-insoluble fractions extracted from the brain of 1 patient showed a triplet of α-synuclein-immunoreactive bands that were ubiquitinated.
These results suggest that interaction between tau and α-synuclein be involved in the pathogenesis of Kii ALS/PDC.
PMID: 22459357
Tunicamycin produces TDP-43 cytoplasmic inclusions in cultured brain organotypic slices.
The cellular distribution of TAR DNA binding protein (TDP-43) is disrupted in several neurodegenerative disorders, including frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive inclusions (FTLD-U subtype) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
In these conditions, TDP-43 is found in neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions, with loss of the normal nuclear expression.
The mechanisms leading to TDP-43 redistribution and its role in disease pathophysiology remain unknown.
We describe an in vitro neural tissue model that reproduces TDP-43 relocalization and inclusion formation.
Two week-old coronal organotypic mouse brain slice cultures were treated with tunicamycin for 7 days.
In cortical regions of treated slice cultures, cytoplasmic inclusions of TDP-43 immunoreactivity were observed, with loss of nuclear TDP-43 immunoreactivity.
These inclusions were found in both astrocytes and neurons, and were of both skein-like and round morphologies.
In contrast, TDP-43 cytoplasmic inclusions were not found in slices treated with staurosporine to induce apoptosis, or with trans-4-carboxy-l-proline (PDC) to induce chronic glutamate excitotoxicity.
Furthermore, TDP-43 cytoplasmic inclusions did not co-localize with cleaved caspase-3, suggesting that TDP-43 mislocalization does not generally accompany caspase activation or apoptosis.
The induction of TDP-43 cytoplasmic translocation in cerebrocortical slice cultures by tunicamycin provides a platform for further mechanistic investigations of pathological processing of TDP-43.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22087831
Role of FK506 binding proteins in neurodegenerative disorders.
Protein misfolding has been implicated in the pathophysiology of several neurodegenerative 'amyloidoses' that includes Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, Huntington's disease, frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Accumulation of misfolded proteins into ordered fibrillar intra- or extracellular amyloids results in brain lesions that in turn lead to injury and neuronal loss.
The appearance of protein aggregates in the diseased brain hints at an inability of cellular chaperones to properly assist folding of client proteins.
Not surprisingly, studies involving cell-based and animal models of the neurodegenerative diseases have shown that overexpression of molecular chaperones can provide neuroprotection.
Together with identification of new targets for symptomatic relief of motor and non-motor defects in neurodegenerative disorders, there is a critical unmet clinical need for the development of novel neuroprotective molecules.
One such promising class of compounds are neuroimmunophilin ligands (NILs).
Derived from FK506 (tacrolimus), NILs have been shown to be efficacious in a number of neurodegenerative disorders.
The ability of these nonimmunosuppressive NILs to protect neurons is modulated, in part, by a large family of co-chaperone proteins called the FK506 binding proteins (FKBPs).
This review focuses on the roles of FKBPs in neurodegenerative disorders with an emphasis on the cellular mechanisms responsible for their neuroprotective and neurotrophic activities.
We discuss the structural features of FKBPs and the mode of action of NILs.
For brevity, we limit our discussion to those FKBPs that are particularly enriched in the nervous system.
We hope that such information will aid in the rational design of new and improved NILs for ameliorating neurodegenerative disorders.
PMID: 21678416
Angiogenin inhibits nuclear translocation of apoptosis inducing factor in a Bcl-2-dependent manner.
Loss-of-function mutations in angiogenin (ANG) gene were discovered in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients and ANG has been shown to prevent neuronal death both in vitro and in vivo.
The neuro-protective activity of ANG was brought about partially by inhibiting stress-induced apoptosis.
ANG attenuates both the extrinsic and the intrinsic apoptotic signals by activating Nf-κb-mediated cell survival pathway and Bcl-2-mediated anti-apoptotic pathway.
Here we report that ANG inhibits nuclear translocation of apoptosis inducing factor (AIF), an important cell death-executing molecule known to play a dominant role in neurodegenerative diseases.
ANG inhibits serum withdrawal-induced apoptosis by attenuating a series of Bcl-2-dependent events including caspase-3 activation, poly ADP-ribose polymerase-1 (PARP-1) cleavage, and AIF nuclear translocation.
Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 23092511
Endogenous TDP-43, but not FUS, contributes to stress granule assembly via G3BP.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease characterized by the selective loss of upper and lower motor neurons, a cell type that is intrinsically more vulnerable than other cell types to exogenous stress.
The interplay between genetic susceptibility and environmental exposures to toxins has long been thought to be relevant to ALS.
One cellular mechanism to overcome stress is the formation of small dense cytoplasmic domains called stress granules (SG) which contain translationally arrested mRNAs.
TDP-43 (encoded by TARDBP) is an ALS-causative gene that we have previously implicated in the regulation of the core stress granule proteins G3BP and TIA-1.
TIA-1 and G3BP localize to SG under nearly all stress conditions and are considered essential to SG formation.
Here, we report that TDP-43 is required for proper SG dynamics, especially SG assembly as marked by the secondary aggregation of TIA-1.
We also show that SG assembly, but not initiation, requires G3BP.
Furthermore, G3BP can rescue defective SG assembly in cells depleted of endogenous TDP-43.
We also demonstrate that endogenous TDP-43 and FUS do not have overlapping functions in this cellular process as SG initiation and assembly occur normally in the absence of FUS.
Lastly, we observe that SG assembly is a contributing factor in the survival of neuronal-like cells responding to acute oxidative stress.
These data raise the possibility that disruptions of normal stress granule dynamics by loss of nuclear TDP-43 function may contribute to neuronal vulnerability in ALS.
PMID: 21809041
The frontotemporal syndromes of ALS. Clinicopathological correlates.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is increasingly recognized to be a syndromic disorder in which the degeneration of motor neurons is frequently accompanied by a range of syndromes reflective of frontotemporal dysfunction, including a behavioural or cognitive syndrome, a dysexecutive syndrome or a frontotemporal dementia.
Both sporadic and familial variants of ALS can be affected.
The anatomic substrate of each is a frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) characterized by superficial linear spongiosus, atrophy and neuronal loss, and both astrocytic and neuronal deposition of TDP-43 as pathological inclusions.
Largely unrecognized however is the extent of alterations in tau protein metabolism, particularly in cognitively impaired patients (ALSci).
This includes hyper-phosphorylation (pThr(175)) and tau phosphatase resistance, increased fibril formation ex vivo of tau isolated from ALSci and tau immunoreactive aggregates in neurons, dystrophic neurites and astrocytes.
In this article, we will review the contemporary clinical, genetic and neuropathological characteristics of the frontotemporal syndromes of ALS and propose that as opposed to being a FTLD in which TDP-43 is the primary disease protein (FTLD-TDP) and that the frontotemporal syndromes of ALS represent a hybrid of both TDP-43 and tau pathology.
PMID: 22214314
A novel P66S mutation in exon 3 of the SOD1 gene with early onset and rapid progression.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal motor neuron disease in adults of unknown origin in most cases.
Here we report a novel P66S mutation in exon 3 of the SOD1 gene in an apparently sporadic ALS patient with unusual early onset and rapid disease progression.
Our data widen the spectrum of SOD1 mutations and clinical presentations of ALS.
PMID: 22819011
Pre-mRNA splicing in disease and therapeutics.
In metazoans, alternative splicing of genes is essential for regulating gene expression and contributing to functional complexity.
Computational predictions, comparative genomics, and transcriptome profiling of normal and diseased tissues indicate that an unexpectedly high fraction of diseases are caused by mutations that alter splicing.
Mutations in cis elements cause missplicing of genes that alter gene function and contribute to disease pathology.
Mutations of core spliceosomal factors are associated with hematolymphoid neoplasias, retinitis pigmentosa, and microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type 1 (MOPD1).
Mutations in the trans regulatory factors that control alternative splicing are associated with autism spectrum disorder, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and various cancers.
In addition to discussing the disorders caused by these mutations, this review summarizes therapeutic approaches that have emerged to correct splicing of individual genes or target the splicing machinery.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22169395
Mutations in UBQLN2 are rare in French amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Mutations in UBQLN2 encoding ubiquilin-2 have recently been identified in families with dominant X-linked juvenile and adult-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and ALS/dementia.
Ubiquilin-2 is a component of the ubiquitin inclusions detected in degenerating neurons in ALS patients.
All the previously reported UBQLN2 mutations were localized in 1 of the 12 PXX domains of ubiquilin-2 protein.
We sequenced UBQLN2 in 130 French patients with familial ALS (FALS) and absence of male-to-male transmission and the PXX domain in 240 more patients with sporadic ALS (SALS).
We identified, at the heterozygote state, the c.1500_1508delCATAGGCCC, p.Gly502_Ile504del, in 1 affected woman.
This deletion presumably leads to the in-frame deletion of 1 PXX repeat in the protein.
This variant did not segregate with the disease in the corresponding family and was also detected in 1/380 control subject.
Our results suggest that UBQLN2 gene mutations are rare in French ALS.
Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22214313
Widespread neuronal and glial hyperphosphorylated tau deposition in ALS with cognitive impairment.
Although the biological basis of frontotemporal syndromes associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is considered to be altered metabolism of TDP-43, in ALS with cognitive impairment (ALSci) the metabolism of tau protein is also altered.
This includes neuronal hyperphosphorylation (pThr(175)).
Using novel polyclonal phospho-tau antibodies (pSer(208, 210), pThr(217) and pThr(175)) and antibodies directed against PHF tau (pSer(202)), TDP-43 or ubiquitin, we characterized tau deposition in ALS and ALSci.
In ALS, we observed pThr(175) tau immunoreactive intraneuronal and neuritic aggregates throughout the amygdala and entorhinal cortex.
In ALSci, this extended to the anterior cingulate gyrus, superior frontal cortex and substantia nigra.
The pThr(217) antibody detected widespread astrocytic tau deposition, including punctuate or fibrillary aggregates, or intensely immunoreactive tufted astrocytes in the superior frontal cortex, anterior cingulate gyrus, entorhinal cortex, amygdala and basal ganglia of ALS.
In ALSci, a similar but more widely distributed pThr(217) pathology was observed.
There was no correlation between the extent of pathological tau deposition and TDP-43 pathology, although nuclear TDP-43 immunoreactivity was absent in neurons with tau pathology.
In conclusion, ALSci is unique in possessing both tau and TDP-43 pathology.
The presence of widespread astrocytic tau pathology suggests that ALSci may initially be characterized by astrocytic pathology.
PMID: 21930207
Mutant SOD1 forms ion channel: implications for ALS pathophysiology.
Point mutations in the gene encoding copper-zinc superoxide dismutase (SOD1) impart a gain-of-function to this protein that underlies 20-25% of all familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS) cases.
However, the specific mechanism of mutant SOD1 toxicity has remained elusive.
Using the complementary techniques of atomic force microscopy (AFM), electrophysiology, and cell and molecular biology, here we examine the structure and activity of A4VSOD1, a mutant SOD1.
AFM of A4VSOD1 reconstituted in lipid membrane shows discrete tetrameric pore-like structure with outer and inner diameters 12.2 and 3.0nm respectively.
Electrophysiological recordings show distinct ionic conductances across bilayer for A4VSOD1 and none for wildtype SOD1.
Mouse neuroblastoma cells exposed to A4VSOD1 undergo membrane depolarization and increases in intracellular calcium.
These results provide compelling new evidence that a mutant SOD1 is capable of disrupting cellular homeostasis via an unregulated ion channel mechanism.
Such a toxic channel mechanism presents a new therapeutic direction for ALS research.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22522477
Proteomic pattern analysis discriminates among multiple sclerosis-related disorders.
To use a new, unbiased biomarker discovery strategy to obtain and assess proteomic data from cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of patients with multiple sclerosis (MS)-related disorders.
CSF protein profiles were analyzed from 107 patients with either MS-related disorders (including relapsing remitting MS [RRMS], primary progressive MS [PPMS], anti-aquaporin4 antibody seropositive-neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder [SP-NMOSD], and seronegative-NMOSD with long cord lesions on spinal magnetic resonance imaging [SN-NMOSD]), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), or other inflammatory neurological diseases (used as controls).
CSF peptides/proteins were purified with magnetic beads, and directly measured by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry.
The obtained spectra were analyzed with multivariate statistics and pattern matching algorithms.
These analyses were replicated in an independent sample set of 84 patients composed of those with MS-related disorders or with other neurological diseases (the second cohort).
MS-related disorders differed considerably in terms of CSF protein profiles.
SP-NMOSD and SN-NMOSD, both of which fit within the NMO spectrum, were distinguishable from RRMS with high cross-validation accuracy on a support vector machine classifier, especially in relapse phases.
Some peaks derived from samples of relapsed SP-NMOSD can discriminate RRMS with high area under curve scores (&gt;0.95) and this was reproduced on the second cohort.
The similarity of proteomic patterns between selected neurological diseases were demonstrated by pattern matching analysis.
To our surprise, the spectral differences between RRMS and PPMS were much larger than those of PPMS and ALS.
Our findings suggest that CSF proteomic pattern analysis can increase the accuracy of disease diagnosis of MS-related disorders and will aid physicians in appropriate therapeutic decision-making.
Copyright © 2011 American Neurological Association.
PMID: 22923257
Parkinson's disease-like midbrain hyperechogenicity is frequent in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Clinical and neuroimaging data suggest impairment of the nigrostriatal system in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
We thus hypothesized whether Parkinson's disease (PD)-like midbrain sonography findings are also present in ALS.
Eighty-six patients with the diagnosis of possible or definite ALS according to revised El Escorial criteria were examined by transcranial B-mode sonography compared to 76 age- and gender-matched controls and 33 PD patients.
Hyperechogenic areas of the midbrain representing the substantia nigra were measured planimetrically using standard protocols.
In subjects with sufficient temporal acoustic bone windows, mean midbrain hyperechogenic areas were significantly higher in ALS (0.251 ± 0.104 cm(2)) and PD patients (0.286 ± 0.078 cm(2)) compared to controls (0.091 ± 0.054 cm(2)) with no significant difference between ALS and PD patients (one-way ANOVA: F value = 94.3; P &lt; 0.0001).
Sixty-seven percent (95 % CI 57-78 %) of ALS patients and 84 % (95 % CI 71-97 %) of PD patients displayed abnormal midbrain hyperechogenic areas (P = 0.383 for group comparison, χ(2) test).
No correlations of hyperechogenic area sizes in ALS patients were found in regard to age, gender, ALS subtype (bulbar versus spinal form) or ALS-FRS-R score.
In summary, we observed hyperechogenicity of the substantia nigra in patients with sporadic ALS with a frequency similar to that in PD and higher than in all other movement disorders.
These findings are important for the diagnosis and differential diagnosis of PD and ALS alike.
PMID: 22521585
Reduced protein O-glycosylation in the nervous system of the mutant SOD1 transgenic mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
In the neurodegenerative disease amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a number of proteins have been found to be hyperphosphorylated, including neurofilament proteins (NFs).
In addition to protein phosphorylation, another important post-translational modification is O-glycosylation with β-N-acetylglucosamine residues (O-GlcNAc) and it has been found that O-GlcNAc can modify proteins competitively with protein phosphorylation, so that increased O-GlcNAc can reduce phosphorylation at specific sites.
We evaluated a transgenic mouse model of ALS that overexpresses mutant superoxide dismutase (mSOD) and found that O-GlcNAc immunoreactivity levels are decreased in spinal cord tissue from mSOD mice, compared to controls.
This reduction in O-GlcNAc levels is prominent in the motor neurons of spinal cord.
We find that inhibition of O-GlcNAcase (OGA), the enzyme catalyzing removal of O-GlcNAc, using the inhibitor NButGT for 3 days, resulted in increased O-GlcNAc levels in spinal cord, both in mSOD and control mice.
Furthermore, NButGT increased levels of O-GlcNAc modified NF-medium in spinal cords of control mice, but not in mSOD mice.
These observations suggest that the neurodegeneration found in mSOD mice is associated with a reduction of O-GlcNAc levels in neurons, including motor neurons.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23097262
Stem cells as promising therapeutic options for neurological disorders.
Due to the limitations of pharmacological and other current therapeutic strategies, stem cell therapies have emerged as promising options for treating many incurable neurologic diseases.
A variety of stem cells including pluripotent stem cells (i.e., embryonic stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells) and multipotent adult stem cells (i.e., fetal brain tissue, neural stem cells, and mesenchymal stem cells from various sources) have been explored as therapeutic options for treating many neurologic diseases, and it is becoming obvious that each type of stem cell has pros and cons as a source for cell therapy.
Wise selection of stem cells with regard to the nature and status of neurologic dysfunctions is required to achieve optimal therapeutic efficacy.
To this aim, the stem cell-mediated therapeutic efforts on four major neurological diseases, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and stroke, will be introduced, and current problems and future directions will be discussed.
Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22169158
Factors affecting the diagnostic delay in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Although amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a relentlessly progressive disorder, early diagnosis allows a prompt start with the specific drug riluzole and an accurate palliative care planning.
ALS at onset may however mimic several disorders, some of them treatable (e.g., multifocal motor neuropathy) or epidemiologically more frequent (e.g., cervical myelopathy).
To study the delay from onset to diagnosis in a cohort of ALS patients and to the variables that may affect it.
We performed a retrospective analysis of the diagnostic delays in a cohort of 260 patients affected by ALS (M/F = 1.32) followed at our tertiary referral ALS Center between 2000 and 2007.
The median time from onset to diagnosis was 11 months (range: 6-21) for the whole ALS cohort, 10 months (range: 6-15) in bulbar-onset (n = 65) and 12 months (range: 7-23) in spinal-onset (n = 195) patients (p = 0.3).
31.1% of patients received other diagnoses before ALS and this led to a significant delay of the correct diagnosis in this group (other diagnoses before ALS, n = 81: median delay, 15 months [9.75-24.25] vs ALS, n = 179, median delay, 9 months [6-15.25], p &lt; 0.001).
The diagnostic delay in ALS is about one year, besides the growing number of tertiary centres and the spread of information about the disease through media and internet.
Cognitive errors based on an incorrect use of heuristics might represent an important contributing factor.
Furthermore, the length of the differential diagnosis from other disorders and delays in referral to the neurologist seems to be positively associated with the delay in diagnosis.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23771221
Immunodetection of disease-associated conformers of mutant cu/zn superoxide dismutase 1 selectively expressed in degenerating neurons in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
We previously showed that some antipurinergic receptor P2X4 antibodies cross react with misfolded forms of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)-linked mutant Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1).
Cross reactivity might be caused by abnormal exposure of an epitope in the inner hydrophobic region of SOD1 that shares structural homology with the P2X4-immunizing peptide.
Here, we raised antibodies against the human SOD1 epitope mimicked by the P2X4 immunizing peptide.
One of these antibodies, AJ10, is a recognized mutant/misfolded form of ALS-linked mutant SOD1.
This was demonstrated in the hybrid motoneuron cell line NSC34 expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein-tagged G943A or A4V mutant SOD1.
We also found AJ10 immunoreactivity to be selectively associated with degenerating neurons but not with glial cells in mice overexpressing either SOD1 or SOD1 mutants.
Neurons with strongly positive AJ10 immunostaining were often associated with activated microglia displaying neuronophagic activity.
AJ10-immunopositive SOD1 aggregates were also found in spinal cord tissue from a patient with a SOD1-linked familial ALS.
AJ10-immunoreactive mutant SOD1 conformers were localized in large intracellular protein aggregates with a filamentous amyloid-like organization by ultrastructural immunolabeling and were also detected in neuronal organelles.
These data are consistent with the ability of the AJ10 antibody to recognize misfolded conformations of SOD1 shared by different ALS-linked SOD1 mutations but not with the native protein.
The neuronal mutant SOD1 conformers detected with AJ10 may promote neuroinflammation and may define a new epitope in SOD1 for ALS research.
PMID: 21998733
Human glial-restricted progenitor transplantation into cervical spinal cord of the SOD1 mouse model of ALS.
Cellular abnormalities are not limited to motor neurons in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
There are numerous observations of astrocyte dysfunction in both humans with ALS and in SOD1(G93A) rodents, a widely studied ALS model.
The present study therapeutically targeted astrocyte replacement in this model via transplantation of human Glial-Restricted Progenitors (hGRPs), lineage-restricted progenitors derived from human fetal neural tissue.
Our previous findings demonstrated that transplantation of rodent-derived GRPs into cervical spinal cord ventral gray matter (in order to target therapy to diaphragmatic function) resulted in therapeutic efficacy in the SOD1(G93A) rat.
Those findings demonstrated the feasibility and efficacy of transplantation-based astrocyte replacement for ALS, and also show that targeted multi-segmental cell delivery to cervical spinal cord is a promising therapeutic strategy, particularly because of its relevance to addressing respiratory compromise associated with ALS.
The present study investigated the safety and in vivo survival, distribution, differentiation, and potential efficacy of hGRPs in the SOD1(G93A) mouse.
hGRP transplants robustly survived and migrated in both gray and white matter and differentiated into astrocytes in SOD1(G93A) mice spinal cord, despite ongoing disease progression.
However, cervical spinal cord transplants did not result in motor neuron protection or any therapeutic benefits on functional outcome measures.
This study provides an in vivo characterization of this glial progenitor cell and provides a foundation for understanding their capacity for survival, integration within host tissues, differentiation into glial subtypes, migration, and lack of toxicity or tumor formation.
PMID: 23583883
Motor neuron dysfunction in a mouse model of ALS: gender-dependent effect of P2X7 antagonism.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative progressive currently untreatable disease, characterized by selective motor neuron degeneration; the incidence and prevalence of ALS are greater in men than in women.
Although some important mechanisms that might contribute to the death of motor neurons have been identified, the mechanisms underlying disease pathophysiology are still uncertain.
In particular, the mechanisms underlying the role of gender in ALS and whether treatments should take into account sexual dimorphism remain only partially understood.
Recently, the P2X7 receptor for ATP was reported to display neurotoxic potential in motor neuron disorders, and antagonism of the receptor has been suggested to be helpful in these disorders.
Studying transgenic mice with superoxide dismutase 1 gene mutations, widely used as model for ALS, may provide a better understanding of pathogenic mechanisms and of toxicity towards motor neurons, also possibly helping to understand whether treatments for ALS should take into account sexual dimorphism.
The aim of the work was (1) investigating on gender-dependence of disease progression in the standard model for ALS - the transgenic mouse bearing superoxide dismutase 1 gene mutations - and (2) assessing if a P2X7 receptor antagonist treatment should take into account sexual dimorphism.
We evaluated if gender affect the disease course, the motor performance, the weight loss and the lifespan in mice overexpressing mutant superoxide dismutase 1.
We measured motor impairment, motor strength and coordination by rotarod and grip strength testing.
Further, we assessed if a treatment with the P2X7 receptor antagonist Brilliant Blue G - a dye that can cross the blood-brain barrier, has low toxicity, and has exhibited therapeutic effects in animal models of neurodegenerative diseases - impact on the disease progression, in male and female ALS mice.
We found that (1) the onset and the disease progression, and the survival were dependent on gender: male performed worst than female, lost body weight and died before; (2) treatment with the P2X7 receptor antagonist Brilliant Blue G ameliorated the disease progression.
The treatment effect was gender-dependent: amelioration was greater in male than in female.
In conclusions, we suggest that not only pathogenetic mechanism of motor neuron toxicity but also the drug treatment effectiveness may depend on gender; sexual dimorphism should be considered when investigating on ALS treatment efficacy in the ALS animal model.
Our findings also point on the potential relevance of P2X7 receptor antagonism for ALS treatment, and highlight the importance of adopting a sex-specific approach to searching for treatment of ALS.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22740598
Exome sequencing reveals riboflavin transporter mutations as a cause of motor neuron disease.
Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome was first described in 1894 as a rare neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive sensorineural deafness in combination with childhood amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Mutations in the gene, SLC52A3 (formerly C20orf54), one of three known riboflavin transporter genes, have recently been shown to underlie a number of severe cases of Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome; however, cases and families with this disease exist that do not appear to be caused by SLC52A3 mutations.
We used a combination of linkage and exome sequencing to identify the disease causing mutation in an extended Lebanese Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere kindred, whose affected members were negative for SLC52A3 mutations.
We identified a novel mutation in a second member of the riboflavin transporter gene family (gene symbol: SLC52A2) as the cause of disease in this family.
The same mutation was identified in one additional subject, from 44 screened.
Within this group of 44 patients, we also identified two additional cases with SLC52A3 mutations, but none with mutations in the remaining member of this gene family, SLC52A1.
We believe this strongly supports the notion that defective riboflavin transport plays an important role in Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome.
Initial work has indicated that patients with SLC52A3 defects respond to riboflavin treatment clinically and biochemically.
Clearly, this makes an excellent candidate therapy for the SLC52A2 mutation-positive patients identified here.
Initial riboflavin treatment of one of these patients shows promising results.
PMID: 22118902
Accumulation of insoluble forms of FUS protein correlates with toxicity in Drosophila.
Recently, the fused in sarcoma/translated in liposarcoma (FUS) protein has been identified as a major constituent of nuclear and/or cytoplasmic ubiquitin-positive inclusions in patients with frontotemporal lobar degeneration or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The molecular mechanisms underlying FUS toxicity are currently not understood.
To address aspects of FUS pathogenesis in vivo, we have generated new Drosophila transgenic models expressing a full-length wild-type isoform of human FUS protein.
We found that when expressed in retinal cells, FUS proteins are mainly recovered as soluble forms, and their overexpression results in a mild eye phenotype, with malformed interommatidial bristles and the appearance of ectopic extensions.
On the other hand, when FUS proteins are specifically targeted to adult differentiated neurons, they are mainly recovered as insoluble forms, and their overexpression drastically reduces fly life span.
Importantly, FUS neurotoxicity occurs regardless of inclusion formation.
Lastly, we showed that molecular chaperones reduce FUS toxicity by modulating protein solubility.
Altogether, our data indicate that accumulation of insoluble non-aggregated FUS forms might represent the primary toxic species in human FUS proteinopathies.
Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23171421
Prospective memory tasks: a more sensitive method for screening cognitive impairment in ALS?
Cognitive change is prevalent in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), but still lack a widely accepted and sensitive screening method.
In this study, we try to find a sensitive screening battery for detecting subtle cognitive deficits in patients with ALS.
Eighty consecutive ALS patients and 57 matched normal controls underwent the Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE), the verbal fluency test (VFT), the Stroop Color Word Interference Test (CWT), and the prospective memory (PM) tests, including event-based (EBPM) and time-based (TBPM).
The patients did not differ from the controls in the MMSE, the VFT and the CWT.
By contrast, statistically significant differences were found in the PM tests (EBPM: P=0.043; TBPM: P&lt;0.001).
More interestingly, TBPM was more sensitive than EBPM in the early-phase patients.
Prefrontal lobar dysfunction does exist among ALS patients and may spread from the medial to the lateral region.
The PM tests seem more sensitive in ALS patients with frontotemporal dysfunction than are the classical cognitive measures.
PMID: 21948899
Atypical presentations of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a case report.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) with atypical symptoms poses a diagnostic challenge to clinicians, frequently resulting in delayed diagnosis.
The patient reported here presented with unexplained weight loss and was investigated for 8 months, with an extensive work-up, including several imaging studies, especially to rule out neoplastic processes, before a diagnosis of ALS could be made, largely on the basis of upper and lower motor weakness.
PMID: 22030407
Compensatory movement-related recruitment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients with dominant upper motor neuron signs: an EEG source analysis study.
Cortical reorganization to simple movement in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) has been investigated in neuroimaging studies, reporting recruitment of ipsilateral primary sensorimotor (iSMC) and premotor regions (PMd).
In order to investigate the spatiotemporal pattern of such overactivation, EEG source analysis to brisk self-paced finger movements was performed in thirty-two ALS patients, able to initiate their movement as fast as controls and clustered according to their most affected motor neuron (upper or lower).
Reduced activity within cortical sources in bilateral SMC and caudal mesial areas was found only in patients subgroup with extensive upper motor neuron (UMN) clinical signs and mild motor weakness (U&gt;L).
Its absence in patients with opposite clinical features (L&gt;U) suggest that this reduction might represent a possible marker of UMN impairment, and that the lower motor neuron (LMN) degeneration in L&gt;U patients did not exert a retrograde effect over their cortical motor neurons.
An ipsilateral premotor recruitment was observed in U&gt;L patients only and since its extent positively correlated with movement initiation speed and right hand Medical Research Council (MRC) score, it might represent a compensatory recruitment.
The latter correlation might suggest that the slight motor weakness in those patients may at least partly depend from a UMN dysfunction that can be compensated by cortical recruitment.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22871270
Impaired response of hypoxic sensor protein HIF-1α and its downstream proteins in the spinal motor neurons of ALS model mice.
We have recently reported spinal blood flow-metabolism uncoupling in an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) animal model using Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1)-transgenic (Tg) mice, suggesting a relative hypoxia in the spinal cord.
However, the hypoxic stress sensor pathway has not been well studied in ALS.
Here, we examined temporal and spatial changes of the hypoxic stress sensor proteins HIF-1α and its downstream proteins (VEGF, HO-1, and EPO) during the normoxiccourse of motor neuron (MN) degeneration in the spinal cord of these ALS model mice.
We found that HIF-1α protein expression progressively increased both in the anterior large MNs and the surrounding glial cells in Tg mice from early symptomatic 14 week (W) and end stage 18 W.
Double immunofluorescence analysis revealed that HIF-1α, plus GFAP and Iba-1 double-positive surrounding glial cells, progressively increased from 14 W to 18 W, although the immunohistochemistry in large MNs did not change.
Expression levels of VEGF and HO-1 also showed a progressive increase but were significant only in the surrounding glial cells at 18 W.
In contrast, EPO protein expression was decreased in the surrounding glial cells of Tg mice at 18 W.
Because HIF1-α serves as an important mediator of the hypoxic response, these findings indicate that MNs lack the neuroprotective response to hypoxic stress through the HIF-1α system, which could be an important mechanism of neurodegeneration in ALS.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21284751
Optineurin in neurodegenerative diseases.
Optineurin is a gene associated with normal tension glaucoma and primary open-angle glaucoma, one of the major causes of irreversible bilateral blindness.
Recently, mutations in the gene encoding optineurin were found in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Immunohistochemical analysis showed aggregation of optineurin in skein-like inclusions and round hyaline inclusions in the spinal cord, suggesting that optineurin appears to be a more general marker for ALS.
However, our detailed examinations demonstrated that optineurin was found not only in ALS-associated pathological structures, but also in ubiquitin-positive intraneuronal inclusions in ALS with dementia, basophilic inclusions in the basophilic type of ALS, neurofibrillary tangles and dystrophic neurites in Alzheimer's disease, Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites in Parkinson's disease, ballooned neurons in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, glial cytoplasmic inclusions in multiple system atrophy, and Pick bodies in Pick disease.
With respect to optineurin-positive basophilic inclusions, these structures showed variable immunoreactivities for ubiquitin; some structures were obviously ubiquitin-positive, while others were negative for the protein, suggesting that optineurin expression was not always associated with the expression of ubiquitin.
This study indicates that optineurin is widely distributed in neurodegenerative conditions; however, its significance is obscure.
© 2011 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.
PMID: 23637180
eGFP expression under UCHL1 promoter genetically labels corticospinal motor neurons and a subpopulation of degeneration-resistant spinal motor neurons in an ALS mouse model.
Understanding mechanisms that lead to selective motor neuron degeneration requires visualization and cellular identification of vulnerable neurons.
Here we report generation and characterization of UCHL1-eGFP and hSOD1(G93A)-UeGFP mice, novel reporter lines for cortical and spinal motor neurons.
Corticospinal motor neurons (CSMN) and a subset of spinal motor neurons (SMN) are genetically labeled in UCHL1-eGFP mice, which express eGFP under the UCHL1 promoter.
eGFP expression is stable and continues through P800 in vivo.
Retrograde labeling, molecular marker expression, electrophysiological analysis, and cortical circuit mapping confirmed CSMN identity of eGFP(+) neurons in the motor cortex.
Anatomy, molecular marker expression, and electrophysiological analysis revealed that the eGFP expression is restricted to a subset of small-size SMN that are slow-twitch α and γ motor neurons.
Crossbreeding of UCHL1-eGFP and hSOD1(G93A) lines generated hSOD1(G93A)-UeGFP mice, which displayed the disease phenotype observed in a hSOD1(G93A) mouse model of ALS. eGFP(+) SMN showed resistance to degeneration in hSOD1(G93A)-UeGFP mice, and their slow-twitch α and γ motor neuron identity was confirmed.
In contrast, eGFP(+) neurons in the motor cortex of hSOD1(G93A)-UeGFP mice recapitulated previously reported progressive CSMN loss and apical dendrite degeneration.
Our findings using these two novel reporter lines revealed accumulation of autophagosomes along the apical dendrites of vulnerable CSMN at P60, early symptomatic stage, suggesting autophagy as a potential intrinsic mechanism for CSMN apical dendrite degeneration.
PMID: 23178912
Dysregulation of iron protein expression in the G93A model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder characterized by selective loss of motor neurons which leads to progressive paralysis and death by respiratory failure.
Although the cause of sporadic ALS is still unknown, oxidative stress is suggested to play a major role in the pathogenesis of this disease and of the rare familial form, which often exhibits mutations of the superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) gene.
Since enhanced iron levels are discussed to participate in oxidative stress and neuronal death, we analyzed the expression levels of Fe-related mRNAs in a cell culture ALS model with the G93A mutation of SOD1.
We observed an increased total iron content in G93A-SOD1 SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells compared to wild-type (WT)-SOD1 cells.
mRNA expression for transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1) and divalent metal transporter 1 was increased in G93A-SOD1 cells, which was in accordance with higher iron uptake.
Experiments with the iron chelator deferoxamine revealed a normal reaction of WT and mutant cells to cytoplasmic iron depletion, i.e.
TfR1 upregulation, suggesting a basically conserved function of the iron-responsive element/iron regulatory protein (IRE/IRP) pathway, designed to adapt gene expression to iron levels.
Expression levels of mitoferrin 1 and 2, frataxin, and iron-sulfur cluster scaffold protein were also significantly increased in G93A-SOD1 cells, suggesting higher mitochondrial iron import and utilization in biosynthetic pathways within the mitochondria.
Moreover, expression of these transcripts was further enhanced, if G93A-SOD1 cells were differentiated by retinoic acid (RA).
Since RA treatment increased cytoplasmic reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels in these cells, an IRE/IRP independent, ROS-mediated mechanism may account for dysregulation of iron-related genes.
Copyright © 2012 IBRO.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22477152
Recent advances in the genetics of the ALS-FTLD complex.
There is a clinical and pathological overlap between amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD).
A number of autosomal-dominant genes have been described that primarily cause ALS or FTLD such as progranulin (GRN), valosin-containing protein (VCP), and TAR DNA-Binding Protein (TARDBP), and for each of these conditions there are a small number of cases with both ALS and FTLD.
Two major genes were described in 2011, which cause FTLD and/or ALS within extended kindreds.
Ubiquilin2 (UBQLN2) is responsible for X-linked FTLD/ALS.
A hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 causes chromosome 9p linked FTLD/ALS and is the most common cause of familial ALS accounting for about 40 % of familial cases.
Both UBQLN2 and C9ORF72 mutations lead to TDP-43 positive neuropathology, and C9ORF72-positive cases have p62/ubiquitin-positive pathology, which is not stained by TDP-43 antibodies.
Ubiquilin2 is one of a family of proteins thought to be important in targeting abnormal proteins for degradation via lysosomal and proteasomal routes.
The pathogenic mechanism of the C9ORF72 expansion is unknown but may involve partial haploinsufficiency of C9ORF72 and/or the formations of toxic RNA inclusions.
The identification of mutations in these genes represents an important step forward in our understanding of the clinical, pathological, and genetic spectrum of ALS/FTLD diseases.
PMID: 23062702
Mutational analysis of TARDBP in Parkinson's disease.
Mutations in TAR DNA-binding protein (TARDBP) are associated with heterogenic phenotypes, including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, frontotemporal dementia, and Parkinson's disease.
In this study, we investigated the presence of TARDBP mutations in a cohort of 429 Dutch patients with Parkinson's disease.
Though we detected 1 silent mutation, p.S332S, no missense mutations were present in our cohort.
Our findings, therefore, demonstrate that TARDBP mutations do not appear to contribute to the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease in The Netherlands.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23062703
FUS is not dysregulated by the spinal bulbar muscular atrophy androgen receptor polyglutamine repeat expansion.
Spinal bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis are two distinct forms of motor neuron disease with different genetic causes, pathology, and clinical course.
However, both disorders are characterized by the progressive loss of lower motor neurons and by a similar protective response to growth factors in animal models, therefore raising the possibility of an overlap in the final pathogenic cascade.
Mutations in the FUS gene and fused in sarcoma (FUS) protein pathology have now been identified in some amyotrophic lateral sclerosis cases, while a CAG expansion in the androgen receptor gene is known to cause SBMA.
Recently, multiple lines of evidence have identified FUS as a major target of the androgen receptor, suggesting that FUS could be dysregulated in SBMA motor neurons.
We have investigated this possibility by using a well-established mouse model of SBMA and our analysis of primary motor neuron cultures, spinal cords, and microdissected motor neurons show no evidence for FUS dysregulation.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23062701
Genetic analysis and SOD1 mutation screening in Iranian amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal motor neuron disease, and the most common in European populations.
Results of genetic analysis and mutation screening of SOD1 in a cohort of 60 Iranian ALS patients are here reported.
Initially, linkage analysis in 4 families identified a disease-linked locus that included the known ALS gene, SOD1.
Screening of SOD1 identified homozygous p.Asp90Ala causing mutations in all the linked families.
Haplotype analysis suggests that the p.Asp90Ala alleles in the Iranian patients might share a common founder with the renowned Scandinavian recessive p.Asp90Ala allele.
Subsequent screening in all the patients resulted in identification of 3 other mutations in SOD1, including p.Leu84Phe in the homozygous state.
Phenotypic features of the mutation-bearing patients are presented.
SOD1 mutations were found in 11.7% of the cohort, 38.5% of the familial ALS probands, and 4.25% of the sporadic ALS cases.
SOD1 mutations contribute significantly to ALS among Iranians.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22414400
[Emotions and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a psychopathological perspective].
Emotions have not often been studied in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Most existing studies have assessed the psychopathological manifestations involved, essentially depression and less frequently anxiety.
The results have shown that major depressive episodes and anxious episodes are not frequent in ALS patients, although moderate depressive or anxious symptoms are often observed, but less frequently than in other diseases like multiple sclerosis or Parkinson's disease.
Depressive symptoms are not correlated to the duration or severity of the disease.
This has led us to investigate the coping mechanisms involved in ALS.
Results of previously published studies have shown that they did not differ from those observed in other somatic diseases, but ALS patients show more frequent concern with spirituality and religious preoccupations.
It thus appears necessary to make a more detailed study of how ALS patients cope with the disease and its ominous consequences.
Emotional processing difficulties may be a factor underlying quite diverse somatic and psychological disorders.
The Baker's model propose five stages in emotional processing: emotional experience, emotional expression, labelling, linkage and awareness.
Assessment of the emotional processing used by ALS patients should improve our comprehension of their adaptive functioning.
The patients' caregivers play an essential role, and studies have shown that they often suffer themselves from depression and the burdens involved, and that the perceived social support has an impact on the quality of life and on the depression of the patients.
Therefore, it seems important to assess the emotional processing not only of patients but also of their caregivers.
PMID: 21534845
What would brain-computer interface users want? Opinions and priorities of potential users with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Universal design principles advocate inclusion of end users in every design stage, including research and development.
Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) have long been described as potential tools to enable people with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) to operate technology without moving.
Therefore the objective of the current study is to determine the opinions and priorities of people with ALS regarding BCI design.
This information will guide BCIs in development to meet end-user needs.
A telephone survey was undertaken of 61 people with ALS from the University of Michigan's Motor Neuron Disease Clinic.
With regard to BCI design, participants prioritized accuracy of command identification of at least 90% (satisfying 84% of respondents), speed of operation comparable to at least 15-19 letters per minute (satisfying 72%), and accidental exits from a standby mode not more than once every 2-4 h (satisfying 84%).
While 84% of respondents would accept using an electrode cap, 72% were willing to undergo outpatient surgery and 41% to undergo surgery with a short hospital stay in order to obtain a BCI.
In conclusion, people with ALS expressed a strong interest in obtaining BCIs, but current BCIs do not yet provide desired BCI performance.
PMID: 22624977
PICK1 expression in reactive astrocytes within the spinal cord of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) rats.
The protein interacting with C kinase 1 (PICK1), a PDZ domain-containing protein mainly expressed in the central nervous system, interacts with the glutamate receptor subunit GluR2, with the glutamate transporter GLT-1b and with the enzyme serine racemase.
These three proteins appear as key actors in the glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), in both patients and animal models of the disease.
In this study, we examined the expression of PICK1 in the spinal cord of transgenic rats expressing a mutated form of the human superoxide dismutase 1 (hSOD1(G93A) ) during the progression of the disease.
Expression of PICK1 was examined by real-time qPCR at presymptomatic and symptomatic stages as well as at end-stage.
The expression of PICK1 in the different cell types of the spinal cord was examined by immunohistochemistry.
The overall expression of PICK1 is not modified in cervical and lumbar spinal cord of transgenic (hSOD1(G93A) ) rats during the progression of the disease.
Nonetheless, immunohistochemical studies of lumbar ventral horns revealed a shift of PICK1 expression from motor neurones in healthy rats to activated astrocytes in end-stage hSOD1(G93A) animals.
Considering the documented influence of PICK1 expression on d-serine release and glutamate transport in astrocytes, these findings point to a potential implication of PICK1 in the progression of ALS.
© 2012 The Authors.
Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology © 2012 British Neuropathological Society.
PMID: 23097605
TARDBP mutations are not a frequent cause of ALS in Finnish patients.
In previous studies 1-3 % of ALS patients have TARDBP mutations as the cause of the disease.
TARDBP mutations have been reported in ALS patients in different populations but so far there are no studies on the frequency of TARDBP mutations in Finnish ALS patients.
A cohort of 50 Finnish patients, 44 SALS and 6 FALS patients, were included in the study.
Genomic DNA was extracted from venous blood or muscle tissue and a mutation analysis of TARDBP was performed.
No definitely pathogenic mutations could be identified in TARDBP in our patient cohort.
However, two previously unknown variations were found: one silent mutation in exon 2 and one relatively deep intronic single nucleotide insertion in intron 5.
In addition, two previously known non-pathogenic polymorphisms in intron 5 were detected.
The size of our cohort is obviously not large enough to conclusively exclude TARDBP mutations as a very rare cause of ALS in Finland.
However, based on our results TARDBP mutations do not appear to be a frequent cause of familial or sporadic ALS in Finland.
PMID: 22085693
Optineurin in Huntington's disease intranuclear inclusions.
Optineurin mutations cause adult-onset primary open-angle glaucoma and have been associated with some familial forms of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Optineurin is involved in many cellular processes and interacts with a variety of proteins, among them huntingtin (htt).
Here we report that in Huntington's disease (HD) cortex, optineurin frequently occurs in neuronal intranuclear inclusions, and to a lesser extent, in inclusions in the neuropil and in perikarya.
Most intranuclear optineurin-positive inclusions were co-labeled for ubiquitin, but they were only occasionally and more weakly co-labeled for htt.
Optineurin-labeled neuropil and perikaryal inclusions were commonly co-labeled for ubiquitin and htt.
Although these inclusions were common in cortex, they were rare in striatum.
Our results show that in HD optineurin is present in intranuclear, neuropil and perikaryal inclusions.
It is not clear whether this indicates a primary involvement in the disease process.
In HD, the known interaction of htt and optineurin may suggest that a different process takes place as compared to other neurodegenerative disorders.
Crown Copyright © 2011.
Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23012445
Japanese amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients with GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72.
A GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 occurs on a chromosome 9p21 locus that is linked with frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) in white populations.
The diseases resulting from this expansion are referred to as 'c9FTD/ALS'.
It has been suggested that c9FTD/ALS arose from a single founder.
However, the existence of c9FTD/ALS in non-white populations has not been evaluated.
We found two index familial ALS (FALS) patients with c9FTD/ALS in the Japanese population.
The frequency of c9FTD/ALS was 3.4% (2/58 cases) in FALS.
No patients with sporadic ALS (n=110) or control individuals (n=180) had the expansion.
Neuropathological findings of an autopsy case were indistinguishable from those of white patients.
Although the frequency of risk alleles identified in white subjects is low in Japanese, one patient had all 20 risk alleles and the other had all but one.
The estimated haplotype indicated that the repeat expansion in these patients was located on the chromosome with the risk haplotype identified in white subjects.
C9ORF72 repeat expansions were present in a Japanese cohort of ALS patients, but they were rare.
Intriguingly, Japanese patients appear to carry the same risk haplotype identified in white populations.
PMID: 23380910
Evaluation of potential infectivity of Alzheimer and Parkinson disease proteins in recipients of cadaver-derived human growth hormone.
Growing evidence of cell-to-cell transmission of neurodegenerative disease (ND)-associated proteins (NDAPs) (ie, tau, Aβ, and α-synuclein) suggests possible similarities to the infectious prion protein (PrPsc) in spongiform encephalopathies.
There are limited data on the potential human-to-human transmission of NDAPs associated with Alzheimer disease (AD) and other non-PrPsc ND.
To examine evidence for human-to-human transmission of AD, Parkinson disease (PD), and related NDAPs in cadaveric human growth hormone (c-hGH) recipients.
We conducted a detailed immunohistochemical analysis of pathological NDAPs other than PrPsc in human pituitary glands.
We also searched for ND in recipients of pituitary-derived c-hGH by reviewing the National Hormone and Pituitary Program (NHPP) cohort database and medical literature.
University-based academic center and agencies of the US Department of Health and Human Services.
Thirty-four routine autopsy subjects (10 non-ND controls and 24 patients with ND) and a US cohort of c-hGH recipients in the NHPP.
Detectable NDAPs in human pituitary sections and death certificate reports of non-PrPsc ND in the NHPP database.
We found mild amounts of pathological tau, Aβ, and α-synuclein deposits in the adeno/neurohypophysis of patients with ND and control patients.
No cases of AD or PD were identified, and 3 deaths attributed to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) were found among US NHPP c-hGH recipients, including 2 of the 796 decedents in the originally confirmed NHPP c-hGH cohort database.
Despite the likely frequent exposure of c-hGH recipients to NDAPs, and their markedly elevated risk of PrPsc-related disease, this population of NHPP c-hGH recipients does not appear to be at increased risk of AD or PD.
We discovered 3 ALS cases of unclear significance among US c-hGH recipients despite the absence of pathological deposits of ALS-associated proteins (TDP-43, FUS, and ubiquilin) in human pituitary glands.
In this unique in vivo model of human-to-human transmission, we found no evidence to support concerns that NDAPs underlying AD and PD transmit disease in humans despite evidence of their cell-to-cell transmission in model systems of these disorders.
Further monitoring is required to confirm these conclusions.
PMID: 22052286
An aggregation sensing reporter identifies leflunomide and teriflunomide as polyglutamine aggregate inhibitors.
Intracellular protein aggregation is a common pathologic feature in neurodegenerative diseases such as Huntington' disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Parkinson' disease.
Although progress towards understanding protein aggregation in vitro has been made, little of this knowledge has translated to patient therapy.
Moreover, mechanisms controlling aggregate formation and catabolism in cellulo remain poorly understood.
One limitation is the lack of tools to quantitatively monitor protein aggregation and disaggregation.
Here, we developed a protein-aggregation reporter that uses huntingtin exon 1 containing 72 glutamines fused to the N-terminal end of firefly luciferase (httQ72-Luc). httQ72-Luc fails to aggregate unless seeded by a non-luciferase-containing polyglutamine (polyQ) protein such as Q80-cfp.
Upon co-aggregation, httQ72-luc becomes insoluble and loses its enzymatic activity.
Using httQ72-Luc with Q80(CFP/YFP) as seeds, we screened the Johns Hopkins Clinical Compound Library and identified leflunomide, a dihydroorotate dehydrogenase inhibitor with immunosuppressive and anti-psoriatic activities, as a novel drug that prevents polyQ aggregation.
Leflunomide and its active metabolite teriflunomide inhibited protein aggregation independently of their known role in pyrimidine biosynthesis, since neither uridine treatment nor other pyrimidine biosynthesis inhibitors affected polyQ aggregation.
Inducible cell line and cycloheximide-chase experiments indicate that these drugs prevent incorporation of expanded polyQ into an aggregate.
This study demonstrates the usefulness of luciferase-based protein aggregate reporters for high-throughput screening applications.
As current trials are under-way for teriflunomide in the treatment of multiple sclerosis, we propose that this drug be considered a possible therapeutic agent for polyQ diseases.
PMID: 21907261
Purinergic signalling: from normal behaviour to pathological brain function.
Purinergic neurotransmission, involving release of ATP as an efferent neurotransmitter was first proposed in 1972.
Later, ATP was recognised as a cotransmitter in peripheral nerves and more recently as a cotransmitter with glutamate, noradrenaline, GABA, acetylcholine and dopamine in the CNS.
Both ATP, together with some of its enzymatic breakdown products (ADP and adenosine) and uracil nucleotides are now recognised to act via P2X ion channels and P1 and P2Y G protein-coupled receptors, which are widely expressed in the brain.
They mediate both fast signalling in neurotransmission and neuromodulation and long-term (trophic) signalling in cell proliferation, differentiation and death.
Purinergic signalling is prominent in neurone-glial cell interactions.
In this review we discuss first the evidence implicating purinergic signalling in normal behaviour, including learning and memory, sleep and arousal, locomotor activity and exploration, feeding behaviour and mood and motivation.
Then we turn to the involvement of P1 and P2 receptors in pathological brain function; firstly in trauma, ischemia and stroke, then in neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and Huntington's, as well as multiple sclerosis and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Finally, the role of purinergic signalling in neuropsychiatric diseases (including schizophrenia), epilepsy, migraine, cognitive impairment and neuropathic pain will be considered.
Crown Copyright © 2011.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22918699
Differential expression of TAR DNA-binding protein (TDP-43) in the central nervous system of horses afflicted with equine motor neuron disease (EMND): a preliminary study of a potential pathologic marker.
Equine motor neuron disease (EMND) is a neurodegenerative disorder of unknown etiology affecting horses worldwide.
Trans-Active Response DNA Binding Protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43) has been reported in the central nervous system (CNS) of several neurodegenerative conditions in humans including Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) and assumed to play role in the disease.
We examined whether horses afflicted with EMND express the TDP-43 in CNS.
Ten horses with EMND and 6 controls of different ages and breed we enrolled.
Detection of presence of TDP-43 protein in the CNS was analyzed by immunohistochemical staining using rabbit anti-human TARDBP (TDP-43) polyclonal antibody.
Formalin fixed neuronal tissues from medulla, cervical, and lumbar spinal cord were harvested from EMND and from control horses.
Sections were assigned randomly to TDP-43 treated or rabbit anti-IgG as control.
Nuclear staining of TDP-43 was detected in one of the neural tissues of 75 % of EMND-positive and 0 of 0 % of control horses in the central nervous system (medulla, and/or cervical spinal cord and/or lumbar spinal cord).
TDP-43 antibody was detected in the nucleus of EMND horses and no cytoplasmic staining was noted.
As in ALS, there was no pattern of age clustering associated with the detection of TDP-43.
This is the first report on the staining of TDP-43 in neuronal tissues of horses and suggests that TDP-43 may play a role in the pathogenesis of EMND.
Further studies are needed to elucidate the etiologic role of this protein in the diseases.
PMID: 23109841
Erythropoietin: new directions for the nervous system.
New treatment strategies with erythropoietin (EPO) offer exciting opportunities to prevent the onset and progression of neurodegenerative disorders that currently lack effective therapy and can progress to devastating disability in patients.
EPO and its receptor are present in multiple systems of the body and can impact disease progression in the nervous, vascular, and immune systems that ultimately affect disorders such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, retinal injury, stroke, and demyelinating disease.
EPO relies upon wingless signaling with Wnt1 and an intimate relationship with the pathways of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI 3-K), protein kinase B (Akt), and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR).
Modulation of these pathways by EPO can govern the apoptotic cascade to control β-catenin, glycogen synthase kinase-3β, mitochondrial permeability, cytochrome c release, and caspase activation.
Yet, EPO and each of these downstream pathways require precise biological modulation to avert complications associated with the vascular system, tumorigenesis, and progression of nervous system disorders.
Further understanding of the intimate and complex relationship of EPO and the signaling pathways of Wnt, PI 3-K, Akt, and mTOR are critical for the effective clinical translation of these cell pathways into robust treatments for neurodegenerative disorders.
PMID: 23147550
SOD1 in cerebral spinal fluid as a pharmacodynamic marker for antisense oligonucleotide therapy.
Therapies designed to decrease the level of SOD1 are currently in a clinical trial for patients with superoxide dismutase (SOD1)-linked familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
To determine whether the SOD1 protein in cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) may be a pharmacodynamic marker for antisense oligonucleotide therapy and a disease marker for ALS.
Antisense oligonucleotides targeting human SOD1 were administered to rats expressing SOD1G93A.
The human SOD1 protein levels were measured in the rats' brain and CSF samples.
In human CSF samples, the following proteins were measured: SOD1, tau, phosphorylated tau, VILIP-1, and YKL-40.
Ninety-three participants with ALS, 88 healthy controls, and 89 controls with a neurological disease (55 with dementia of the Alzheimer type, 19 with multiple sclerosis, and 15 with peripheral neuropathy).
Antisense oligonucleotide-treated SOD1G93A rats had decreased human SOD1 messenger RNA levels (mean [SD] decrease of 69% [4%]) and decreased protein levels (mean [SD] decrease of 48% [14%]) in the brain.
The rats' CSF samples showed a similar decrease in hSOD1 levels (mean [SD] decrease of 42% [14%]).
In human CSF samples, the SOD1 levels varied a mean (SD) 7.1% (5.7%) after additional measurements, separated by months, were performed.
The CSF SOD1 levels were higher in the participants with ALS (mean [SE] level, 172 [8] ng/mL; P&lt;.05) and the controls with a neurological disease (mean [SE] level, 172 [6] ng/mL; P&lt;.05) than in the healthy controls (mean [SE] level, 134 [4] ng/mL).
Elevated CSF SOD1 levels did not correlate with disease characteristics in participants with ALS or controls with dementia of the Alzheimer type, but they did correlate with tau, phosphorylated tau, VILIP-1 and YKL-40 levels in controls with dementia of the Alzheimer type.
SOD1 in CSF may be an excellent pharmacodynamic marker for SOD1-lowering therapies because antisense oligonucleotide therapy lowers protein levels in the rat brain and rat CSF samples and because SOD1 levels in CSF samples from humans are stable over time.
PMID: 22742420
Curcuminoids in neurodegenerative diseases.
Neurodegeneration is a term used to describe progressive deterioration of structure and/or function of neurons that affects different parts of the central nervous system and leads to eventual death.
Neurodegenerative diseases include Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Huntington's disease (HD), and Down's syndrome (DS), multiple sclerosis (MS), glaucoma, age-related macular degeneration (AMD), and diabetic encephalopathy (DE).
Although the initial events that trigger these disorders may be different from each other, they share similar biochemical reactions that lead to neurodegeneration.
Curcuminoids, polyphenol compounds from turmeric (Curcuma longa), possess diverse biological properties that modulate debilitating biochemical processes involved in AD that include attenuation of mitochondrial dysfunction-induced oxidative stress and inflammatory responses to inflammatory cytokines, COX-2, and iNOS.
Curcuminoids also bind to β-amyloid (Aβ) plaques to inhibit amyloid accumulation and aggregation in the brain, in addition to inhibiting the toxic Aβ oligomer formation and oligomer-dependent Aβ toxicity.
These properties can be further elaborated to DS, glaucoma and AMD.
Curcuminoids also prevent α-synuclein aggregation in PD; attenuate ROS-induced COX-2 expression in ALS; ameliorate the symptoms of MS, DE and traumatic brain injury, in addition to neurodamages caused by heavy metal poisoning.
These results demonstrate curcuminoids may be potentially effective therapeutic means to treat neurodegenerative diseases.
A bulk of patents discloses methods to improve bioavailability of curcuminoids for therapeutic development.
This review provides a comprehensive description on the current progress on curcuminoids against neurodegenerative diseases.
PMID: 23254636
C9ORF72 repeat expansions in the frontotemporal dementias spectrum of diseases: a flow-chart for genetic testing.
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) refers to a disease spectrum including the behavioral variant FTD (bvFTD), primary progressive aphasia (PPA), progressive supranuclear palsy/corticobasal degeneration syndrome (PSP/CBDS), and FTD with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FTD-ALS).
A GGGGCC expansion in C9ORF72 is a major cause of FTD and ALS.
C9ORF72 was analyzed in 833 bvFTD, FTD-ALS, PPA, and PSP/CBDS probands; 202 patients from 151 families carried an expansion.
C9ORF72 expansions were much more frequent in the large subgroup of patients with familial FTD-ALS (65.9%) than in those with pure FTD (12.8%); they were even more frequent than in familial pure ALS, according to estimated frequencies in the literature (23-50%).
The frequency of carriers in non-familial FTD-ALS (12.7%) indicates that C9ORF72 should be analyzed even when family history is negative.
Mutations were detected in 6.8% of PPA patients, and in 3.2% of patients with a clinical phenotype of PSP, thus enlarging the phenotype spectrum of C9ORF72.
Onset was later in C9ORF72 (57.4 years, 95%CI: 55.9-56.1) than in MAPT patients (46.8, 95%CI: 43.0-50.6; p = 0.00001) and the same as in PGRN patients (59.6 years; 95%CI: 57.6-61.7; p = 0.4).
ALS was more frequent in C9ORF72 than in MAPT and PGRN patients; onset before age 50 and parkinsonism were indicative of MAPT mutations, whereas hallucinations were indicative of PGRN mutations; prioritization of genetic testing is thus possible.
Penetrance was age- and gender-dependent: by age 50, 78% of male carriers were symptomatic, but only 52% of females.
This can also guide genetic testing and counseling.
A flowchart for genetic testing is thus proposed.
PMID: 22742426
Rapidly progressive frontotemporal dementia and bulbar amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in Portuguese patients with C9orf72 mutation.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) form a spectrum of clinically, pathologically, and genetically overlapping disorders, as confirmed by the recent report that it can be caused by a hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9orf72.
One hundred and fourteen Portuguese cases diagnosed as probable or possible familial FTLD, as part of the EOD consortium study, and nine further Portuguese cases with familial ALS were tested for the presence of this mutation.
Results showed that six Portuguese patients from unrelated families had the mutation, five (4.4%) patients from the FTLD group and one (11.1%) from the ALS sample.
Of these, three patients had FTLD and rapidly progressive bulbar ALS.
Electromyography confirmed diffuse loss of motor units with marked bulbar involvement.
In conclusion, the cases now reported showed a very rapid progression, suggesting bulbar ALS could be particularly common and aggressive in patients with the C9orf72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion, in the Portuguese population.
PMID: 23509252
Molecular chaperone Hsp110 rescues a vesicle transport defect produced by an ALS-associated mutant SOD1 protein in squid axoplasm.
Mutant human Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) is associated with motor neuron toxicity and death in an inherited form of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS; Lou Gehrig disease).
One aspect of toxicity in motor neurons involves diminished fast axonal transport, observed both in transgenic mice and, more recently, in axoplasm isolated from squid giant axons.
The latter effect appears to be directly mediated by misfolded SOD1, whose addition activates phosphorylation of p38 MAPK and phosphorylation of kinesin.
Here, we observe that several different oligomeric states of a fusion protein, comprising ALS-associated human G85R SOD1 joined with yellow fluorescent protein (G85R SOD1YFP), which produces ALS in transgenic mice, inhibited anterograde transport when added to squid axoplasm.
Inhibition was blocked both by an apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1; MAPKKK) inhibitor and by a p38 inhibitor, indicating the transport defect is mediated through the MAPK cascade.
In further incubations, we observed that addition of the mammalian molecular chaperone Hsc70, abundantly associated with G85R SOD1YFP in spinal cord of transgenic mice, exerted partial correction of the transport defect, associated with diminished phosphorylation of p38.
Most striking, the addition of the molecular chaperone Hsp110, in a concentration substoichiometric to the mutant SOD1 protein, completely rescued both the transport defect and the phosphorylation of p38.
Hsp110 has been demonstrated to act as a nucleotide exchange factor for Hsc70 and, more recently, to be able to cooperate with it to mediate protein disaggregation.
We speculate that it can cooperate with endogenous squid Hsp(c)70 to mediate binding and/or disaggregation of mutant SOD1 protein, abrogating toxicity.
PMID: 21889984
The modulation of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis risk by ataxin-2 intermediate polyglutamine expansions is a specific effect.
Full expansions of the polyglutamine domain (polyQ≥34) within the polysome-associated protein ataxin-2 (ATXN2) are the cause of a multi-system neurodegenerative disorder, which usually presents as a Spino-Cerebellar Ataxia and is therefore known as SCA2, but may rarely manifest as Levodopa-responsive Parkinson syndrome or as motor neuron disease.
Intermediate expansions (27≤polyQ≤33) were reported to modify the risk of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS).
We have now tested the reproducibility and the specificity of this observation.
In 559 independent ALS patients from Central Europe, the association of ATXN2 expansions (30≤polyQ≤35) with ALS was highly significant.
The study of 1490 patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) showed an enrichment of ATXN2 alleles 27/28 in a subgroup with familial cases, but the overall risk of sporadic PD was unchanged.
No association was found between polyQ expansions in Ataxin-3 (ATXN3) and ALS risk.
These data indicate a specific interaction between ATXN2 expansions and the causes of ALS, possibly through altered RNA-processing as a common pathogenic factor.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23772210
The utility of independent component analysis and machine learning in the identification of the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis diseased brain.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating disease with a lifetime risk of ∼1 in 2000.
Presently, diagnosis of ALS relies on clinical assessments for upper motor neuron and lower motor neuron deficits in multiple body segments together with a history of progression of symptoms.
In addition, it is common to evaluate lower motor neuron pathology in ALS by electromyography.
However, upper motor neuron pathology is solely assessed on clinical grounds, thus hindering diagnosis.
In the past decade magnetic resonance methods have been shown to be sensitive to the ALS disease process, namely: resting-state connectivity measured with functional MRI, cortical thickness measured by high-resolution imaging, diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) metrics such as fractional anisotropy and radial diffusivity, and more recently magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) measures of gamma-aminobutyric acid concentration.
In this present work we utilize independent component analysis to derive brain networks based on resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging and use those derived networks to build a disease state classifier using machine learning (support-vector machine).
We show that it is possible to achieve over 71% accuracy for disease state classification.
These results are promising for the development of a clinically relevant disease state classifier.
Future inclusion of other MR modalities such as high-resolution structural imaging, DTI and MRS should improve this overall accuracy.
PMID: 22072701
Cardiovascular fitness as a risk factor for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: indirect evidence from record linkage study.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) appears to be a sporadic disorder in 95% of cases.
Although few personal characteristics associated with developing ALS are known, identification of those at risk is essential to any vision of early intervention.
There is persistent anecdotal observation that those with ALS are premorbidly physically 'fitter', although such observations are susceptible to bias.
Hospital admission for coronary heart disease (CHD) might serve as an objective marker of reduced cardiovascular fitness.
A record linkage study of two large databases of hospital admissions, the Oxford Record Linkage Study (ORLS) and an English national record linkage dataset of Hospital Episode Statistics was undertaken.
The ratio of the rate of ALS in people without a record of CHD to that in those with a record of CHD was calculated, factoring out premature death in both cohorts.
Similar analysis for Parkinson's disease (PD) and multiple sclerosis (MS) was undertaken.
In the English population, the rate ratio for ALS in the non-CHD cohort, compared with the CHD cohort, was 1.14 (95% CI 1.05 to 1.22); for PD it was 0.95 (95% CI 0.93 to 0.98); and for MS 0.95 (95% CI 0.88 to 1.04).
The ORLS data yielded similar findings.
Those without a record of CHD were at modestly higher risk of ALS, but not for PD or MS.
This lends support to the assertion that ALS arises within a population who may have relatively higher levels of cardiovascular fitness.
PMID: 23645595
Pilot trial of clenbuterol in spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy.
To test the efficacy and tolerability of clenbuterol in patients with spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA).
Twenty patients with a diagnosis of SBMA were given oral clenbuterol (0.04 mg/d) for 12 months.
The primary efficacy end point was the change from baseline of the walking distance covered in 6 minutes at 12 months.
Secondary end points included the change over time in muscle strength assessed with the Medical Research Council scale, the revised Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Functional Rating Scale (ALSFRS-R), and forced vital capacity values.
Safety was assessed by a series of laboratory and instrumental tests, as well as reporting of adverse events.
Sixteen patients completed the study.
There was a significant and sustained increase in walking distance covered in 6 minutes and forced vital capacity between the baseline and the 12-month assessments (p &lt; 0.001).
No differences were recorded in Medical Research Council or ALSFRS-R scores between baseline and follow-up assessments.
Serious side effects, including those on heart function, were absent.
A significant increase in serum creatine kinase levels was observed.
Our findings suggest a positive effect of clenbuterol on SBMA disease progression.
This study provides Class IV evidence that clenbuterol is effective in improving motor function in SBMA.
PMID: 22065782
A yeast functional screen predicts new candidate ALS disease genes.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating and universally fatal neurodegenerative disease.
Mutations in two related RNA-binding proteins, TDP-43 and FUS, that harbor prion-like domains, cause some forms of ALS.
There are at least 213 human proteins harboring RNA recognition motifs, including FUS and TDP-43, raising the possibility that additional RNA-binding proteins might contribute to ALS pathogenesis.
We performed a systematic survey of these proteins to find additional candidates similar to TDP-43 and FUS, followed by bioinformatics to predict prion-like domains in a subset of them.
We sequenced one of these genes, TAF15, in patients with ALS and identified missense variants, which were absent in a large number of healthy controls.
These disease-associated variants of TAF15 caused formation of cytoplasmic foci when expressed in primary cultures of spinal cord neurons.
Very similar to TDP-43 and FUS, TAF15 aggregated in vitro and conferred neurodegeneration in Drosophila, with the ALS-linked variants having a more severe effect than wild type.
Immunohistochemistry of postmortem spinal cord tissue revealed mislocalization of TAF15 in motor neurons of patients with ALS.
We propose that aggregation-prone RNA-binding proteins might contribute very broadly to ALS pathogenesis and the genes identified in our yeast functional screen, coupled with prion-like domain prediction analysis, now provide a powerful resource to facilitate ALS disease gene discovery.
PMID: 22485182
Shared resistance to aging and ALS in neuromuscular junctions of specific muscles.
Normal aging and neurodegenerative diseases both lead to structural and functional alterations in synapses.
Comparison of synapses that are generally similar but respond differently to insults could provide the basis for discovering mechanisms that underlie susceptibility or resistance to damage.
Here, we analyzed skeletal neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) in 16 mouse muscles to seek such differences.
We find that muscles respond in one of three ways to aging.
In some, including most limb and trunk muscles, age-related alterations to NMJs are progressive and extensive during the second postnatal year.
NMJs in other muscles, such as extraocular muscles, are strikingly resistant to change.
A third set of muscles, including several muscles of facial expression and the external anal sphinter, succumb to aging but not until the third postnatal year.
We asked whether susceptible and resistant muscles differed in rostrocaudal or proximodistal position, source of innervation, motor unit size, or fiber type composition.
Of these factors, muscle innervation by brainstem motor neurons correlated best with resistance to age-related decline.
Finally, we compared synaptic alterations in normally aging muscles to those in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Patterns of resistance and susceptibility were strikingly correlated in the two conditions.
Moreover, damage to NMJs in aged muscles correlated with altered expression and distribution of CRMP4a and TDP-43, which are both altered in motor neurons affected by ALS.
Together, these results reveal novel structural, regional and molecular parallels between aging and ALS.
PMID: 23800361
TREM2 in neurodegeneration: evidence for association of the p.R47H variant with frontotemporal dementia and Parkinson's disease.
A rare variant in the Triggering Receptor Expressed on Myeloid cells 2 (TREM2) gene has been reported to be a genetic risk factor for Alzheimer's disease by two independent groups (Odds ratio between 2.9-4.5).
Given the key role of TREM2 in the effective phagocytosis of apoptotic neuronal cells by microglia, we hypothesized that dysfunction of TREM2 may play a more generalized role in neurodegeneration.
With this in mind we set out to assess the genetic association of the Alzheimer's disease-related risk variant in TREM2 (rs75932628, p.R47H) with other related neurodegenerative disorders.
The study included 609 patients with frontotemporal dementia, 765 with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 1493 with Parkinson's disease, 772 with progressive supranuclear palsy, 448 with ischemic stroke and 1957 controls subjects free of neurodegenerative disease.
A significant association was observed for the TREM2 p.R47H substitution in susceptibility to frontotemporal dementia (OR = 5.06; p-value = 0.001) and Parkinson's disease (OR = 2.67; p-value = 0.026), while no evidence of association with risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, progressive supranuclear palsy or ischemic stroke was observed.
Our results suggest that the TREM2 p.R47H substitution is a risk factor for frontotemporal dementia and Parkinson's disease in addition to Alzheimer's disease.
These findings suggest a more general role for TREM2 dysfunction in neurodegeneration, which could be related to its role in the immune response.
PMID: 22140121
A high-throughput screening method for small-molecule inhibitors of the aberrant mutant SOD1 and dynein complex interaction.
Aberrant protein-protein interactions are attractive drug targets in a variety of neurodegenerative diseases due to the common pathology of accumulation of protein aggregates.
In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, mutations in SOD1 cause the formation of aggregates and inclusions that may sequester other proteins and disrupt cellular processes.
It has been demonstrated that mutant SOD1, but not wild-type SOD1, interacts with the axonal transport motor dynein and that this interaction contributes to motor neuron cell death, suggesting that disrupting this interaction may be a potential therapeutic target.
However, it can be challenging to configure a high-throughput screening (HTS)-compatible assay to detect inhibitors of a protein-protein interaction.
Here we describe the development and challenges of an HTS for small-molecule inhibitors of the mutant SOD1-dynein interaction.
We demonstrate that the interaction can be formed by coexpressing the A4V mutant SOD1 and dynein intermediate complex in cells and that this interaction can be disrupted by compounds added to the cell lysates.
Finally, we show that some of the compounds identified from a pilot screen to inhibit the protein-protein interaction with this method specifically disrupt the interaction between the dynein complex and mtSOD1 but not the dynein complex itself when applied to live cells.
PMID: 23193897
Environmental risk factors for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: methodological issues in epidemiologic studies.
The exact role of environmental risk factors in the etiology of the neurodegenerative disease amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is still unknown.
Their hypothetical contribution ranges from a minimal impact to a major role.
Among the environmental factors strictu sensu (i.e., not life-style factors) suspected to play a role in ALS etiology, we consider pesticides, the metalloid selenium, some heavy metals, magnetic fields and cyanobacteria.
However, the possibility exists that these factors exert their activity only in genetically susceptible persons and only after long-term exposures, thus further hampering epidemiologic studies.
The recent availability of powerful tools such as population-based ALS registries for case ascertainment and clustering detection, and of environmental modeling techniques and of geographical information systems, may yield unique opportunities for offering insight into the etiology of the disease.
PMID: 22970211
Monitoring CSF proteome alterations in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: obstacles and perspectives in translating a novel marker panel to the clinic.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal disorder of the motor neuron system with poor prognosis and marginal therapeutic options.
Current clinical diagnostic criteria are based on electrophysiological examination and exclusion of other ALS-mimicking conditions.
Neuroprotective treatments are, however, most promising in early disease stages.
Identification of disease-specific CSF biomarkers and associated biochemical pathways is therefore most relevant to monitor disease progression, response to neuroprotective agents and to enable early inclusion of patients into clinical trials.
CSF from 35 patients with ALS diagnosed according to the revised El Escorial criteria and 23 age-matched controls was processed using paramagnetic bead chromatography for protein isolation and subsequently analyzed by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry.
CSF protein profiles were integrated into a Random Forest model constructed from 153 mass peaks.
After reducing this peak set to the top 25%, a classifier was built which enabled prediction of ALS with high accuracy, sensitivity and specificity.
Further analysis of the identified peptides resulted in a panel of five highly sensitive ALS biomarkers.
Upregulation of secreted phosphoprotein 1 in ALS-CSF samples was confirmed by univariate analysis of ELISA and mass spectrometry data.
Further quantitative validation of the five biomarkers was achieved in an 80-plex Multiple Reaction Monitoring mass spectrometry assay.
ALS classification based on the CSF biomarker panel proposed in this study could become a valuable predictive tool for early clinical risk stratification.
Of the numerous CSF proteins identified, many have putative roles in ALS-related metabolic processes, particularly in chromogranin-mediated secretion signaling pathways.
While a stand-alone clinical application of this classifier will only be possible after further validation and a multicenter trial, it could be readily used to complement current ALS diagnostics and might also provide new insights into the pathomechanisms of this disease in the future.
PMID: 21669047
Optimization of immunosuppressive therapy for spinal grafting of human spinal stem cells in a rat model of ALS.
Previous rodent studies employing monotherapy or combined immunosuppressive regimens have demonstrated a variable degree of spinal xenograft survival in several spinal neurodegenerative models including spinal ischemia, trauma, or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Accordingly, the  characterization of optimal immunosuppressive protocols for the specific neurodegenerative model is critical to ensure reliable assessment of potential long-term therapeutic effects associated with cell replacement.
In the present study we characterized the survival of human spinal stem cells  when grafted into the lumbar spinal cords of a rodent model of ALS, SOD1 (G93A) male and female rats (60-67 days old).
Four different immunosuppressive protocols were studied: i) FK506 (q12h); ii) FK506 (qd) + mycophenolate (PO; q12h, up to 7 days postop); iii) FK506 (qd) + mycophenolate  (IP; q12h, up to 7 days postop); and iv) FK506 (qd) + mycophenolate (IP; qd, up to 7 days postop).
Three weeks after cell grafting the number of surviving human cells was then systematically assessed.
The highest density of grafted cells was seen in animals treated with FK506 (qd) and mycophenolate  (IP; qd; an average 915 ± 95 grafted cells per spinal cord section).
The majority of hNUMA-positive cells colocalized with doublecortin (DCX) immunoreactivity.
DCX-positive neurons showed extensive axodendritic sprouting toward surrounding host neurons.
In addition, migrating grafted  cells were identified up to 500 μm from the graft.
In animals treated with FK506 (q12h), FK506 (qd) + mycophenolate (PO; q12h) or FK506 (qd) + mycophenolate (IP; q12h), 11.8 ± 3.4%, 61.2 ± 7.8%, and 99.4 ± 8.9% [expressed as percent of the FK506 (qd) and mycophenolate  (IP; qd)] cell survival was seen, respectively.
In contrast to animals treated with a combination of FK506 + mycophenolate, robust CD4/8 immunoreactivity was identified in the vicinity of the injection tract in animals treated with FK506 only.
These data suggest that a combined, systemically  delivered immunosuppression regimen including FK506 and mycophenolate can significantly improve survival of human spinal stem cells after intraspinal transplantation in SOD1 (G93A) rats.
PMID: 22529995
Iron accumulation in deep cortical layers accounts for MRI signal abnormalities in ALS: correlating 7 tesla MRI and pathology.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by cortical and spinal motor neuron dysfunction.
Routine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies have previously shown hypointense signal in the motor cortex on T(2)-weighted images in some ALS patients, however, the cause of this finding is unknown.
To investigate the utility of this MR signal change as a marker of cortical motor neuron degeneration, signal abnormalities on 3T and 7T MR images of the brain were compared, and pathology was obtained in two ALS patients to determine the origin of the motor cortex hypointensity.
Nineteen patients with clinically probable or definite ALS by El Escorial criteria and 19 healthy controls underwent 3T MRI.
A 7T MRI scan was carried out on five ALS patients who had motor cortex hypointensity on the 3T FLAIR sequence and on three healthy controls.
Postmortem 7T MRI of the brain was performed in one ALS patient and histological studies of the brains and spinal cords were obtained post-mortem in two patients.
The motor cortex hypointensity on 3T FLAIR images was present in greater frequency in ALS patients.
Increased hypointensity correlated with greater severity of upper motor neuron impairment.
Analysis of 7T T(2)(*)-weighted gradient echo imaging localized the signal alteration to the deeper layers of the motor cortex in both ALS patients.
Pathological studies showed increased iron accumulation in microglial cells in areas corresponding to the location of the signal changes on the 3T and 7T MRI of the motor cortex.
These findings indicate that the motor cortex hypointensity on 3T MRI FLAIR images in ALS is due to increased iron accumulation by microglia.
PMID: 22206832
Identification of receptors and enzymes for endocannabinoids in NSC-34 cells: relevance for in vitro studies with cannabinoids in motor neuron diseases.
NSC-34 cells, a hybridoma cell line derived from the fusion of neuroblastoma cells with mice spinal cord cells, have been widely used as an in vitro model for the study of motor neuron diseases [i.e.
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)].
In the present study, they were used to characterize different elements of the cannabinoid signaling system, which have been reported to serve as targets for the neuroprotective action of different natural and synthetic cannabinoid compounds.
Using RT-PCR, Western blotting and immunocytochemistry, we first identified the presence of the cannabinoid CB(1) receptor in these cells.
As expected, CB(2) receptor is not expressed in this neuronal cell line, a result that is concordant with the idea that this receptor type is preferentially expressed in glial elements.
Diacylglycerol-lipase (DAGL) and N-arachidonoylphosphatidylethanolamine-phospholipase D (NAPE-PLD), the enzymes that synthesize endocannabinoids, have also been detected in these cells using RT-PCR, and the same happened with the endocannabinoid-degrading enzymes fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) and monoacylglycerol-lipase (MAGL).
The presence of the CB(1) receptor in these cells supports the idea that this receptor may play a role in the regulation of cellular survival face to excitotoxic injury.
Interestingly, the expression of CB(1) receptor (and also the FAAH enzyme) was strongly up-regulated after differentiation of these cells, as previously reported with glutamate receptors.
No changes were found for NAPE-PLD, DAGL and MAGL.
Assuming that glutamate toxicity is one of the major causes of neuronal damage in ALS and other motor neurons diseases, the differentiated NSC-34 cells might serve as a useful model for studying neuroprotection with cannabinoids in conditions of excitotoxic injury, mitochondrial malfunctioning and oxidative stress.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22835604
Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor is an NFL mRNA destabilizing factor that forms cytoplasmic inclusions in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is an adult-onset progressive disorder of unknown etiology characterized by the selective degeneration of motor neurons.
Recent evidence supports the hypothesis that alterations in RNA metabolism in motor neurons can explain the development of protein inclusions, including neurofilamentous aggregates, observed in this pathology.
In mice, p190RhoGEF, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor, is involved in neurofilament protein aggregation in an RNA-triggered transgenic model of motor neuron disease.
Here, we observed that rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor (RGNEF), the human homologue of p190RhoGEF, binds low molecular weight neurofilament mRNA and affects its stability via 3' untranslated region destabilization.
We observed that the overexpression of RGNEF in a stable cell line significantly decreased the level of low molecular weight neurofilament protein.
Furthermore, we observed RGNEF cytoplasmic inclusions in ALS spinal motor neurons that colocalized with ubiquitin, p62/sequestosome-1, and TAR (trans-active regulatory) DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43).
Our results provide further evidence that RNA metabolism pathways are integral to ALS pathology.
This is also the first described link between ALS and an RNA binding protein with aggregate formation that is also a central cell signaling pathway molecule.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22842785
Modulation of synaptic function by VAC14, a protein that regulates the phosphoinositides PI(3,5)P₂ and PI(5)P.
Normal steady-state levels of the signalling lipids PI(3,5)P(2) and PI(5)P require the lipid kinase FAB1/PIKfyve and its regulators, VAC14 and FIG4.
Mutations in the PIKfyve/VAC14/FIG4 pathway are associated with Charcot-Marie-Tooth syndrome and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in humans, and profound neurodegeneration in mice.
Hence, tight regulation of this pathway is critical for neural function.
Here, we examine the localization and physiological role of VAC14 in neurons.
We report that endogenous VAC14 localizes to endocytic organelles in fibroblasts and neurons.
Unexpectedly, VAC14 exhibits a pronounced synaptic localization in hippocampal neurons, suggesting a role in regulating synaptic function.
Indeed, the amplitude of miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents is enhanced in both Vac14(-/-) and Fig4(-/-) neurons.
Re-introduction of VAC14 in postsynaptic Vac14(-/-) cells reverses this effect.
These changes in synaptic strength in Vac14(-/-) neurons are associated with enhanced surface levels of the AMPA-type glutamate receptor subunit GluA2, an effect that is due to diminished regulated endocytosis of AMPA receptors.
Thus, VAC14, PI(3,5)P(2) and/or PI(5)P play a role in controlling postsynaptic function via regulation of endocytic cycling of AMPA receptors.
PMID: 22555610
CSF markers in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, 'Lou Gehrig disease') is the most common, progressive, neurodegenerative, motor neuron disease, causing damage to upper and lower motor neurons, leading to paralysis and death within 3-5 years.
Majority of ALS cases are sporadic ALS (SALS) and only 5-10 % of cases are familial ALS (FALS).
Pathogenesis of ALS is complicated and still unclear, including genetic, glutamate excitotoxicity, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, neurofilament accumulation, impaired trophic support, altered glial function, viral infection, immune imbalance and impairment of the blood-brain, blood-spinal cord and blood-cerebrospinal fluid barriers (BBB/BSCB/BCSFB).
The CSF analysis is still one of the basic laboratory tools and might reflect pathophysiological alterations in the course of the disease and could provide an insight into disease pathomechanisms.
The most important aim of its analysis is evaluation of blood-CSF barrier, which is altered in 46 % of ALS patients.
The CSF biomarkers may give insight into ALS pathophysiology and may be useful for early, presymptomatic diagnosis, therapeutic monitoring and the development of new therapeutic strategies.
This review summarizes the general concepts of biomarkers in CSF of ALS patients and their potential usefulness in further research.
PMID: 22550220
ALS/FTD phenotype in two Sardinian families carrying both C9ORF72 and TARDBP mutations.
In the isolated population of Sardinia, a Mediterranean island, ∼25% of ALS cases carry either a p.A382T mutation of the TARDBP gene or a GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat expansion in the first intron of the C9ORF72 gene.
To describe the co-presence of two genetic mutations in two Sardinian ALS patients.
We identified two index ALS cases carrying both the p.A382T missense mutation of TARDBP gene and the hexanucleotide repeat expansion of C9ORF72 gene.
The index case of Family A had bulbar ALS and frontemporal dementia (FTD) at 43.
His father, who carried the hexanucleotide repeat expansion of C9ORF72 gene, had spinal ALS and FTD at 64 and his mother, who carried the TARDBP gene p.A382T missense mutation, had spinal ALS and FTD at 69.
The index case of Family B developed spinal ALS without FTD at 35 and had a rapid course to respiratory failure.
His parents are healthy at 62 and 63.
The two patients share the known founder risk haplotypes across both the C9ORF72 9p21 locus and the TARDBP 1p36.22 locus.
Our data show that in rare neurodegenerative causing genes can co-exist within the same individuals and are associated with a more severe disease course.
PMID: 21802176
Novel optineurin mutations in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients.
Optineurin (OPTN) mutations have been reported in a cohort of Japanese patients with familial (FALS) and sporadic (SALS) amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
In Caucasian patients, OPTN mutations have been identified in FALS patients, but were not detected in a cohort of 95 SALS patients.
Moreover, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in OPTN that could raise amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) susceptibility have not been investigated.
Therefore, we screened a large Dutch cohort of 1191 patients with SALS, 94 patients with FALS, and 1415 control subjects for mutations and SNPs in OPTN.
We identified 1 novel nonsense mutation (Q165X) and 1 unreported missense mutation (Q454E) in individual SALS patients.
These patients demonstrated rapid disease progression with an average survival of 24.5 months.
No heterozygous or homozygous OPTN mutations were identified in our cohort of FALS patients.
SNP analysis did not reveal significant differences between ALS patients and control subjects.
Therefore, variations in OPTN appear to be a rare cause of rapidly progressive SALS in the Netherlands.
Copyright Â© 2012.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
PMID: 22898310
Dystrophic neurites express C9orf72 in Alzheimer's disease brains.
Chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 (C9orf72) is an evolutionarily conserved protein with unknown function, expressed at high levels in the brain.
An expanded hexanucleotide GGGGCC repeat located in the first intron of the C9orf72 gene represents the most common genetic cause of familial frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Previous studies by immunohistochemistry with two different anti-C9orf72 antibodies named sc-138763 and HPA023873 showed that C9orf72 is expressed chiefly in the cytoplasm of neurons, and is concentrated in the synaptic terminals in the brains of FTD/ALS with or without C9orf72 repeat expansion as well as those of controls.
At present, a pathological role of C9orf72 in the process of neurodegeneration remains unknown.
Using immunohistochemistry we studied C9orf72 expression in the frontal cortex and the hippocampus of six Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 13 control cases, including ALS, Parkinson's disease, multiple system atrophy, and non-neurological cases.
The HPA023873 antibody showed a cross-reactivity to glial fibrillary acidic protein, and therefore stained intensely reactive astrocytes in AD and non-AD brains.
Both sc-138763 and HPA023873 antibodies labeled the neuronal cytoplasm and the neuropil with variable intensities, and intensely stained a cluster of p62-negative, UBQLN1-positive swollen neurites, which were distributed in the CA1 region and the molecular layer in the hippocampus of both AD and non-AD brains.
Most notably, both of these antibodies reacted strongly with dystrophic neurites accumulated on senile plaques in AD brains.
These results suggest a general role of C9orf72 in the process of neurodegeneration in a range of human neurodegenerative diseases.
PMID: 22206942
Caffeic acid phenethyl ester extends survival of a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
There is currently very limited effective pharmacological treatment for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Recent evidence suggests that caffeic acid phenethyl ester has strong anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidative, and anti-neuronal death properties; thus, the present study tested the effects of caffeic acid phenethyl ester in mice expressing a mutant superoxide dismutase (SOD1(G93A)) linked to human amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Administration of caffeic acid phenethyl ester after symptom onset significantly increased the post-onset survival and lifespan of SOD1(G93A) mice.
Moreover, immunohistochemical analysis detected less activation of microglia and astrocytes and higher motor neuron counts at an early symptomatic stage (7 days following onset) in the spinal cords of SOD1(G93A) mice given caffeic acid phenethyl ester treatment.
Additionally, lower levels of phosphorylated p38, a mitogen-activated protein kinase that is involved in both inflammation and neuronal death, were observed in the spinal cords of SOD1(G93A) mice treated with caffeic acid phenethyl ester for 7 days.
These results indicate that caffeic acid phenethyl ester may represent a novel and effective therapeutic for the treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and these significant neuroprotective effects observed in a commonly used amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mouse model validate the therapeutic potential of caffeic acid phenethyl ester for slowing disease progression by attenuating the neuroinflammation and motor neuron cell death associated with clinical amyotrophic lateral sclerosis pathology.
Copyright Â© 2012 IBRO.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22921461
TNF-α triggers rapid membrane insertion of Ca(2+) permeable AMPA receptors into adult motor neurons and enhances their susceptibility to slow excitotoxic injury.
Excitotoxicity (caused by over-activation of glutamate receptors) and inflammation both contribute to motor neuron (MN) damage in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and other diseases of the spinal cord.
Microglial and astrocytic activation in these conditions results in release of inflammatory mediators, including the cytokine, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α).
TNF-α has complex effects on neurons, one of which is to trigger rapid membrane insertion of α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) type glutamate receptors, and in some cases, specific insertion of GluA2 lacking, Ca(2+) permeable AMPA receptors (Ca-perm AMPAr).
In the present study, we use a histochemical stain based upon kainate stimulated uptake of cobalt ions (Co(2+) labeling) to provide the first direct demonstration of the presence of substantial numbers of Ca-perm AMPAr in ventral horn MNs of adult rats under basal conditions.
We further find that TNF-α exposure causes a rapid increase in the numbers of these receptors, via a phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (PI3K) and protein kinase A (PKA) dependent mechanism.
Finally, to assess the relevance of TNF-α to slow excitotoxic MN injury, we made use of organotypic spinal cord slice cultures.
Co(2+) labeling revealed that MNs in these cultures possess Ca-perm AMPAr.
Addition of either a low level of TNF-α, or of the glutamate uptake blocker, trans-pyrrolidine-2,4-dicarboxylic acid (PDC) to the cultures for 48 h resulted in little MN injury.
However, when combined, TNF-α+PDC caused considerable MN degeneration, which was blocked by the AMPA/kainate receptor blocker, 2,3-Dihydroxy-6-nitro-7-sulfamoylbenzo (F) quinoxaline (NBQX), or the Ca-perm AMPAr selective blocker, 1-naphthyl acetylspermine (NASPM).
Thus, these data support the idea that prolonged TNF-α elevation, as may be induced by glial activation, acts in part by increasing the numbers of Ca-perm AMPAr on MNs to enhance injurious excitotoxic effects of deficient astrocytic glutamate transport.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22412900
Genetic biomarkers for ALS disease in transgenic SOD1(G93A) mice.
The pathophysiological mechanisms of both familial and sporadic Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) are unknown, although growing evidence suggests that skeletal muscle tissue is a primary target of ALS toxicity.
Skeletal muscle biopsies were performed on transgenic SOD1(G93A) mice, a mouse model of ALS, to determine genetic biomarkers of disease longevity.
Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane, and three biopsy samples were obtained per animal at the three main stages of the disease.
Transcriptional expression levels of seventeen genes, Ankrd1, Calm1, Col19a1, Fbxo32, Gsr, Impa1, Mef2c, Mt2, Myf5, Myod1, Myog, Nnt, Nogo A, Pax7, Rrad, Sln and Snx10, were tested in each muscle biopsy sample.
Total RNA was extracted using TRIzol Reagent according to the manufacturer's protocol, and variations in gene expression were assayed by real-time PCR for all of the samples.
The Pearson correlation coefficient was used to determine the linear correlation between transcriptional expression levels throughout disease progression and longevity.
Consistent with the results obtained from total skeletal muscle of transgenic SOD1(G93A) mice and 74-day-old denervated mice, five genes (Mef2c, Gsr, Col19a1, Calm1 and Snx10) could be considered potential genetic biomarkers of longevity in transgenic SOD1(G93A) mice.
These results are important because they may lead to the exploration of previously unexamined tissues in the search for new disease biomarkers and even to the application of these findings in human studies.
PMID: 23705876
A prospective pilot study measuring muscle volumetric change in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Our objective was to investigate the potential of muscle volume, measured with magnetic resonance (MR), as a biomarker to quantify disease progression in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
In this longitudinal pilot study, we first sought to determine the stability of volumetric muscle MR measurements in 11 control subjects at two time-points.
We assessed feasibility of detecting atrophy in four patients with ALS, followed at three-month intervals for 12 months.
Muscle power and MR volume were measured in thenar eminence (TEm), first dorsal interosseous (1DIO), tibialis anterior (TA) and tongue.
Changes over time were assessed using linear regression models and t-tests.
Results demonstrated that, in controls, no volumetric MR changes were seen (mean volume variation in all muscles &lt; 5%, p &gt; 0.1).
In patients, between-subject heterogeneity was identified.
Trends for volume loss were found in TEm (mean, - 26.84%, p = 0.056) and TA (- 8.29%, p = 0.077), but not in 1DIO (- 18.47%, p = 0.121) or tongue (&lt; 5%, p = 0.367).
In conclusion, volumetric muscle MR appears a stable measure in controls, and progressive volume loss was demonstrable in individuals with ALS in whom clinical weakness progressed.
In this small study, subclinical atrophy was not demonstrable using muscle MR.
Clinico-radiological discordance between muscle weakness and MR atrophy could reflect a contribution of upper motor neuron pathology.
PMID: 22292798
Identification of a novel missense mutation in angiogenin in a Chinese amyotrophic lateral sclerosis cohort.
Abstract   Angiogenin (ANG) gene mutations have been identified in both familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients from multiple European and North American populations.
However, no ANG mutation has yet been reported in Asian ALS populations.
Here, we screened for ANG mutations in a Chinese ALS cohort.
The entire coding region of the ANG gene was sequenced in 10 familial ALS pedigrees, 202 sporadic ALS patients, and 151 healthy controls.
All patients were negative for SOD1, FUS, and TARDBP mutations.
We identified a novel missense mutation, c.379G &gt; A (p.V103I), in one sporadic ALS patient, but not in the controls.
No mutations were found in the familial ALS patients.
A novel missense variant, c.323A &gt; G (p.H84R), was detected in one healthy individual.
We identified the presence of the known single nucleotide polymorphism, rs11701 (T/G), in both ALS cases and controls.
However, no significant association of the G allele with ALS susceptibility was demonstrated.
In conclusion, ANG mutations accounted for 0.5% of our SOD1-, FUS-, TARDBP- mutation-negative ALS cohort.
Our findings highlight that the genetic background of ALS differs between different populations, and suggest that ANG mutation may be involved in the aetiology of ALS in the Han Chinese population.
PMID: 22842875
Transportin 1 accumulates specifically with FET proteins but no other transportin cargos in FTLD-FUS and is absent in FUS inclusions in ALS with FUS mutations.
Accumulation of the DNA/RNA binding protein fused in sarcoma (FUS) as inclusions in neurons and glia is the pathological hallmark of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients with mutations in FUS (ALS-FUS) as well as in several subtypes of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD-FUS), which are not associated with FUS mutations.
Despite some overlap in the phenotype and neuropathology of FTLD-FUS and ALS-FUS, significant differences of potential pathomechanistic relevance were recently identified in the protein composition of inclusions in these conditions.
While ALS-FUS showed only accumulation of FUS, inclusions in FTLD-FUS revealed co-accumulation of all members of the FET protein family, that include FUS, Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) and TATA-binding protein-associated factor 15 (TAF15) suggesting a more complex disturbance of transportin-mediated nuclear import of proteins in FTLD-FUS compared to ALS-FUS.
To gain more insight into the mechanisms of inclusion body formation, we investigated the role of Transportin 1 (Trn1) as well as 13 additional cargo proteins of Transportin in the spectrum of FUS-opathies by immunohistochemistry and biochemically.
FUS-positive inclusions in six ALS-FUS cases including four different mutations did not label for Trn1.
In sharp contrast, the FET-positive pathology in all FTLD-FUS subtypes was also strongly labeled for Trn1 and often associated with a reduction in the normal nuclear staining of Trn1 in inclusion bearing cells, while no biochemical changes of Trn1 were detectable in FTLD-FUS.
Notably, despite the dramatic changes in the subcellular distribution of Trn1 in FTLD-FUS, alterations of its cargo proteins were restricted to FET proteins and no changes in the normal physiological staining of 13 additional Trn1 targets, such as hnRNPA1, PAPBN1 and Sam68, were observed in FTLD-FUS.
These data imply a specific dysfunction in the interaction between Trn1 and FET proteins in the inclusion body formation in FTLD-FUS.
Moreover, the absence of Trn1 in ALS-FUS provides further evidence that ALS-FUS and FTLD-FUS have different underlying pathomechanisms.
PMID: 22344792
Involvement of activated microglia in increased vulnerability of motoneurons after facial nerve avulsion in presymptomatic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis model rats.
Activated microglia are observed in various neurodegenerative diseases and are thought to be involved in the processes of neuronal cell death.
Motoneuron damage in the facial nuclei after facial nerve avulsion is accelerated in presymptomatic transgenic rats expressing human mutant Cu(2+) /Zn(2+) superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1), compared with that in wild-type rats.
To reveal the functional role of microglia in motoneuronal death, we investigated the microglial response after facial nerve avulsion in presymptomatic mutant SOD1(H46R) (mSOD1(H46R) ) rats.
At 3 days after avulsion, microglial clusters were observed in the facial nuclei of both wild-type and mSOD1(H46R) rats.
The numbers of microglial clusters, proliferating microglia, and microglial attachments to motoneurons were significantly higher in mSOD1(H46R) rats, compared with those in wild-type rats.
Immunopositive signals for the phagocytic marker ED1 were significantly stronger in mSOD1(H46R) rats, compared with that in wild-type rats, at 2 weeks after avulsion.
Furthermore, primary microglia prepared from mSOD1(H46R) rats showed enhanced phagocytic activity, compared with that in wild-type rats.
The expression of P2Y(12) mRNA was higher in the facial nuclei of mSOD1(H46R) rats, compared with that in wild-type rats.
A laser microdissection system revealed that the expression of ATF3 mRNA was higher in the motoneurons of mSOD1(H46R) rats, compared with that in wild-type rats, at 2 days after avulsion.
These results indicate that microglial activation in response to early neuronal damage increased in mSOD1(H46R) rats and suggest that the enhanced activation of microglia may lead to an increase in the vulnerability of motoneurons after avulsion in mSOD1(H46R) rats.
Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 23352207
α-Synuclein coaggregation in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with SOD1 gene mutation.
Immunohistochemical studies were performed on postmortem brain and spinal cord from a patient with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis characterized by a C111Y mutation in the Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase gene.
Clinically, the patient presented with classical amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and died of respiratory failure at age 53 years without ventilator dependence, 4 years after the onset.
Pathologically, loss of motor neurons was more extensive than upper motor neurons.
Lower motor neurons developed massive intracellular cytoplasmic neuronal inclusions, which were immunoreactive for Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase and phosphorylated α-synuclein, often colocalized.
The inclusions were TAR DNA-binding protein 43 negative.
The clinicopathologic significance of coaggregation of α-synuclein and Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase protein, a novel finding in neurodegenerative disorders, needs further investigation.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23777266
Magnesium intake and risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: results from five large cohort studies.
A low magnesium intake has been suggested to be associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) in pathological and case-control studies, but prospective studies in humans are lacking.
The relation between dietary intake of magnesium and ALS risk was explored in five large prospective cohort studies (the Nurses' Health Study, the Health Professionals Follow-up Study, the Cancer Prevention Study II Nutrition Cohort, the Multiethnic Cohort Study, and the National Institutes of Health - AARP Diet and Health Study), comprising over 1,050,000 males and females contributing 1093 cases of ALS during a mean of 15 years of follow-up.
Cox proportional hazards models were used within each cohort, and cohort-specific estimates were subsequently pooled using a random-effects model.
Results demonstrated that dietary magnesium intake was not associated with ALS risk, relative risk 1.07, 95% confidence interval 0.88 - 1.31 comparing the highest quintile of intake with the lowest.
This finding does not support a protective effect of magnesium intake on ALS risk.
Further analyses should explore magnesium intake in combination with heavy metal exposure and genetic variants affecting magnesium absorption.
PMID: 22147697
Different 8-hydroxyquinolines protect models of TDP-43 protein, α-synuclein, and polyglutamine proteotoxicity through distinct mechanisms.
No current therapies target the underlying cellular pathologies of age-related neurodegenerative diseases.
Model organisms provide a platform for discovering compounds that protect against the toxic, misfolded proteins that initiate these diseases.
One such protein, TDP-43, is implicated in multiple neurodegenerative diseases, including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration.
In yeast, TDP-43 expression is toxic, and genetic modifiers first discovered in yeast have proven to modulate TDP-43 toxicity in both neurons and humans.
Here, we describe a phenotypic screen for small molecules that reverse TDP-43 toxicity in yeast.
One group of hit compounds was 8-hydroxyquinolines (8-OHQ), a class of clinically relevant bioactive metal chelators related to clioquinol.
Surprisingly, in otherwise wild-type yeast cells, different 8-OHQs had selectivity for rescuing the distinct toxicities caused by the expression of TDP-43, α-synuclein, or polyglutamine proteins.
In fact, each 8-OHQ synergized with the other, clearly establishing that they function in different ways.
Comparative growth and molecular analyses also revealed that 8-OHQs have distinct metal chelation and ionophore activities.
The diverse bioactivity of 8-OHQs indicates that altering different aspects of metal homeostasis and/or metalloprotein activity elicits distinct protective mechanisms against several neurotoxic proteins.
Indeed, phase II clinical trials of an 8-OHQ has produced encouraging results in modifying Alzheimer disease.
Our unbiased identification of 8-OHQs in a yeast TDP-43 toxicity model suggests that tailoring 8-OHQ activity to a particular neurodegenerative disease may be a viable therapeutic strategy.
PMID: 22384095
The aggregation and neurotoxicity of TDP-43 and its ALS-associated 25 kDa fragment are differentially affected by molecular chaperones in Drosophila.
Almost all cases of sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and some cases of the familial form, are characterised by the deposition of TDP-43, a member of a family of heteronuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNP).
Although protein misfolding and deposition is thought to be a causative feature of many of the most prevalent neurodegenerative diseases, a link between TDP-43 aggregation and the dysfunction of motor neurons has yet to be established, despite many correlative neuropathological studies.
We have investigated this relationship in the present study by probing the effect of altering TDP-43 aggregation behaviour in vivo by modulating the levels of molecular chaperones in a Drosophila model.
More specifically, we quantify the effect of either pharmacological upregulation of the heat shock response or specific genetic upregulation of a small heat shock protein, CG14207, on the neurotoxicity of both TDP-43 and of its disease associated 25 kDa fragment (TDP-25) in a Drosophila model.
Inhibition of the aggregation of TDP-43 by either method results in a partial reduction of its neurotoxic effects on both photoreceptor and motor neurons, whereas inhibition of the aggregation of TDP-25 results not only in a complete suppression of its toxicity but also its clearance from the brain in both neuronal subtypes studied.
The results demonstrate, therefore, that aggregation plays a crucial role in mediating the neurotoxic effects of both full length and truncated TDP-43, and furthermore reveal that the in vivo propensity of these two proteins to aggregate and their susceptibility to molecular chaperone mediated clearance are quite distinct.
PMID: 23312666
Rehabilitation of motor neuron disease.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), the most common adult motor neuron disease, is an acquired disorder that results in loss of function in multiple domains.
Although there is no treatment that can halt or reverse this progressive condition, there are many opportunities for interventions that can lead to improved quality of life for the patient and caregiver.
Physical and occupational therapy can assist with mobility and activities of daily living.
Interventions by speech pathology can optimize nutrition and communication.
Respiratory function can be managed noninvasively or invasively.
Depression, hopelessness, anxiety, and other mental health issues can and should be aggressively addressed and treated.
Many symptoms such as pseudobulbar affect, sialorrhea, constipation, spasticity, and cramps can be treated effectively with medications.
Spirituality and religion are important issues to address, as are end-of-life concerns, including advance directives, hospice, and the dying process.
In contrast to the discouraging view that there is nothing we can do, a broad approach to management, through collaboration with a multidisciplinary team, will permit the ALS physician to make a meaningful difference in the lives of individuals living with ALS.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22921269
UNC13A influences survival in Italian amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients: a population-based study.
The common variant rs12608932, located within an intron of UNC13A gene on chromosome 19p13.3, has been suggested to influence susceptibility to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), as well as survival, in patients of north European descent.
To examine this possibility further, we evaluated the association of rs12608932 with susceptibility and survival in a population-based cohort of 500 Italian ALS patients and 1457 Italian control samples.
Although rs12608932 was not associated with ALS susceptibility in our series (p = 0.124), it was significantly associated with survival under the recessive model (median survival for AA/AC genotypes = 3.5 years [interquartile range, 2.2-6.4]; CC = 2.5 years [interquartile range, 1.6-4.2]; p = 0.017).
Furthermore, rs12608932 genotype remained an independent prognostic factor in Cox multivariable analysis adjusting for other factors known to influence survival (p = 0.023).
Overall, minor allele carrier status of rs12608932 was strongly associated with an approximate 1-year reduction of survival in ALS patients, making it a significant determinant of phenotype variation.
The identification of UNC13A as a modifier of prognosis among sporadic ALS patients potentially provides a new therapeutic target aimed at slowing disease progression.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23624525
Genome-wide association analyses in Han Chinese identify two new susceptibility loci for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
To identify susceptibility genes for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), we conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) in 506 individuals with sporadic ALS and 1,859 controls of Han Chinese ancestry.
Ninety top SNPs suggested by the current GWAS and 6 SNPs identified by previous GWAS were analyzed in an independent cohort of 706 individuals with ALS and 1,777 controls of Han Chinese ancestry.
We discovered two new susceptibility loci for ALS at 1q32 (CAMK1G, rs6703183, Pcombined = 2.92 × 10(-8), odds ratio (OR) = 1.31) and 22p11 (CABIN1 and SUSD2, rs8141797, Pcombined = 2.35 × 10(-9), OR = 1.52).
These two loci explain 12.48% of the overall variance in disease risk in the Han Chinese population.
We found no association evidence for the previously reported loci in the Han Chinese population, suggesting genetic heterogeneity of disease susceptibility for ALS between ancestry groups.
Our study identifies two new susceptibility loci and suggests new pathogenic mechanisms of ALS.
PMID: 23402800
Pesticides and human chronic diseases: evidences, mechanisms, and perspectives.
Along with the wide use of pesticides in the world, the concerns over their health impacts are rapidly growing.
There is a huge body of evidence on the relation between exposure to pesticides and elevated rate of chronic diseases such as different types of cancers, diabetes, neurodegenerative disorders like Parkinson, Alzheimer, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), birth defects, and reproductive disorders.
There is also circumstantial evidence on the association of exposure to pesticides with some other chronic diseases like respiratory problems, particularly asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), cardiovascular disease such as atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease, chronic nephropathies, autoimmune diseases like systemic lupus erythematous and rheumatoid arthritis, chronic fatigue syndrome, and aging.
The common feature of chronic disorders is a disturbance in cellular homeostasis, which can be induced via pesticides' primary action like perturbation of ion channels, enzymes, receptors, etc., or can as well be mediated via pathways other than the main mechanism.
In this review, we present the highlighted evidence on the association of pesticide's exposure with the incidence of chronic diseases and introduce genetic damages, epigenetic modifications, endocrine disruption, mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, endoplasmic reticulum stress and unfolded protein response (UPR), impairment of ubiquitin proteasome system, and defective autophagy as the effective mechanisms of action.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23033353
Is language impairment more common than executive dysfunction in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis?
Systematic explorations of language abilities in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) are lacking in the context of wider cognitive change.
Neuropsychological assessment data were obtained from 51 patients with ALS and 35 healthy controls matched for age, gender and IQ.
Composite scores were derived for the domains of language and executive functioning.
Domain impairment was defined as a composite score ≤5th centile relative to the control mean.
Cognitive impairment was also classified using recently published consensus criteria.
The patients with ALS were impaired on language and executive composite scores.
Language domain impairment was found in 43% of patients with ALS, and executive domain impairment in 31%.
Standardised language and executive composite scores correlated in the ALS group (r=0.68, p&lt;0.001).
Multiple regression analyses indicated that scores on the executive composite accounted for 44% of the variance in language composite scores.
Language impairments are at least as prevalent as executive dysfunction in ALS.
While the two domains are strongly associated, executive dysfunction does not fully account for the profile of language impairments observed, further highlighting the heterogeneity of cognitive impairment in non-demented patients with ALS.
PMID: 22409362
Incidence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in Sicily: A population based study.
Our objective was to investigate incidence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) in Sicily, southern Italy, by means of a population based study.
We included people with ALS resident in five Sicilian provinces, whose onset occurred in the two-year period 2005-2006 (population at 31 December 2006: 3,481,096 inhabitants).
A multisource case-finding procedure was adopted and patients were classified as affected by ALS according to revised El Escorial criteria.
During the two-year surveillance period, 97 patients meeting eligibility criteria included 57 males (58.8%) and 40 females (41.2%).
Crude annual incidence rate was 1.4/100,000 person years (95% CI 1.33-1.47).
The incidence rate was higher in males (1.71/100,000; CI 1.61-1.81) than in females (1.11/100,000; CI 1.01-1.21).
Standardized incidence rate for the total population in the 45-74-years-old age group was 3.22 (CI 3.11-3.33).
Prevalence rate was 6.0/100,000 (CI 5.97-6.03), higher in males (7.1/100,000; CI 7.02-7.18) than females (4.9/100,000; CI 4.86-4.94).
In conclusion, ALS rates observed in the present study are higher in males than females, with a peak of incidence at 70 years of age in both genders.
These findings are consistent with those of other population based European studies.
PMID: 22409360
Prevalence of Huntington's disease gene CAG repeat alleles in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients.
A higher prevalence of intermediate ataxin-2 CAG repeats in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients has raised the possibility that CAG expansions in other polyglutamine disease genes could contribute to ALS neurodegeneration.
We sought to determine whether expansions of the CAG repeat of the HTT gene that causes Huntington's disease, are associated with ALS.
We compared the HTT CAG repeat length on a total of 3144 chromosomes from 1572 sporadic ALS patients and 4007 control chromosomes, and also tested its possible effects on ALS-specific parameters, such as age and site of onset and survival rate.
Our results show that the CAG repeat in the HTT gene is not a risk factor for ALS nor modifies its clinical presentation.
These findings suggest that distinct neuronal degeneration processes are involved in these two different neurodegenerative disorders.
PMID: 23049975
c-Abl inhibition delays motor neuron degeneration in the G93A mouse, an animal model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease characterized by progressive death of motor neurons.
Although the pathogenesis of ALS remains unclear, several cellular processes are known to be involved, including apoptosis.
A previous study revealed the apoptosis-related gene c-Abl to be upregulated in sporadic ALS motor neurons.
We investigated the possibility that c-Abl activation is involved in the progression of ALS and that c-Abl inhibition is potentially a therapeutic strategy for ALS.
Using a mouse motor neuron cell line, we found that mutation of Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1), which is one of the causative genes of familial ALS, induced the upregulation of c-Abl and decreased cell viability, and that the c-Abl inhibitor dasatinib inhibited cytotoxicity.
Activation of c-Abl with a concomitant increase in activated caspase-3 was observed in the lumbar spine of G93A-SOD1 transgenic mice (G93A mice), a widely used model of ALS.
The survival of G93A mice was improved by oral administration of dasatinib, which also decreased c-Abl phosphorylation, inactivated caspase-3, and improved the innervation status of neuromuscular junctions.
In addition, c-Abl expression in postmortem spinal cord tissues from sporadic ALS patients was increased by 3-fold compared with non-ALS patients.
The present results suggest that c-Abl is a potential therapeutic target for ALS and that the c-Abl inhibitor dasatinib has neuroprotective properties in vitro and in vivo.
PMID: 21852022
Novel heterozygous nonsense mutation of the OPTN gene segregating in a Danish family with ALS.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder.
About 10% of ALS cases are familial (FALS) and the genetic defect is known only in approximately 20%-30% of these cases.
The most common genetic cause of ALS is SOD1 (superoxide dismutase 1) mutation.
Very recently, mutations of the optineurin gene (OPTN), which is involved in open-angle glaucoma, were identified in 3 Japanese patients/families with ALS, and subsequently in a few FALS patients of European descent.
We found a heterozygous nonsense mutation (c.493C&gt;T, p.Gln165X, exon 6) in the OPTN gene in a Danish patient with ALS, and the mutation segregated from his affected father.
The p.Gln165X mutation could not be detected in 1070 healthy Danish controls, in 1000 Danish individuals with metabolic phenotypes or in 64 sporadic ALS (SALS) cases.
The p.Gln165X mutation described in this study is the first mutation reported in a Danish family and is likely involved in disease pathogenesis.
Until now, only few OPTN mutations have been associated with ALS.
As the underlying genetic defect is known only in approximately 20%-30% of FALS families, further screening of these cases is necessary for establishing the contribution of OPTN mutations in disease pathogenesis.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23781106
Structural similarity of wild-type and ALS-mutant superoxide dismutase-1 fibrils using limited proteolysis and atomic force microscopy.
Abnormal assemblies formed by misfolded superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1) proteins are the likely cause of SOD1-linked familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (fALS) and may be involved in some cases of sporadic ALS.
To analyze the structure of the insoluble SOD1 amyloid fibrils, we first used limited proteolysis followed by mass spectrometric analysis.
Digestion of amyloid fibrils formed from full-length N-acetylated WT SOD1 with trypsin, chymotrypsin, or Pronase revealed that the first 63 residues of the N terminus were protected from protease digestion by fibril formation.
Furthermore, every tested ALS-mutant SOD1 protein (G37R, L38V, G41D, G93A, G93S, and D101N) showed a similar protected fragment after trypsin digestion.
Our second approach to structural characterization used atomic force microscopy to image the SOD1 fibrils and revealed that WT and mutants showed similar twisted morphologies.
WT fibrils had a consistent average helical pitch distance of 62.1 nm.
The ALS-mutant SOD1 proteins L38V, G93A, and G93S formed fibrils with helical twist patterns very similar to those of WT, whereas small but significant structural deviations were observed for the mutant proteins G37R, G41D, and D101N.
Overall, our studies suggest that human WT SOD1 and ALS-mutants tested have a common intrinsic propensity to fibrillate through the N terminus and that single amino acid substitutions can lead to changes in the helical twist pattern.
PMID: 23333387
ALS-causing P56S mutation and splicing variation on the hVAPB MSP domain transform its β-sandwich fold into lipid-interacting helical conformations.
P56S mutation on VAPB MSP domain causes a familial ALS, characteristic of severe aggregation both in vivo and in vitro.
We previously showed that P56S rendered the MSP domain to be predominantly disordered in water.
Unexpectedly, here we reveal that P56S-MSP transforms into a highly helical conformation in a membrane environment.
This chameleon transformation is shared by a splicing variant VAPB-3 with a truncated MSP domain, which is also highly disordered and buffer insoluble as demonstrated here by NMR.
Our discovery provides a mechanism for ALS-causing VAPB mutants/variants to gain novel functions such as to mediate ER structure before significant accumulation of aggregates occurs.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23250913
mTOR dysfunction contributes to vacuolar pathology and weakness in valosin-containing protein associated inclusion body myopathy.
Autophagy is dysfunctional in many degenerative diseases including myopathies.
Mutations in valosin-containing protein (VCP) cause inclusion body myopathy (IBM) associated with Paget's disease of the bone, fronto-temporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (IBMPFD/ALS).
VCP is necessary for protein degradation via the proteasome and lysosome.
IBMPFD/ALS mutations in VCP disrupt autophagosome and endosome maturation resulting in vacuolation, weakness and muscle atrophy.
To understand the regulation of autophagy in VCP-IBM muscle, we examined the AKT/FOXO3 and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathways.
Basal Akt and FOXO3 phosphorylation was normal.
In contrast, the phosphorylation of mTOR targets was decreased.
Consistent with this, global protein translation was diminished and autophagosome biogenesis was increased in VCP-IBM muscle.
Further mTORC1 inhibition with rapamycin hastened weakness, atrophy and vacuolation in VCP-IBM mice.
This was accompanied by the accumulation of autophagic substrates such as p62, LC3II and ubiquitinated proteins.
The decrease in mTOR signaling was partially rescued by insulin and to a lesser extent by amino acid (AA) stimulation in VCP-IBM muscle.
Cells expressing catalytically inactive VCP or treated with a VCP inhibitor also failed to activate mTOR upon nutrient stimulation.
Expression of a constitutively active Rheb enhanced mTOR activity and increased the fiber size in VCP-IBM mouse skeletal muscle.
These studies suggest that VCP mutations may disrupt mTOR signaling and contribute to IBMPFD/ALS disease pathogenesis.
Treatment of some autophagic disorders with mTOR inhibitors such as rapamycin may worsen disease.
PMID: 23506891
The acetyl-CoA transporter family SLC33.
The acetyl-CoA (Ac-CoA) transporter, ACATN is a multiple (11 or 12) transmembrane protein in the endoplasmic reticulum.
Ac-CoA is transported into the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum/Golgi apparatus, where it serves as the substrate of acetyltransferases that modify a variety of molecules including the sialic acid residues of gangliosides and lysine residues of membrane proteins.
The ACATN gene, assigned as SLC33A1, was cloned from human melanoma cells and encodes the ACATN/ACATN1 (Acetyl-CoA Transporter 1) protein.
Although homologs of this family of proteins have been identified in lower organisms such as Escherichia coli, Drosophila melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans, only one member of this SLC33A1 family has been identified.
Although acetylated gangliosides are synthesized in the luminal Golgi membrane and show a highly tissue-specific distribution, ACATN1 is enriched in the ER membrane and is ubiquitously expressed.
Phylogenetically, the SLC33A1 gene is highly conserved, suggesting that it is particularly significant.
In fact, ACATN1 is essential for motor neuron viability.
SLC33A1 is associated with neurodegenerative disorders such as sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and Spastic Paraplegia 42, in the Chinese population.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22245675
VapB as a regulator of osteoclastogenesis via modulation of PLCγ2-Ca(2+)-NFAT signaling.
VapB has been shown to regulate calcium homeostasis in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Calcium signaling is also important in metabolic bone diseases, but the role of VapB in the generation of osteoclasts for bone resorption during osteoclastogenesis is not known.
Therefore, we investigated the role of VapB in RANKL-induced osteoclast differentiation.
Interestingly, VapB is induced during osteoclastogenesis, and regulates osteoclast differentiation by modulating NFATc1.
The results also suggest that VapB regulates osteoclastogenesis via PLCγ2-Ca(2+)-NFAT signaling.
The involvement of PLCγ2-Ca(2+)-NFAT signaling in VapB-regulated osteoclastogenesis was confirmed by a pharmacological study.
Taken together, the results indicate that VapB positively regulates RANKL-mediated osteoclastogenesis via PLCγ2-Ca(2+)-NFAT signaling.
Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.
Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23721573
Optineurin suppression causes neuronal cell death via NF-κB pathway.
Mutations in more than 10 genes are reported to cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Among these genes, optineurin (OPTN) is virtually the only gene that is considered to cause classical ALS by a loss-of-function mutation.
Wild-type optineurin (OPTN(WT) ) suppresses nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) activity, but the ALS-causing mutant OPTN is unable to suppress NF-κB activity.
Therefore, we knocked down OPTN in neuronal cells and examined the resulting NF-κB activity and phenotype.
First, we confirmed the loss of the endogenous OPTN expression after siRNA treatment and found that NF-κB activity was increased in OPTN-knockdown cells.
Next, we found that OPTN knockdown caused neuronal cell death.
Then, overexpression of OPTN(WT) or OPTN(E) (50K) with intact NF-κB-suppressive activity, but not overexpression of ALS-related OPTN mutants, suppressed the neuronal death induced by OPTN knockdown.
This neuronal cell death was inhibited by withaferin A, which selectively inhibits NF-κB activation.
Lastly, involvement of the mitochondrial proapoptotic pathway was suggested for neuronal death induced by OPTN knockdown.
Taken together, these results indicate that inappropriate NF-κB activation is the pathogenic mechanism underlying OPTN mutation-related ALS.
Among the genes for typical amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) phenotypes, optineurin (OPTN) is virtually the only gene in which a loss-of-function mutation is considered as the principal disease mechanism.
We found that OPTN knockdown induced neuronal cell death via NF-κB activation.
Furthermore, proapoptotic molecules such as p53 and Bax representing downstream targets of NF-κB are suggested to be involved in neuronal death.
© 2013 International Society for Neurochemistry.
PMID: 21808983
Emotional adjustment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Despite the devastating motor impairment, a significant number of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) maintain a good psychosocial adjustment.
Here we investigated whether this is specific for ALS or a more general characteristic of terminal disease.
Psychosocial adjustment was investigated in 30 ALS patients, 29 cancer patients in palliative treatment and 29 age-, gender- and level of education-matched healthy controls.
Subjective quality of life (sQoL), degree of depressive symptoms and coping were evaluated as measures of psychosocial adjustment.
Personality factors were described.
ALS and cancer patients showed a good psychosocial adjustment.
Subjective QoL and depression did not differ significantly.
Both patient groups presented a good sQoL.
The level of mild depressive symptoms in both patient groups was similar and none showed clinically relevant depression.
ALS patients expressed fewer active coping strategies than cancer patients which were explained by gender differences.
Both patient groups showed comparable psychosocial adjustment to their disease.
Overall, in terminally ill patients the psychological response to the prognosis is not associated with neurobiological changes (e.g., associated with subclinical deficits in ALS) or with physical decline.
PMID: 22870402
Comparison of parallel high-throughput RNA sequencing between knockout of TDP-43 and its overexpression reveals primarily nonreciprocal and nonoverlapping gene expression changes in the central nervous system of Drosophila.
The human Tar-DNA binding protein, TDP-43, is associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and other neurodegenerative disorders.
TDP-43 contains two conserved RNA-binding motifs and has documented roles in RNA metabolism, including pre-mRNA splicing and repression of transcription.
Here, using Drosophila melanogaster as a model, we generated loss-of-function and overexpression genotypes of Tar-DNA binding protein homolog (TBPH) to study their effect on the transcriptome of the central nervous system (CNS).
By using massively parallel sequencing methods (RNA-seq) to profile the CNS, we find that loss of TBPH results in widespread gene activation and altered splicing, much of which are reversed by rescue of TBPH expression.
Conversely, TBPH overexpression results in decreased gene expression.
Although previous studies implicated both absence and mis-expression of TDP-43 in ALS, our data exhibit little overlap in the gene expression between them, suggesting that the bulk of genes affected by TBPH loss-of-function and overexpression are different.
In combination with computational approaches to identify likely TBPH targets and orthologs of previously identified vertebrate TDP-43 targets, we provide a comprehensive analysis of enriched gene ontologies.
Our data suggest that TDP-43 plays a role in synaptic transmission, synaptic release, and endocytosis.
We also uncovered a potential novel regulation of the Wnt and BMP pathways, many of whose targets appear to be conserved.
PMID: 23413376
Neural progenitors derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells survive and differentiate upon transplantation into a rat model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) offer hope for personalized regenerative cell therapy in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
We analyzed the fate of human iPSC-derived neural progenitors transplanted into the spinal cord of wild-type and transgenic rats carrying a human mutated SOD1(G93A) gene.
The aim was to follow survival and differentiation of human neural progenitors until day 60 post-transplantation in two different in vivo environments, one being ALS-like. iPSC-derived neural progenitors efficiently engrafted in the adult spinal cord and survived at high numbers.
Different neural progenitor, astroglial, and neuronal markers indicated that, over time, the transplanted nestin-positive cells differentiated into cells displaying a neuronal phenotype in both wild-type and transgenic SOD1 rats.
Although a transient microglial phenotype was detected at day 15, astroglial staining was negative in engrafted cells from day 1 to day 60.
At day 30, differentiation toward a neuronal phenotype was identified, which was further established at day 60 by the expression of the neuronal marker MAP2.
A specification process into motoneuron-like structures was evidenced in the ventral horns in both wild-type and SOD1 rats.
Our results demonstrate proof-of-principle of survival and differentiation of human iPSC-derived neural progenitors in in vivo ALS environment, offering perspectives for the use of iPSC-based therapy in ALS.
PMID: 22919484
ALS and Frontotemporal Dysfunction: A Review.
Though once believed to be a disease that was limited to the motor system, it is now apparent that amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) may be associated with cognitive changes in some patients.
Changes are consistent with frontotemporal dysfunction, and may range from mild abnormalities only recognized with formal neuropsychological testing, to profound frontotemporal dementia (FTD).
Executive function, behavior, and language are the most likely areas to be involved.
Screening helpful in detecting abnormalities includes verbal or categorical fluency, behavioral inventories filled out by the caregiver, and evaluation for the presence of depression and pseudobulbar affect.
Patients with cognitive dysfunction have shortened survival and may be less compliant with recommendations regarding use of feeding tubes and noninvasive ventilation.
Evolving knowledge of genetic and pathological links between ALS and FTD has allowed us to better understand the overlapping spectrum of ALS and FTD.
PMID: 22256586
[Use of sugammadex in a patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis].
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a degenerative disease involving motor neurons.
The anesthetic problem is increased susceptibility to non-depolarizing muscle relaxants and the feasibility of spinal and epidural anesthesia.
An 86-year-old man with ALS underwent colostomy to the ileus.
We chose general anesthesia with propofol, remifentanil, rocuronium and sugammadex.
We administered 30 mg (0.52 mg . kg-1) of rocuronium only for induction.
TOF-count was 2 at the end of operation.
At spontaneous neuromuscular recovery to TOF-count 3, we administered sugammadex 2.1 mg . kg-1.
The patient emerged from general anesthesia smoothly, and was extubated.
Post-operative course was uneventful.
Our anesthetic management of ALS patient using sugammadex was successful.
Further evidence is required to establish appropriate use of sugammadex for ALS patients.
PMID: 21616601
The cortisol awakening response in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is blunted and correlates with clinical status and depressive mood.
Considerable evidence indicates that amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a progressive neurodegenerative disease of the motor system, has an enormous impact on the patient's emotional and physical well-being.
As previous findings indicated that particularly the rise in cortisol levels immediately after awakening, i.e., the cortisol awakening response (CAR), is associated with indices of physical and emotional well-being, we compared the CAR of 29 admitted ALS patients with that of 12 age-matched caregiver controls.
Saliva samples for cortisol measurement were collected immediately, 15, 30 and 45 min after awakening.
The severity of ALS progression was quantified using the ALS functional rating scale (ALSFRS) and manual muscle test (MMT).
Depressive mood status in ALS patients was determined with the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) and Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HDRS).
Salivary cortisol levels of ALS patients did not differ from those of caregiver controls at awakening, 15 min or 45 min after awakening, but were significantly lower at 30 min after awakening.
Area under the curve analysis confirmed that the CAR was significantly smaller in ALS patients than in caregiver controls.
A smaller CAR in ALS patients was significantly correlated to poorer clinical status, as assessed with both the ALSFRS and MMT rating instruments.
Further, a smaller CAR significantly correlated with a more severe depressive mood status.
No correlations were observed between total cortisol output during the first 45 min post-awakening and clinical or depressive status.
In conclusion, our findings indicate that ALS patients show a blunted CAR, correlated with disease and depression severity.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22919483
RNA-Binding Proteins in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Neurodegeneration.
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is an adult onset neurodegenerative disease, which is universally fatal.
While the causes of this devastating disease are poorly understood, recent advances have implicated RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) that contain predicted prion domains as a major culprit.
Specifically, mutations in the RBPs TDP-43 and FUS can cause ALS.
Cytoplasmic mislocalization and inclusion formation are common pathological features of TDP-43 and FUS proteinopathies.
Though these RBPs share striking pathological and structural similarities, considerable evidence suggests that the ALS-linked mutations in TDP-43 and FUS can cause disease by disparate mechanisms.
In a recent study, Couthouis et al. screened for protein candidates that were also involved in RNA processing, contained a predicted prion domain, shared other phenotypic similarities with TDP-43 and FUS, and identified TAF15 as a putative ALS gene.
Subsequent sequencing of ALS patients successfully identified ALS-linked mutations in TAF15 that were largely absent in control populations.
This study underscores the important role that perturbations in RNA metabolism might play in neurodegeneration, and it raises the possibility that future studies will identify other RBPs with critical roles in neurodegenerative disease.
PMID: 22919482
Neuromuscular junction protection for the potential treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neuromuscular disease characterized by the progressive degeneration of upper and lower motor neurons (MNs), leading to muscular atrophy and eventual respiratory failure.
ALS research has primarily focused on mechanisms regarding MN cell death; however, degenerative processes in the skeletal muscle, particularly involving neuromuscular junctions (NMJs), are observed in the early stages of and throughout disease progression.
According to the dying-back hypothesis, NMJ degeneration may not only precede, but actively cause upper and lower MN loss.
The importance of NMJ pathology has relatively received little attention in ALS, possibly because compensatory mechanisms mask NMJ loss for prolonged periods.
Many mechanisms explaining NMJ degeneration have been proposed such as the disruption of anterograde/retrograde axonal transport, irregular cellular metabolism, and changes in muscle gene and protein expression.
Neurotrophic factors, which are known to have neuroprotective and regenerative properties, have been intensely investigated for their therapeutic potential in both the preclinical and clinical setting.
Additional research should focus on the potential of preserving NMJs in order to delay or prevent disease progression.
PMID: 21904562
Effects of bee venom on glutamate-induced toxicity in neuronal and glial cells.
Bee venom (BV), which is extracted from honeybees, is used in traditional Korean medical therapy.
Several groups have demonstrated the anti-inflammatory effects of BV in osteoarthritis both in vivo and in vitro.
Glutamate is the predominant excitatory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system (CNS).
Changes in glutamate release and uptake due to alterations in the activity of glutamate transporters have been reported in many neurodegenerative diseases, including Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
To assess if BV can prevent glutamate-mediated neurotoxicity, we examined cell viability and signal transduction in glutamate-treated neuronal and microglial cells in the presence and absence of BV.
We induced glutamatergic toxicity in neuronal cells and microglial cells and found that BV protected against cell death.
Furthermore, BV significantly inhibited the cellular toxicity of glutamate, and pretreatment with BV altered MAP kinase activation (e.g., JNK, ERK, and p38) following exposure to glutamate.
These findings suggest that treatment with BV may be helpful in reducing glutamatergic cell toxicity in neurodegenerative diseases.
PMID: 23717136
Effects of Panax ginseng in Neurodegenerative Diseases.
Ginseng, the root of the Panax ginseng, has been a popular and widely-used traditional herbal medicine in Korea, China, and Japan for thousands of years.
Now it has become popular as a functional health food and is used globally as a natural medicine.
Evidence is accumulating in the literature on the physiological and pharmacological effects of P. ginseng on neurodegenerative diseases.
Possible ginseng- or ginsenosides-mediated neuroprotective mechanisms mainly involve maintaining homeostasis, and anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidant, anti-apoptotic, and immune-stimulatory activities.
This review considers publications dealing with the various actions of P. ginseng that are indicative of possible neurotherapeutic efficacies in neurodegenerative diseases and neurological disorders such as Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, Huntington's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and multiple sclerosis.
PMID: 22836461
Is magnetic resonance imaging a plausible biomarker for upper motor neuron degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/primary lateral sclerosis or merely a useful paraclinical tool to exclude mimic syndromes? A critical review of imaging applicability in clinical routine.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease that affects motor neurons in the cerebral cortex, brainstem, and spinal cord, brain regions in which conventional magnetic resonance imaging is often uninformative.
Although the mean time from symptom onset to diagnosis is estimated to be about one year, the current criteria only prescribe magnetic resonance imaging to exclude ALS mimic syndromes.
Extensive application of non-conventional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to the study of ALS has improved our understanding of the in vivo pathological mechanisms involved in the disease.
These modern imaging techniques have recently been added to the list of potential ALS biomarkers to aid in both diagnosis and monitoring of disease progression.
This article provides a comprehensive review of the clinical applicability of the neuroimaging progress that has been made over the past two decades towards establishing suitable diagnostic tools for upper motor neuron (UMN) degeneration in ALS.
PMID: 21883225
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-immunoglobulins selectively interact with neuromuscular junctions expressing P/Q-type calcium channels.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease characterized by a gradual loss of motoneurons.
The majority of ALS cases are associated with a sporadic form whose etiology is unknown.
Several pieces of evidence favor autoimmunity as a potential contributor to sporadic ALS pathology.
To gain understanding concerning possible antigens interacting with IgGs from sporadic ALS patients (ALS-IgGs), we studied immunoreactivity against neuromuscular junction (NMJ), spinal cord and cerebellum of mice with and without the Ca(V) 2.1 pore-forming subunit of the P/Q-type voltage-gated calcium (Ca(2+)) channel.
ALS-IgGs showed a strong reactivity against NMJs of wild-type diaphragms.
ALS-IgGs also increased muscle miniature end-plate potential frequency, suggesting a functional role for ALS-IgGs on synaptic signaling.
In support, in mice lacking the Ca(V) 2.1 subunit ALS-IgGs showed significantly reduced NMJ immunoreactivity and did not alter spontaneous acetylcholine release.
This difference in reactivity was absent when comparing N-type Ca(2+) channel wild-type or null mice.
These results are particularly relevant because motoneurons are known to be early pathogenic targets in ALS.
Our findings add further evidence supporting autoimmunity as one of the possible mechanisms contributing to ALS pathology.
They also suggest that serum autoantibodies in a subset of ALS patients would interact with NMJ proteins down-regulated when P/Q-type channels are absent.
© 2011 The Authors.
Journal of Neurochemistry © 2011 International Society for Neurochemistry.
PMID: 23333275
TDP-43 loss-of-function causes neuronal loss due to defective steroid receptor-mediated gene program switching in Drosophila.
TDP-43 proteinopathy is strongly implicated in the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and related neurodegenerative disorders.
Whether TDP-43 neurotoxicity is caused by a novel toxic gain-of-function mechanism of the aggregates or by a loss of its normal function is unknown.
We increased and decreased expression of TDP-43 (dTDP-43) in Drosophila.
Although upregulation of dTDP-43 induced neuronal ubiquitin and dTDP-43-positive inclusions, both up- and downregulated dTDP-43 resulted in selective apoptosis of bursicon neurons and highly similar transcriptome alterations at the pupal-adult transition.
Gene network analysis and genetic validation showed that both up- and downregulated dTDP-43 directly and dramatically increased the expression of the neuronal microtubule-associated protein Map205, resulting in cytoplasmic accumulations of the ecdysteroid receptor (EcR) and a failure to switch EcR-dependent gene programs from a pupal to adult pattern.
We propose that dTDP-43 neurotoxicity is caused by a loss of its normal function.
Copyright © 2013 The Authors.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23256855
Communication styles of persons with ALS as recounted by surviving partners.
The purpose of this study was to describe the communication patterns of individuals with Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) as reported from the surviving spouses' perspectives.
Six surviving spouses of people with ALS participated in semi-structured interviews after the deaths of their partners.
The interviews were transcribed and coded.
Data analysis revealed four primary themes: communication styles, augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) use, decision-making, and lifestyle changes.
Spouses described unique changes in communication styles as their partners began to use augmentative communication strategies and devices.
AAC devices were described as essential for individuals with ALS with respect to decision making and maintaining social roles.
Spouses stated the importance of adapting social activities in order to maintain involvement in the community as well as with family and friends.
PMID: 24052799
Clinical Characteristics of C9ORF72-Linked Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration.
The most common genetic cause of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) has been linked to a hexanucleotide repeat expansion in the C9ORF72 gene.
The frequency of the C9ORF72 expansion in Finland is among the highest in the world.
We assessed 73 Finnish patients with FTLD in order to examine the clinical characteristics associated with the expanded C9ORF72.
Demographic and clinical features were evaluated.
As a potential disease modifier, the apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotype was also assessed.
Neuropathological analysis was available on 2 expansion carriers and 1 non-carrier.
The C9ORF72 expansion was present in 20 of 70 (29%) probands.
Significant associations with the C9ORF72 expansion were observed for concomitant ALS and positive family history of dementia or ALS.
Psychoses were detected in both carriers and non-carriers (21 vs. 10%, p = 0.25).
The APOE ε4 allele did not cluster among expansion carriers.
Numerous p62-positive neuronal inclusions were detected in the cerebellar cortex of the 2 expansion carriers.
In line with the suggested C9ORF72 core phenotype, we also detected a high frequency of neuropsychiatric symptoms; however, these symptoms seem not be specific to C9ORF72-associated FTLD.
FTLD should be considered in cases of middle-age-onset psychosis.
PMID: 24052798
Imaging findings associated with cognitive performance in primary lateral sclerosis and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Executive dysfunction occurs in many patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), but it has not been well studied in primary lateral sclerosis (PLS).
The aims of this study were to (1) compare cognitive function in PLS to that in ALS patients, (2) explore the relationship between performance on specific cognitive tests and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) metrics of white matter tracts and gray matter volumes, and (3) compare DTI metrics in patients with and without cognitive and behavioral changes.
The Delis-Kaplan Executive Function System (D-KEFS), the Mattis Dementia Rating Scale (DRS-2), and other behavior and mood scales were administered to 25 ALS patients and 25 PLS patients.
Seventeen of the PLS patients, 13 of the ALS patients, and 17 healthy controls underwent structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and DTI.
Atlas-based analysis using MRI Studio software was used to measure fractional anisotropy, and axial and radial diffusivity of selected white matter tracts.
Voxel-based morphometry was used to assess gray matter volumes.
The relationship between diffusion properties of selected association and commissural white matter and performance on executive function and memory tests was explored using a linear regression model.
More ALS than PLS patients had abnormal scores on the DRS-2.
DRS-2 and D-KEFS scores were related to DTI metrics in several long association tracts and the callosum.
Reduced gray matter volumes in motor and perirolandic areas were not associated with cognitive scores.
The changes in diffusion metrics of white matter long association tracts suggest that the loss of integrity of the networks connecting fronto-temporal areas to parietal and occipital areas contributes to cognitive impairment.
PMID: 22536536
History, present, and progress of frontotemporal dementia in china: a systematic review.
We aim to provide an overview of clinical and demographical features and neuropathological research on frontotemporal dementia (FTD) from China over the past decade.
We reviewed the demographic features, clinical presentations, and neuropathology of the FTD-spectrum disorders from the 49 cases in China published since 1998.
On the basis of these findings, we retrospect the history and speculate on future progress in terms of FTD in China.
We found that most published papers comprise case reports with a few retrospective studies with small sample sizes.
Behavior variant FTD (bvFTD) was the most common diagnostic subtype, of which 35% were associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or Parkinsonian syndrome.
More than 47% patients with FTD had age onset before 65.
There were no differences in age of onset and sex distribution between diagnostic subtypes.
The spectrum of neuropathological diagnosis of bvFTD was frontotemporal lobe degeneration (FTLD) with tau protein or ubiquitin-immunopositive inclusions, and FTLD without intracellular inclusions.
Median survival in bvFTD was 14 years.
This paper provides an overview of the current status and pointers for future research directions of FTD in China.
PMID: 21774784
Mitochondria as possible pharmaceutical targets for the effects of vitamin E and its homologues in oxidative stress-related diseases.
It is well known that vitamin E functions as an antioxidant, and it is expected to exert an antioxidant effect when taken as a supplement.
However, a number of cohort studies have shown that vitamin E does not alleviate oxidative stress and could even worsen it.
Recently, Wang et al. investigated whether vitamin E intake was associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) based on data from 5 cohort studies with 1,055,546 participants, of which 805 of them had developed ALS.
They concluded in this large pooled prospective study, in which long-term vitamin E supplementation was associated with lower ALS rates, and therefore, a possible protective effect of vitamin E deserves further consideration.
Performing further large cohort studies may reveal similar findings for other oxidative stress-related diseases.
It is still controversial if antioxidants such as vitamin E provide a clinical therapeutic effect against oxidative stress-related diseases.
If effective, the dose at which they should be administered and the duration of supplement exposure should be of interest.
Vitamin E reduces production of reactive oxygen species by mitochondria and elicits further reactions in cells.
It should be noted that mitochondria are important targets for vitamin E and its homologues.
Therefore, a proper usage of vitamin E in subjects under high oxidative stress, due to its individually targeting property, will arise its importance in healthy life.
PMID: 22998474
Motor neuron disease and acquired axonal neuropathy association in HIV infection: case report and update.
A possible viral etiology has been documented in the genesis of motor neuron disorders and acquired peripheral neuropathies, mainly due to the vulnerability of peripheral nerves and the anterior horn to certain viruses.
In recent years, several reports show association of HIV infection with Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis - Syndrome, Motor Neuron Diseases and peripheral neuropathies.
To report a case of an association between Motor Neuron Disease and Acquired Axonal neuropathy in HIV infection, and describe the findings of neurological examination, cerebrospinal fluid, neuroimaging and electrophysiology.
Methods: The patient underwent neurological examination.
General medical examinations were performed, including, specific neuromuscular tests, analysis of cerebrospinal fluid, muscle biopsy and imaging studies.
The initial clinical presentation of our case was marked by cramps and fasciculations with posterior distal paresis and atrophy in the left arm.
We found electromyography tracings with deficits in the anterior horn of the spinal cord and peripheral nerves.
Dysphagia and release of primitive reflexes were also identified.
At the same time, the patient was informed to be HIV positive with high viral load.
He received antiretroviral therapy, with load control but with no clinical remission.
Motor Neuron disorders and peripheral neuropathy may occur in association with HIV infection.
However, a causal relationship remains uncertain.
It is noteworthy that the antiretroviral regimen may be implicated in some cases.
PMID: 21911035
On the development of markers for pathological TDP-43 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with and without dementia.
Pathological 43-kDa transactive response sequence DNA-binding protein (TDP-43) has been recognized as the major disease protein in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin positive, tau and α-synuclein negative inclusions (FTLD-U) and the transitional forms between these multisystem conditions.
In order to develop TDP-43 into a successful ALS biomarker, the natural history of TDP-43 pathology needs to be characterized and the underlying pathophysiology established.
Here we propose a spatial and temporal two-axes model of central nervous system vulnerability for TDP-43 linked degeneration and review recent studies on potential biomarkers related to pathological TDP-43 in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), blood, and skeletal muscle.
The model includes the following two arms: Firstly, a motor neuron disease or spinal cord/brainstem to motor cortex axis (with degeneration possibly ascending from the lower motor neurons to the upper motor neurons); and secondly, a dementia or corticoid/allocortex to neocortex axis (with a probable spread of TDP-43 linked degeneration from the mediotemporal lobe to wider mesocortical and neocortical brain areas).
At the cellular level, there is a gradual disappearance of normal TDP-43 in the nucleus in combination with the formation of pathological aggregates in the cell body and cellular processes, which can also be used to identify the stage of the disease process.
Moreover, TDP-43 lesions in subpial/subependymal or perivascular localizations have been noted, and this might account for increased CSF and blood TDP-43 levels through mechanisms that remain to be elucidated.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21549454
[SOD1-N196 mutation in a family with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis].
N19S mutation is produced by substitution in the 139 position of SOD1 and was described by Mayeux in a patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
He suggested that it did not have a causal effect as it was found in asymptomatic and sporadic cases.
Other authors in later articles did not agree.
We describe a family with 4 members with ALS patients and attempt to find the carrier of the N19S mutation of the propositus.
Molecular studies were performed on 15 members of the family of a different order.
The ALS cases were found in the maternal line of the propositus.
The presence of the mutation was detected in 3 people, the other two were asymptomatic.
One of patients with ALS in the family, who died previously, did not have the mutation.
Two of the sons of this case and another of the other case did not show it.
On the other hand, N19S mutation was only present in paternal branch of the propositus, where there were no cases.
The described family supports the hypothesis by Mayeux and against that mutation N19S has pathological consequences, since mutation is only in the family line where there are no cases with ALS.
In consequence, although the described case is included as a familiar form, it cannot be attributed to the mutation, and its relationship with N19S should be considered as casual.
Copyright Â© 2011 Sociedad Española de Neurología.
Published by Elsevier Espana.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23423380
The disease-associated r(GGGGCC)n repeat from the C9orf72 gene forms tract length-dependent uni- and multimolecular RNA G-quadruplex structures.
Certain DNA and RNA sequences can form G-quadruplexes, which can affect promoter activity, genetic instability, RNA splicing, translation, and neurite mRNA localization.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia were recently shown to be caused by expansion of a (GGGGCC)n·(GGCCCC)n repeat in the C9orf72 gene.
Mutant r(GGGGCC)n-containing transcripts aggregate in nuclear foci possibly sequestering repeat-binding proteins, suggesting a toxic RNA pathogenesis.
We demonstrate that the r(GGGGCC)n RNA but not the C-rich r(GGCCCC)n RNA forms extremely stable uni- and multimolecular parallel G-quadruplex structures (up to 95 °C).
Multimolecular G-quadruplex formation is influenced by repeat number and RNA concentration.
MBNL1, a splicing factor that is sequestered in myotonic dystrophy patients by binding to expanded r(CUG)n repeat hairpins, does not bind the C9orf72 repeats, but the splicing factor ASF/SF2 can bind the r(GGGGCC)n repeat.
Because multimolecular G-quadruplexes are enhanced by repeat length, RNA-RNA interactions facilitated by G-quadruplex formation at expanded repeats might influence transcript aggregation and foci formation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-frontotemporal dementia cells.
Tract length-dependent G-quadruplex formation by the C9orf72 RNA should be considered when assessing the role of this repeat in C9orf72 gene activity, protein binding, transcript foci formation, and translation of the C9orf72 product, including the noncanonical repeat-associated non-ATG translation (RAN translation) into pathologic dipeptide repeats, as well as any oligonucleotide repeat-based therapy.
PMID: 22492046
Reduced calreticulin levels link endoplasmic reticulum stress and Fas-triggered cell death in motoneurons vulnerable to ALS.
Cellular responses to protein misfolding are thought to play key roles in triggering neurodegeneration.
In the mutant superoxide dismutase (mSOD1) model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), subsets of motoneurons are selectively vulnerable to degeneration.
Fast fatigable motoneurons selectively activate an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response that drives their early degeneration while a subset of mSOD1 motoneurons show exacerbated sensitivity to activation of the motoneuron-specific Fas/NO pathway.
However, the links between the two mechanisms and the molecular basis of their cellular specificity remained unclear.
We show that Fas activation leads, specifically in mSOD1 motoneurons, to reductions in levels of calreticulin (CRT), a calcium-binding ER chaperone.
Decreased expression of CRT is both necessary and sufficient to trigger SOD1(G93A) motoneuron death through the Fas/NO pathway.
In SOD1(G93A) mice in vivo, reductions in CRT precede muscle denervation and are restricted to vulnerable motor pools.
In vitro, both reduced CRT and Fas activation trigger an ER stress response that is restricted to, and required for death of, vulnerable SOD1(G93A) motoneurons.
Our data reveal CRT as a critical link between a motoneuron-specific death pathway and the ER stress response and point to a role of CRT levels in modulating motoneuron vulnerability to ALS.
PMID: 23251123
A model for humanization in critical care.
We present a case in which narrative medicine was used to assist a patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis who was dependent on mechanical ventilation and prolonged hospitalization.
Implementing narrative medicine led to the development of more effective communication that strengthened the therapeutic relationship, enhanced humane care practices, and resulted in greater physical and psychological comfort for the patient.
Narrative medicine is a discipline that has been progressively incorporated into medical training to restore a humane and individual physician-patient relationship.
The patient is viewed, not merely as a case to diagnose, but as a person with a story that evokes emotions in those who assist him or her.
In fact, narrative medicine can be understood as a model of medical practice based on narrative competence, ie, the ability to acknowledge, to absorb, to interpret, and to respond to a person's story.
It strengthens empathy, rescues patient individuality, and facilitates solutions to conflicts in complex settings, such as critical care units, where clinicians are constantly exposed to existential issues, both moral and ethical.
PMID: 23197716
Drosophila Vap-33 is required for axonal localization of Dscam isoforms.
Mutations in VAPB have been identified in a familial form of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and reduced VAPB levels have been found in patients with sporadic ALS.
Vap protein family members from different species and cell types have been implicated in a number of cellular functions, but how Vap dysfunction in neurons and/or muscles contributes to motor neuron degeneration and death is poorly understood.
Using Drosophila as a model organism, we show that Vap physically interacts with and affects the axonal functions of the Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule (Dscam).
Dscam is a cell-surface receptor involved in axon and dendritic patterning and neuron self-recognition and avoidance.
Alternative splicing of the Dscam transcript leads to the production of Dscam isoforms that contain one of two possible transmembrane (TM) domain and flanking sequences that either restrict the isoform to dendrites and cell bodies (TM1) or target the isoform to axon processes (TM2).
We find that Vap specifically interacts with Dscam isoforms that contain the TM2 cytoplasmic juxtamembrane flanking sequences.
Using loss-of-function genetics, we further show that Vap is required for localization of Dscam isoforms containing TM2 to axons and that Vap loss suppresses Dscam gain-of-function axon phenotypes.
We propose that Vap function is required in neurons to selectively traffic proteins to axons, and disruption of this function may contribute to the pathology of ALS.
PMID: 21813820
A qualitative study of interference with communicative participation across communication disorders in adults.
To explore the similarities and differences in self-reported restrictions in communicative participation across different communication disorders in community-dwelling adults.
Interviews were conducted with 44 adults representing 7 different medical conditions: spasmodic dysphonia, multiple sclerosis, stroke, stuttering, Parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and laryngectomy.
This article represents a secondary analysis of qualitative data collected in cognitive interviews during development of the Communicative Participation Item Bank.
The data were analyzed to identify themes in participants' experiences related to communicative participation.
Participants described many situations in which they experienced interference in communicative participation.
Two themes emerged from the data.
The first theme was Interference is both functional and emotional, in which participants defined interference as limitations in accomplishing tasks and emotional consequences.
The second theme was It depends-sources of interference, in which participants described many variables that contribute to interference in participation.
Participants had limited control of some variables such as symptoms and environmental contexts, but personal decisions and priorities also influenced participation.
Despite different impairments and activity limitations, participants described similar communicative participation restrictions.
These similarities may have theoretical and clinical implications in terms of how we assess, treat, and study the participation restrictions associated with communication disorders.
PMID: 21573992
Defective protein folding and aggregation as the basis of neurodegenerative diseases: the darker aspect of proteins.
The ability of a polypeptide to fold into a unique, functional, and three-dimensional structure depends on the intrinsic properties of the amino acid sequence, function of the molecular chaperones, proteins, and enzymes.
Every polypeptide has a finite tendency to misfold and this forms the darker side of the protein world.
Partially folded and misfolded proteins that escape the cellular quality control mechanism have the high tendency to form inter-molecular hydrogen bonding between the same protein molecules resulting in aggregation.
This review summarizes the underlying and universal mechanism of protein folding.
It also deals with the factors responsible for protein misfolding and aggregation.
This article describes some of the consequences of such behavior particularly in the context of neurodegenerative conformational diseases such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, Huntington's, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and other non-neurodegenerative conformational diseases such as cancer and cystic fibrosis etc.
This will encourage a more proactive approach to the early diagnosis of conformational diseases and nutritional counseling for patients.
PMID: 21396632
The anatomy of cognitive impairment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: more than frontal lobe dysfunction.
Cognitive and behavioural impairments accompanying amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) have been reported since the early 20th century.
Typically, these changes can be associated with a dysexecutive syndrome or manifest as a frontotemporal dementia (FTD).
Although the nature of specific frontotemporal dysfunction in ALS remains to be refined, as with the clinical presentation, there is likely to be significant heterogeneity.
This article will review the current state of knowledge regarding the neuropathological and neuroanatomical basis for cognitive dysfunction in ALS.
Neuropathological findings suggest that ALS does not selectively affect the frontotemporal network but rather is part of a broad clinico-pathological spectrum now known as TAR-DNA binding protein (TDP)-43 proteinopathies.
Functional neuroimaging has supported neuropsychological findings of frontotemporal dysfunction but has also implied the involvement of somatosensory areas.
Structural neuroimaging has not been able to establish a specific hypothesis of extra-motor cortical atrophy beyond the combination of various frontal, temporal and limbic areas.
The finding of reduction in the integrity of white matter in the frontal, temporal and parietal lobes including long association fibers suggests that subcortical involvement may underlie both cognitive and functional changes in ALS.
Future perspectives for further investigations are highlighted.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Srl.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23325230
Glucocorticoids exacerbate cognitive deficits in TDP-25 transgenic mice via a glutathione-mediated mechanism: implications for aging, stress and TDP-43 proteinopathies.
The accumulation of TDP-43 (transactive response DNA-binding protein 43) and its 25 kDa C-terminal fragment (TDP-25) is a hallmark of several neurodegenerative disorders, including frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD-TDP) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
The majority of FTLD-TDP cases are due to loss of function mutations in the gene encoding progranulin, a secreted growth factor.
In ALS, specific mutations in the gene encoding TDP-43 have been linked to the disease pathogenesis.
In both cases, however, the penetrance of the mutations greatly increases during aging, suggesting that other genetic or environmental factors may facilitate the development of the disease.
Using transgenic mice that overexpress the 25 kDa C-terminal fragment of TDP-43, here we show that glucocorticoids, stress hormones known to increase the brain susceptibility to neurotoxic insults, increase the levels of soluble TDP-25 and exacerbate cognitive deficits, without altering full-length TDP-43 levels.
Additionally, we show that the mechanism underlying the glucocorticoid-mediated increase in TDP-25 levels is coupled to changes in the glutathione redox state.
Glutathione is an antioxidant involved in protecting cells from damage caused by reactive oxygen species; notably, alterations in the ratio of reduced to oxidized glutathione, which is the primary determinant of the cellular redox state, are associated with aging and neurodegeneration.
We show that restoring the ratio of reduced to oxidized glutathione blocks the glucocorticoid effects on TDP-25.
These data show that glucocorticoids potentiate the neurotoxic action of TDP-25 by increasing its levels and clearly indicate the role of cellular oxidative damage in this process.
PMID: 21740229
Cyclin-dependent kinases in brain development and disease.
Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5) is a multifaceted serine/threonine kinase protein with important roles in the nervous system.
Two related proteins, p35 and p39, activate Cdk5 upon direct binding.
Over the past decade, Cdk5 activity has been demonstrated to regulate many events during brain development, including neuronal migration as well as axon and dendrite development.
Recent evidence also suggests a pivotal role for Cdk5 in synaptic plasticity, behavior, and cognition.
Dysfunction of Cdk5 has been implicated in a number of neurological disorders and neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Niemann-Pick type C disease, and ischemia.
Hyperactivation of Cdk5 due to the conversion of p35 to p25 by the calcium-dependent protease calpain during neurotoxicity also contributes to the pathological state.
This review surveys recent literature surrounding Cdk5 in synaptic plasticity and homeostasis, with particular emphasis on Cdk5 kinase activity under neurodegenerative conditions.
PMID: 21905193
Delineation of the core aggregation sequences of TDP-43 C-terminal fragment.
Ubiquitinated cytoplasmic inclusions of TDP-43 and its C-terminal cleavage products are the pathological hallmarks of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitinated inclusions.
The C-terminal fragments (CTFs) of TDP-43 are increasingly considered to play an important role in its aggregation and in disease.
Here, we employed a set of synthetic peptides spanning the length of the TDP-43 CTF (220-414) in order to find out its core aggregation domains.
Two regions, one in the RRM-2 domain (246-255) and the other in the C-terminal domain (311-320) of TDP-43, stand out as highly aggregation prone.
Studies done on recombinant purified TDP-43 CTF and its three mutants, in which these sequences were deleted individually and together, suggested that the 311-320 region has a more crucial role to play than the 246-255 in its aggregation.
The study helps in defining specific peptide sequences that might form the core of TDP-43 aggregation.
Identification of these sequences could help in designing peptide based inhibitors of TDP-43 aggregation.
Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH &amp; Co.
KGaA, Weinheim.
PMID: 23000195
Resveratrol upregulated heat shock proteins and extended the survival of G93A-SOD1 mice.
In the present study, we investigated whether resveratrol, a SIRT1 activator, can suppress the motor neuron degeneration in a transgenic mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Chronic intraperitoneal injection of resveratrol delayed the disease onset and extended survival of the transgenic mice overexpressing G93A-SOD1.
The number of surviving motor neurons increased in the resveratrol-injected G93A mice.
Importantly, the levels of Hsp25 and Hsp70 were elevated while the level of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) acetylation decreased in the spinal cords of the resveratrol-injected G93A mice.
Our data suggest that resveratrol may protect motor neurons from the mutant SOD1-induced neurotoxicity by promoting SIRT1-mediated deacetylation of HSF1 and subsequent upregulation of Hsps.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21943034
Rapidly fatal neuropathies and an ALS clinical presentation.
OBJECTIVES - The objective of this report is to describe patients with an unusually severe, rapidly fatal acquired polyneuropathy.
METHODS - The clinical, electrodiagnostic (EDX), laboratory, and pathological findings in three patients with a distinctive form of neuropathic illness are discussed.
RESULTS - Three patients, ages 67, 54, and 50, had clinical findings that met accepted clinical criteria for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) - definite in two and probable in one.
The EDX studies in these patients had abnormalities that would be highly atypical for ALS.
There were features consistent with an asymmetrical, non-length-dependent process as well findings consistent with demyelination - features consistent with a chronic acquired polyneuropathy.
All patients had a rapidly progressive course with death because of respiratory failure in 4-30 months.
The patients did not respond to immunomodulating therapies.
Extensive evaluations in these patients did not reveal a cause for the patients' neuropathies.
Postmortem examination in two of the patients did not reveal evidence for ALS.
In one of these patients, there were pathological findings thought possibly consistent with an immunologically mediated process.
CONCLUSION - This report emphasizes the importance of considering other diagnoses in patients who clinically appear to have ALS and raise the specter of an as of yet poorly understood, severe neuropathic illness.
© 2011 John Wiley &amp; Sons A/S.
PMID: 22323604
TDP-43 promotes microRNA biogenesis as a component of the Drosha and Dicer complexes.
Although aberrant microRNA (miRNA) expression is linked to human diseases including cancer, the mechanisms that regulate the expression of each individual miRNA remain largely unknown.
TAR DNA-binding protein-43 (TDP-43) is homologous to the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNPs), which are involved in RNA processing, and its abnormal cellular distribution is a key feature of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), two neurodegenerative diseases.
Here, we show that TDP-43 facilitates the production of a subset of precursor miRNAs (pre-miRNAs) by both interacting with the nuclear Drosha complex and binding directly to the relevant primary miRNAs (pri-miRNAs).
Furthermore, cytoplasmic TDP-43, which interacts with the Dicer complex, promotes the processing of some of these pre-miRNAs via binding to their terminal loops.
Finally, we show that involvement of TDP-43 in miRNA biogenesis is indispensable for neuronal outgrowth.
These results support a previously uncharacterized role for TDP-43 in posttranscriptional regulation of miRNA expression in both the nucleus and the cytoplasm.
PMID: 23825416
A multilevel screening strategy defines a molecular fingerprint of proregenerative olfactory ensheathing cells and identifies SCARB2, a protein that improves regenerative sprouting of injured sensory spinal axons.
Olfactory ensheathing cells (OECs) have neuro-restorative properties in animal models for spinal cord injury, stroke, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Here we used a multistep screening approach to discover genes specifically contributing to the regeneration-promoting properties of OECs.
Microarray screening of the injured olfactory pathway and of cultured OECs identified 102 genes that were subsequently functionally characterized in cocultures of OECs and primary dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons.
Selective siRNA-mediated knockdown of 16 genes in OECs (ADAMTS1, BM385941, FZD1, GFRA1, LEPRE1, NCAM1, NID2, NRP1, MSLN, RND1, S100A9, SCARB2, SERPINI1, SERPINF1, TGFB2, and VAV1) significantly reduced outgrowth of cocultured DRG neurons, indicating that endogenous expression of these genes in OECs supports neurite extension of DRG neurons.
In a gain-of-function screen for 18 genes, six (CX3CL1, FZD1, LEPRE1, S100A9, SCARB2, and SERPINI1) enhanced and one (TIMP2) inhibited neurite growth.
The most potent hit in both the loss- and gain-of-function screens was SCARB2, a protein that promotes cholesterol secretion.
Transplants of fibroblasts that were genetically modified to overexpress SCARB2 significantly increased the number of regenerating DRG axons that grew toward the center of a spinal cord lesion in rats.
We conclude that expression of SCARB2 enhances regenerative sprouting and that SCARB2 contributes to OEC-mediated neuronal repair.
PMID: 21818775
A test of Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in structured populations.
Testing for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) is used routinely as an important initial step for genotype data quality checking.
Departure from HWE can be caused by many factors, such as genotyping errors, population stratification, and disease association, if we use affected individuals only.
In a structured population, even if a marker is in HWE in each subpopulation, data may show departure from HWE if allele frequencies are different in different subpopulations and such a departure can be misinterpreted as a potential problem in genotyping quality, resulting in false exclusion from future analysis.
In this article, we propose a new HWE test, a test for HWE in structured populations (HWES) that can assess departure from HWE and take into account of population stratification at the same time.
Our proposed test can distinguish departure from HWE caused by population stratification and departure from HWE caused by other factors.
We use simulation studies as well as applications to real data sets to evaluate the performance of the proposed test.
Results show that, for a wide range of population structures, our proposed test has correct type I error rates while the traditional χ(2) test will lead to false-positive results.
In homogenous populations, our proposed test has comparable power with the traditional χ(2) test.
© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22117694
Paradoxical roles of serine racemase and D-serine in the G93A mSOD1 mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
D-serine is an endogenous neurotransmitter that binds to the NMDA receptor, thereby increasing the affinity for glutamate, and the potential for excitotoxicity.
The primary source of D-serine in vivo is enzymatic racemization by serine racemase (SR).
Regulation of D-serine in vivo is poorly understood, but is thought to involve a combination of controlled production, synaptic reuptake by transporters, and intracellular degradation by D-amino acid oxidase (DAO).
However, SR itself possesses a well-characterized eliminase activity, which effectively degrades D-serine as well.
D-serine is increased two-fold in spinal cords of G93A Cu,Zn-superoxide dismutase (SOD1) mice--the standard model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
ALS mice with SR disruption show earlier symptom onset, but survive longer (progression phase is slowed), in an SR-dependent manner.
Paradoxically, administration of D-serine to ALS mice dramatically lowers cord levels of D-serine, leading to changes in the onset and survival very similar to SR deletion.
D-serine treatment also increases cord levels of the alanine-serine-cysteine transporter 1 (Asc-1).
Although the mechanism by which SOD1 mutations increases D-serine is not known, these results strongly suggest that SR and D-serine are fundamentally involved in both the pre-symptomatic and progression phases of disease, and offer a direct link between mutant SOD1 and a glial-derived toxic mediator.
© 2011 The Authors.
Journal of Neurochemistry © 2011 International Society for Neurochemistry.
PMID: 23168171
ZNF512B gene is a prognostic factor in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Recently, Iida et al. discovered a new single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the ZNF512B gene associated with susceptibility to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
The ZNF512B gene was found to be a transcription factor promoting the expression of a downstream gene in the signal transduction pathway of the transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), which is essential for the protection and survival of neurons but the influence of the new SNP (rs2275294) in actual ALS patients remained unknown.
The objective of our study was to examine whether the new SNP in the ZNF512B gene might influence the phenotype of ALS.
We conducted a retrospective analysis of the ZNF512B gene in 176 patients diagnosed as having ALS at our hospital.
Evaluation of the prognosis after the onset using Kaplan-Meier survival curves in patients with versus without the risk allele (C allele: CC and CT genotypes) revealed a significantly lower survival probability in those with the risk allele (log-rank test, P&lt;0.01), independent of the other prognostic factors in ALS.
Our study revealed the influence of the new SNP in actual ALS patients.
It would be clinically reasonable to suggest that the ZNF512B gene is a new prognostic factor in ALS.
This study is the first, as per our knowledge, to indicate that the association between the new susceptibility gene for ALS and its pathway could be identified.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22023158
Diaphragm pacing improves sleep in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients, respiratory insufficiency is a major burden.
Diaphragm conditioning by electrical stimulation could interfere with lung function decline by promoting the development of type 1 muscle fibres.
We describe an ancillary study to a prospective, non-randomized trial (NCT00420719) assessing the effects of diaphragm pacing on forced vital capacity (FVC).
Sleep-related disturbances being early clues to diaphragmatic dysfunction, we postulated that they would provide a sensitive marker.
Stimulators were implanted laparoscopically in the diaphragm close to the phrenic motor point in 18 ALS patients for daily conditioning.
ALS functioning score (ALSFRS), FVC, sniff nasal inspiratory pressure (SNIP), and polysomnographic recordings (PSG, performed with the stimulator turned off) were assessed before implantation and after four months of conditioning (n = 14).
Sleep efficiency improved (69 ± 15% to 75 ± 11%, p = 0.0394) with fewer arousals and micro-arousals.
This occurred against a background of deterioration as ALSFRS-R, FVC, and SNIP declined.
There was, however, no change in NIV status or the ALSFRS respiratory subscore, and the FVC decline was mostly due to impaired expiration.
Supporting a better diaphragm function, apnoeas and hypopnoeas during REM sleep decreased.
In conclusion, in these severe patients not expected to experience spontaneous improvements, diaphragm conditioning improved sleep and there were hints at diaphragm function changes.
PMID: 21964848
Nervous system lyme disease: is there a controversy?
Infection with the tick-borne spirochete,  BORRELIA BURGDORFERI, affects the nervous system in well-defined ways.
Accurate diagnostic tools and effective therapeutic regimens are now well established.
Persistent misconceptions about (1) the role and interpretation of laboratory tests, (2) what is and is not evidence of nervous system infection, and (3) what constitutes an expected response to treatment have fostered widespread perceptions that this disease is highly controversial.
Infection causes the classically described triad of meningitis, radiculoneuritis, and cranial neuritis; however, virtually every known neurologic disorder has been blamed on this infection.
For most (multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease), evidence is scant, nonexistent, or coincidental.
For some (cerebral vasculitis with stroke, optic neuritis) a few case reports suggest a rare possible causal link.
© Thieme Medical Publishers.
PMID: 23634771
Profilin-1 mutations are rare in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia.
Mutations in profilin-1 (PFN1) have recently been identified in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Because of the considerable overlap between ALS and the common subtype of frontotemporal dementia, which is characterized by transactive response DNA-binding protein 43 pathology (FTLD-TDP), we tested cohorts of ALS and FTLD-TDP patients for PFN1 mutations.
DNA was obtained from 342 ALS patients and 141 FTLD-TDP patients at our outpatient clinic and brain bank for neurodegenerative diseases at the Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, USA.
We screened these patients for mutations in coding regions of PFN1 by Sanger sequencing.
Subsequently, we used TaqMan genotyping assays to investigate the identified variant in 1167 control subjects.
From the results, one variant, p.E117G, was detected in one ALS patient, one FTLD-TDP patient, and two control subjects.
The mutation frequency of patients versus control subjects was not significantly different (p-value = 0.36).
Moreover, PFN1 and TDP-43 staining of autopsy material did not differ between patients with or without this variant.
In conclusion, the p.E117G variant appears to represent a benign polymorphism.
PFN1 mutations, in general, are rare in ALS and FTLD-TDP patients.
PMID: 22124781
Pathobiochemical effect of acylated steryl-β-glucoside on aggregation and cytotoxicity of α-synuclein.
Cycad seed consumption by the native islanders of Guam is frequently associated with high rates of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-parkinsonism dementia complex (ALS/PDC); furthermore, accompanying pathological examination often exhibits α-synuclein inclusions in the neurons of the affected brain.
Acylated steryl-β-glucoside (ASG) contained in cycad seeds is considered as causative environmental risk factor.
We aimed to investigate whether ASG influences aggregation and cell toxicity of α-synuclein.
To understand whether ASG is a causative factor in the development of ALS/PDC, soybean-derived ASG was tested for its effect on in vitro aggregation of α-synuclein using Thioflavin-T.
ASG was also tested to determine whether it modulates α-synuclein cytotoxicity in yeast cells.
In addition, we determined whether an interaction between ASG and α-synuclein occurs in the plasma membrane or cytoplasm using three factors: GM1 ganglioside, small unilamellar vesicles, and ATP.
In the present study, we found that ASG-mediated acceleration of α-synuclein aggregation is influenced by the presence of ATP, but not by the presence of GM1.
ASG accelerated the α-synuclein aggregation in the cytoplasm.
ASG also enhanced α-synuclein-induced cytotoxicity in yeast cells.
This study demonstrated that ASG directly enhances aggregation and cytotoxicity of α-synuclein, which are often observed in patients with ALS/PDC.
These results, using assays that replicate cytoplasmic conditions, are consistent with the molecular mechanism that cytotoxicity is caused by intracellular α-synuclein fibril formation in neuronal cells.
PMID: 23201762
Dysregulation of glutathione homeostasis in neurodegenerative diseases.
Dysregulation of glutathione homeostasis and alterations in glutathione-dependent enzyme activities are increasingly implicated in the induction and progression of neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and Huntington's diseases, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and Friedreich's ataxia.
In this review background is provided on the steady-state synthesis, regulation, and transport of glutathione, with primary focus on the brain.
A brief overview is presented on the distinct but vital roles of glutathione in cellular maintenance and survival, and on the functions of key glutathione-dependent enzymes.
Major contributors to initiation and progression of neurodegenerative diseases are considered, including oxidative stress, protein misfolding, and protein aggregation.
In each case examples of key regulatory mechanisms are identified that are sensitive to changes in glutathione redox status and/or in the activities of glutathione-dependent enzymes.
Mechanisms of dysregulation of glutathione and/or glutathione-dependent enzymes are discussed that are implicated in pathogenesis of each neurodegenerative disease.
Limitations in information or interpretation are identified, and possible avenues for further research are described with an aim to elucidating novel targets for therapeutic interventions.
The pros and cons of administration of N-acetylcysteine or glutathione as therapeutic agents for neurodegenerative diseases, as well as the potential utility of serum glutathione as a biomarker, are critically evaluated.
PMID: 22521461
AAV2 mediated retrograde transduction of corticospinal motor neurons reveals initial and selective apical dendrite degeneration in ALS.
Corticospinal motor neurons (CSMN) are the cortical component of motor neuron circuitry, which controls voluntary movement and degenerates in diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, primary lateral sclerosis and hereditary spastic paraplegia.
By using dual labeling combined with molecular marker analysis, we identified AAV2-2 mediated retrograde transduction as an effective approach to selectively target CSMN without affecting other neuron populations both in wild-type and hSOD1(G93A) transgenic ALS mice.
This approach reveals very precise details of cytoarchitectural defects within vulnerable neurons in vivo.
We report that CSMN vulnerability is marked by selective degeneration of apical dendrites especially in layer II/III of the hSOD1(G93A) mouse motor cortex, where cortical input to CSMN function is vastly modulated.
While our findings confirm the presence of astrogliosis and microglia activation, they do not lend support to their direct role for the initiation of CSMN vulnerability.
This study enables development of targeted gene replacement strategies to CSMN in the cerebral cortex, and reveals CSMN cortical modulation defects as a potential cause of neuronal vulnerability in ALS.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22521463
Selective increase of two ABC drug efflux transporters at the blood-spinal cord barrier suggests induced pharmacoresistance in ALS.
ATP-binding cassette (ABC) drug efflux transporters in the CNS are predominantly localized to the luminal surface of endothelial cells in capillaries to impede CNS accumulation of xenobiotics.
Inflammatory mediators and cellular stressors regulate their activity.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disease of upper and lower motor neurons characterized by extensive neuroinflammation.
Here we tested the hypothesis that disease-driven changes in ABC transporter expression and function occur in ALS.
Given the multitude of ABC transporters with their widespread substrate recognition, we began by examining expression levels of several ABC transporters.
We found a selective increase in only two transporters: P-glycoprotein (P-gp) and breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) both at mRNA and protein levels, in the SOD1-G93A mouse model of ALS, specifically in disease-affected CNS regions.
Detailed analysis revealed a similar disease-driven increase in P-gp and BCRP levels in spinal cord microvessels, indicating that their altered expression occurs at the blood spinal cord barrier.
Transport activity of P-gp and BCRP increased with disease progression in spinal cord and cerebral cortex capillaries.
Finally, P-gp and BCRP protein expression also increased in spinal cords of ALS patients.
Preclinical drug trials in the mouse model of ALS have failed to decisively slow or arrest disease progression; pharmacoresistance imparted by ABC transporters is one possible explanation for these failures.
Our observations have large implications for ALS therapeutics in humans and suggest that the obstacle provided by these transporters to drug treatments must be overcome to develop effective ALS pharmacotherapies.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23819039
Factors Affecting Aggregate Formation in Cell Models of Huntington's Disease and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
Most neurodegenerative pathologies stem from the formation of aggregates of mutant proteins, causing dysfunction and ultimately neuronal death.
This study was aimed at elucidating the role of the protein factors that promote aggregate formation or prevent the process, respectively, glyceraldehyde-3-dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and tissue transglutaminase (tTG) and Hsp70 molecular chaperone.
The siRNA technology was used to show that the inhibition of GAPDH expression leads to a 45-50% reduction in the aggregation of mutant huntingtin, with a repeat of 103 glutamine residues in a model of Huntington's disease (HD).
Similarly, the blockage of GAPDH synthesis was found for the first time to reduce the degree of aggregation of mutant superoxide dismutase 1 (G93A) in a model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
The treatment of cells that imitate HD and ALS with a pharmacological GAPDH inhibitor, hydroxynonenal, was also shown to reduce the amount of the aggregating material in both disease models.
Tissue transglutaminase is another factor that promotes the aggregation of mutant proteins; the inhibition of its activity with cystamine was found to prevent aggregate formation of mutant huntingtin and SOD1.
In order to explore the protective function of Hsp70 in the control of the aggregation of mutant huntingtin, a cell model with inducible expression of the chaperone was used.
The amount and size of polyglutamine aggregates were reduced by increasing the intracellular content of Hsp70.
Thus, pharmacological regulation of the function of three proteins, GAPDH, tTG, and Hsp70, can affect the pathogenesis of two significant neurodegenerative diseases.
PMID: 21516465
Preceding infections and anti-ganglioside antibody profiles assessed by a dot immunoassay in 306 French Guillain-Barré syndrome patients.
We describe by an in-house dot immunoassay, specific anti-ganglioside and sulfatide antibodies, by comparing the results from a large group of 134 infected French GBS patients and those from 172 noninfected French GBS and 142 control groups.
A recent infection was identified in 134/306 (43.8%) GBS patients: Campylobacter jejuni (24.6%) was the most common agent, followed by cytomegalovirus (12.4%), Mycoplasma pneumoniae (3.2%) and Epstein-Barr virus (1.3%).
Anti-ganglioside antibodies were detected in 97/306 (31.7%) of total GBS patients, 82/134 (61.2%) of GBS patients with a recent identified infection and 15/172 (8.7%) of the patients without identified infection.
According to the specificities and antibody classes, four specific IgG antibody profiles were individualised against the two major GM1 and GD1a gangliosides in motor axonal C. jejuni-associated GBS variants, against GQ1b and disialylated gangliosides in Miller Fisher syndrome and its variants.
One specific IgM profile against GM2 was found in 16/38 (42%) of severe sensory demyelinating CMV-associated GBS and in 8/17 (47%) of subjects with recent CMV infection with no neurological disease.
IgG or IgM antibodies to GM1 were found in 5/10 M. pneumoniae-infected patients.
IgM antibodies to GM1 were observed in the control groups, 15% of the 74 patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 19% of the 51 patients with chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy, and 9% of the 21 healthy control subjects.
The fine specificity of the four IgG antibody profiles and the IgM anti-GM2 profile is closely related to the nature of the preceding infections and the pattern of clinical features.
PMID: 22122965
Intraspinal injection of human umbilical cord blood-derived cells is neuroprotective in a transgenic mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is characterized by progressive degeneration of motor neurons in the spinal cord, brain stem and motor cortex and has only marginal therapeutic options.
Adult stem cells have recently come into the focus of neurological research.
While replacement of motor neurons by stem cells currently appears not feasible, there is evidence that non-neuronal cells can be neuroprotective.
Therefore, we evaluated the effects of direct intraspinal administration of human umbilical cord blood cells in a G93A transgenic mouse model of ALS before (day 40) and after symptom onset (day 90).
Treatment effects were assessed by survival analysis, behavioral tests, histological and biochemical analyses.
Treatment at early stages increased survival, led to significant improvements in motor performance and significantly reduced motor neuron loss and astrogliosis in the spinal cord.
Interestingly females tended to respond better to treatment than males.
This study confirms the neuroprotective potential of human umbilical cord blood cells and encourages further investigations.
Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.
PMID: 22450425
Mitochondrial complex I deficiency and ATP/ADP ratio in lymphocytes of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients.
Several lines of evidence suggest that mitochondrial dysfunction is involved in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), but despite the fact that mitochondria play a central role in excitotoxicity, oxidative stress, and apoptosis, the intimate underlying  mechanism linking mitochondrial defects to motor neuron degeneration in ALS still remains elusive.
This study was performed to assess the mitochondrial respiratory chain dysfunction and cellular energy index (ATP/ADP ratio) in lymphocytes of ALS patients.
In this study,  activity of mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I (measured as NADH-ferricyanide reductase) and both intracellular ATP and ADP measurements were performed on lymphocytes of ALS patients (n = 14) and control subjects (n = 26).
Then, ATP/ADP ratio was calculated.
Our finding showed that in patients compared with controls, complex I activity and intracellular ATP were significantly reduced (P = 0·001) and intracellular ADP content was increased (P&lt;0·005) and ATP/ADP ratio subsequently was decreased and also we  found strong correlation between complex I activity and intracellular ATP content and strong reverse correlation between complex I activity and intracellular ADP content in the patients with ALS (r(2) = 0·90).
This study suggests that  complex I deficiency and both reduction in intracellular ATP and increase in intracellular ADP content may be involved in the progression and pathogenesis of ALS.
PMID: 21702760
Co-occurrence of argyrophilic grain disease in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Phosphorylated TDP-43 (pTDP-43) is the pathological protein responsible for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a fatal neurodegenerative disease.
Recently, it has been reported that accumulation of pTDP-43 can occur in the brains of patients with argyrophilic grain disease (AGD), in which phosphorylated 4-repeat tau is the pathological protein.
To elucidate the association of ALS with AGD, we examined the brains from 37 consecutively autopsied patients with sporadic ALS (age range 45-84 years, mean 71.5 ± 9.0 years).
Sections from the frontotemporal lobe were stained with the Gallyas-Braak method and also immunostained with antibodies against phosphorylated tau, 4-repeat tau and pTDP-43.
Fourteen (38%) of the 37 ALS patients were found to have AGD.
With regard to staging, 5 of these 14 cases were rated as I, 4 as II and 5 as III. pTDP-43 immunohistochemistry revealed the presence of positive neuronal and glial cytoplasmic inclusions in the affected medial temporal lobe in many cases (93% and 64%, respectively).
On the other hand, pTDP-43-positive small structures corresponding to argyrophilic grains were observed only in one case.
A significant correlation was found between AGD and the Braak stage for neurofibrillary pathology (stage range 0-V, mean 2.1).
However, there were no significant correlations between AGD and any other clinicopathological features, including dementia.
The present findings suggest that co-occurrence of AGD in ALS is not uncommon, and in fact comparable with that in a number of diseases belonging to the tauopathies or α-synucleinopathies.
© 2011 The Authors.
Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology © 2011 British Neuropathological Society.
PMID: 22081209
SOD1 and mitochondria in ALS: a dangerous liaison.
Mutant Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase (mutSOD1) is found in a subset of patients with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a fatal progressive paralysis due to loss of motor neurons.
In the present article, we review existing evidence linking the expression of mutSOD1 to the many facets of mitochondrial dysfunction in ALS, with a focus on recent studies suggesting that the association and misfolding of the mutant protein (and possibly of the wild type protein as well) within these organelles is causally linked to their functional and structural alterations.
Energy deficit, calcium mishandling and oxidative stress are paralleled by alteration in mitochondrial motility, dynamics and turnover and most probably lead to mitochondria-dependent cell death.
Thus, the development of new, selective mitochondria-targeted therapies may constitute a promising approach in the treatment of SOD1-linked ALS.
PMID: 22806366
Electromyographs of the flexor digitorum profundus muscle are useful for the diagnosis of inclusion body myositis.
The frequent observation of high-amplitude and long-duration motor unit potentials (MUPs) in inclusion body myositis (IBM) is problematic, because it may lead to a misdiagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
To document the diagnostic utility of EMG from the flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) muscle for IBM.
Quantitative analyses of MUP parameters were performed in the FDP and biceps brachii (BB) muscles from 7 biopsy-confirmed IBM patients.
In the FDP muscle, all MUP parameters were significantly decreased in IBM patients, which indicated the predominance of low-amplitude and short-duration MUPs in this muscle.
In the BB muscle, most parameters were increased, suggesting the frequent contamination of high-amplitude and long-duration MUPs.
Low-amplitude MUPs in the FDP muscle indicate the presence of an advanced myopathy in this muscle that was extremely weak for all subjects.
Examining the FDP muscle would reduce the chance of misdiagnosing IBM as ALS.
Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 21861938
The role of induced pluripotent stem cells in regenerative medicine: neurodegenerative diseases.
Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and Friedreich's ataxia are the most common human neurodegenerative diseases pathologically characterized by a progressive and specific loss of certain neuronal populations.
The exact mechanisms of neuronal cell death in these diseases are unclear, although some forms of the diseases are inherited and genes causing these diseases have been identified.
Currently there are no effective clinical therapies for many of these diseases.
The recently acquired ability to reprogram human adult somatic cells to induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) in culture may provide a powerful tool for in vitro neurodegenerative disease modeling and an unlimited source for cell replacement therapy.
In the present review, we summarize recent progress on iPSC generation and differentiation into neuronal cell types and discuss the potential application for in vitro disease mechanism study and in vivo cell replacement therapy.
PMID: 21603978
FUS immunogold labeling TEM analysis of the neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions of neuronal intermediate filament inclusion disease: a frontotemporal lobar degeneration with FUS proteinopathy.
Fused in sarcoma (FUS)-immunoreactive neuronal and glial inclusions define a novel molecular pathology called FUS proteinopathy.
FUS has been shown to be a component of inclusions of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with FUS mutation and three frontotemporal lobar degeneration entities, including neuronal intermediate filament inclusion disease (NIFID).
The pathogenic role of FUS is unknown.
In addition to FUS, many neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions (NCI) of NIFID contain aggregates of α-internexin and neurofilament proteins.
Herein, we have shown that: (1) FUS becomes relatively insoluble in NIFID and there are no apparent posttranslational modifications, (2) there are no pathogenic abnormalities in the FUS gene in NIFID, and (3) immunoelectron microscopy demonstrates the fine structural localization of FUS in NIFID which has not previously been described.
FUS localized to euchromatin, and strongly with paraspeckles, in nuclei, consistent with its RNA/DNA-binding functions.
NCI of varying morphologies were observed.
Most frequent were the loosely aggregated cytoplasmic inclusions, 81% of which had moderate or high levels of FUS immunoreactivity.
Much rarer compact cytoplasmic inclusions and tangled twine ball inclusions were FUS-immunoreactive at their granular peripheries, or heavily FUS-positive throughout, respectively.
Thus, FUS may aggregate in the cytoplasm and then admix with neuronal intermediate filament accumulations.
PMID: 22771914
Domains involved in TAF15 subcellular localisation: dependence on cell type and ongoing transcription.
TAF15 (TBP associated factor 15) is a member of the highly conserved TET (also known as FET) protein family of RNA binding proteins (RBP), which comprises in addition FUS (fused in sarcoma, also known as TLS, translocated in liposarcoma) and EWS (Ewing sarcoma protein).
The TET proteins are implied to play important roles in the onset of specific tumours, certain forms of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD).
In this study we identified the domains of TAF15 responsible for its subcellular localisation in human (HeLa) cells and experimentally confirmed the presence of a transportin-dependent nuclear localisation signal (NLS) at its carboxy-terminus.
We demonstrated that additional domains of TAF15 contributed, albeit to a less prominent extent, to its subcellular localisation.
In the carboxy-terminus we identified an arginine and glycine rich (RGG) domain, capable of being targeted to stress granules.
We, moreover, showed that TAF15 cellular localisation depended on ongoing transcription and that independent domains of TAF15 engaged in nucleolar capping upon transcription inhibition.
Finally, we demonstrated that TAF15 localisation was differentially regulated in the HeLa and the neuronal HT22 cell lines and that TAF15 co-localised with a minor subset of RNA granules in the cytoplasm of HT22 cells, supporting a model whereupon TAF15 plays a role in RNA transport and/or local RNA translation.
Copyright © 2012.
Published by Elsevier B.V.
PMID: 22364637
Effects of dexpramipexole on brain mitochondrial conductances and cellular bioenergetic efficiency.
Cellular stress or injury can result in mitochondrial dysfunction, which has been linked to many chronic neurological disorders including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and Parkinson's disease (PD).
Stressed and dysfunctional mitochondria exhibit an increase in large conductance mitochondrial membrane currents and a decrease in bioenergetic efficiency.
Inefficient energy production puts cells, and particularly neurons, at risk of death when energy demands exceed cellular energy production.
Here we show that the candidate ALS drug dexpramipexole (DEX; KNS-760704; ((6R)-4,5,6,7-tetrahydro-N6-propyl-2,6-benzothiazole-diamine) and cyclosporine A (CSA) inhibited increases in ion conductance in whole rat brain-derived mitochondria induced by calcium or treatment with a proteasome inhibitor, although only CSA inhibited calcium-induced permeability transition in liver-derived mitochondria.
In several cell lines, including cortical neurons in culture, DEX significantly decreased oxygen consumption while maintaining or increasing production of adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
DEX also normalized the metabolic profile of injured cells and was protective against the cytotoxic effects of proteasome inhibition.
These data indicate that DEX increases the efficiency of oxidative phosphorylation, possibly by inhibition of a CSA-sensitive mitochondrial conductance.
Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 24179768
Structural imaging differences and longitudinal changes in primary lateral sclerosis and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Magnetic resonance imaging measures have been proposed as objective markers to study upper motor neuron loss in motor neuron disorders.
Cross-sectional studies have identified imaging differences between groups of healthy controls and patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) or primary lateral sclerosis (PLS) that correlate with disease severity, but it is not known whether imaging measures change as disease progresses.
Additionally, whether imaging measures change in a similar fashion with disease progression in PLS and ALS is unclear.
To address these questions, clinical and imaging evaluations were first carried out in a prospective cross-sectional study of 23 ALS and 22 PLS patients with similar motor impairment and 19 age-matched healthy controls.
Clinical evaluations consisted of a neurological examination, the ALS Functional rating scale-revised, and measures of finger tapping, gait, and timed speech.
Age and ALSFRS score were not different, but PLS patients had longer duration of symptoms.
Imaging measures examined were cortical thickness, regional brain volumes, and diffusion tensor imaging of the corticospinal tract and callosum.
Imaging measures that differed from controls in a cross-sectional vertex-wise analysis were used as regions of interest for longitudinal analysis, which was carried out in 9 of the ALS patients (interval 1.26 ± 0.72 years) and 12 PLS patients (interval 2.08 ± 0.93 years).
In the cross-sectional study both groups had areas of cortical thinning, which was more extensive in motor regions in PLS patients.
At follow-up, clinical measures declined more in ALS than PLS patients.
Cortical thinning and grey matter volume loss of the precentral gyri progressed over the follow-up interval.
Fractional anisotropy of the corticospinal tracts remained stable, but the cross-sectional area declined in ALS patients.
Changes in clinical measures correlated with changes in precentral cortical thickness and grey matter volume.
The rate of cortical thinning was greater in ALS patients with shorter disease durations, suggesting that thickness decreases in a non-linear fashion.
Thus, cortical thickness changes are a potential imaging marker for disease progression in individual patients, but the magnitude of change likely depends on disease duration and progression rate.
Differences between PLS and ALS patients in the magnitude of thinning in cross-sectional studies are likely to reflect longer disease duration.
We conclude that there is an evolution of structural imaging changes with disease progression in motor neuron disorders.
Some changes, such as diffusion properties of the corticospinal tract, occur early while cortical thinning and volume loss occur later.
PMID: 21946374
Asymmetry of motor unit number estimate and its rate of decline in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
This study was performed to investigate the asymmetry of motor unit number estimate (MUNE) and its longitudinal course in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
A modified statistical MUNE was performed at the hypothenar muscles bilaterally in a total of 135 patients, and 18 of these patients underwent a follow-up study.
The degree of asymmetry varied considerably among those patients whose average MUNE of both sides was moderately reduced, whereas it tended to be low in those whose average MUNE was either severely reduced or close to normal.
The rate of motor unit loss was also asymmetric, and two distinct patterns were identified.
In patients whose MUNE was greater than 30 in both sides (n = 7), the rate of motor unit loss tended to be greater in the initially more affected side compared with the contralateral one, yielding the so-called lead phenomenon.
In contrast, the other patients (n = 11) tended to show the opposite pattern of catch-up, that is, MUNE declined faster in the initially less affected side compared with the contralateral one.
This study shows that not only the MUNE but also the rate of motor unit loss are frequently asymmetric in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients.
PMID: 22300932
Widespread microstructural white matter involvement in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a whole-brain DTI study.
The extensive application of advanced MR imaging techniques to the study of ALS has undoubtedly improved our knowledge of disease pathophysiology, even if the actual spread of the neurodegenerative process throughout the central nervous system is not fully understood.
The present study aimed to detect WM patterns of microstructural abnormalities to better investigate the pathologic process in ALS, within but also beyond CSTs, in a whole-brain analysis.
DTI was performed in 19 patients with ALS and 20 matched healthy controls, by using whole-brain TBSS and VOI analyses.
We observed a significant decrease of FA in the body of CC of the ALS group (P &lt; .05).
At the VOI level, both FA decrease and RD increase in the body of CC significantly correlated with the UMN score (P = .003 and P = .02).
Additionally, significant voxelwise positive correlations between FA and the ALSFRS-R were detected in the WM tracts underneath the left premotor cortex (P &lt; .05).
The correlations between reduction of FA and increase of RD in the body of CC with the UMN score indicate that the WM degeneration in the CC is strictly related to the ALS pyramidal impairment, while the correlation between FA and ALSFRS-R in the associative tracts underneath the left premotor cortex might reflect the progressive spread of the disease from the motor toward the extramotor areas.
PMID: 21957629
[Bright prospects and deplorable state of prolonged home mechanical ventilation in Russia: two cases' description].
The report describes two patients with lateral amyotrophic sclerosis complicated by respiratory insufficiency.
Instead of long-term hospitalization to ICU the patients were kept at home, where prolonged mechanical ventilation was applied to them: in the first case - through tracheostomy tube, in the second - through mask.
The use of prolonged home mechanical ventilation therapy instead of long-term hospitalization to ICU is discussed.
PMID: 21769946
Motor neuron impairment mediated by a sumoylated fragment of the glial glutamate transporter EAAT2.
Dysregulation of glutamate handling ensuing downregulation of expression and activity levels of the astroglial glutamate transporter EAAT2 is implicated in excitotoxic degeneration of motor neurons in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
We previously reported that EAAT2 (a.k.a.
GLT-1) is cleaved by caspase-3 at its cytosolic carboxy-terminus domain.
This cleavage results in impaired glutamate transport activity and generates a proteolytic fragment (CTE) that we found to be post-translationally conjugated by SUMO1.
We show here that this sumoylated CTE fragment accumulates in the nucleus of spinal cord astrocytes of the SOD1-G93A mouse model of ALS at symptomatic stages of disease.
Astrocytic expression of CTE, artificially tagged with SUMO1 (CTE-SUMO1) to mimic the native sumoylated fragment, recapitulates the nuclear accumulation pattern of the endogenous EAAT2-derived proteolytic fragment.
Moreover, in a co-culture binary system, expression of CTE-SUMO1 in spinal cord astrocytes initiates extrinsic toxicity by inducing caspase-3 activation in motor neuron-derived NSC-34 cells or axonal growth impairment in primary motor neurons.
Interestingly, prolonged nuclear accumulation of CTE-SUMO1 is intrinsically toxic to spinal cord astrocytes, although this gliotoxic effect of CTE-SUMO1 occurs later than the indirect, noncell autonomous toxic effect on motor neurons.
As more evidence on the implication of SUMO substrates in neurodegenerative diseases emerges, our observations strongly suggest that the nuclear accumulation in spinal cord astrocytes of a sumoylated proteolytic fragment of the astroglial glutamate transporter EAAT2 could participate to the pathogenesis of ALS and suggest a novel, unconventional role for EAAT2 in motor neuron degeneration.
Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
PMID: 23134591
Longitudinal diffusion tensor imaging in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder, caused by progressive loss of motor neurons.
Changes are widespread in the subcortical white matter in ALS.
Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) detects pathological changes in white matter fibres in vivo, based on alterations in the degree (diffusivity, ADC) and directedness (fractional anisotropy, FA) of proton movement.
24 patients with ALS and 24 age-matched controls received 1.5T DTI.
FA and ADC were analyzed using statistical parametric mapping.
In 15 of the 24 ALS patients, a second DTI was obtained after 6 months.
Decreased FA in the corticospinal tract (CST) and frontal areas confirm existing results.
With a direct comparison of baseline and follow-up dataset, the progression of upper motor neuron degeneration, reflected in FA decrease, could be captured along the CST and in frontal areas.
The involvement of cerebellum in the pathology of ALS, as suspected from functional MRI studies, could be confirmed by a reduced FA (culmen, declive).
These structural changes correlated well with disease duration, ALSFRS-R, and physical and executive functions.
DTI detects changes that are regarded as prominent features of ALS and thus, shows promise in its function as a biomarker.
Using the technique herein, we could demonstrate DTI changes at follow-up which correlated well with clinical progression.
PMID: 23358745
[Pain management in palliative care. Current aspects of medicinal therapy].
Palliative care patients do not only suffer from cancer pain but also from painful muscle spasticity due to multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, after stroke or due to dementia if damage of the pyramidal motor system is present.
Centrally active muscle relaxants can be helpful also when used as coanalgesics for cancer pain.
In addition to opioids other coanalgesics, such as tricyclic antidepressants or serotonin/noradrenalin reuptake inhibitors as well as anticonvulsants (sodium channel and calcium channel blockers) can be helpful if neuropathic cancer pain is present.
Idiopathic Parkinsonism or multiple system atrophy leads more to a painful rigor and pain control should be supported here by optimal adjustment of L-DOPA or DOPA agonist therapy.
However, pain treatment should always address the psychological, social and spiritual demands of the patient.
PMID: 21956716
Different clinical and neuropathologic phenotypes of familial ALS with A315E TARDBP mutation.
To present the relationship between TARDBP gene mutation and clinicopathologic findings of a Japanese pedigree affected by familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS).
The clinical, genetic, and neuropathologic characteristics of 4 members of a Japanese pedigree affected by FALS were examined.
All the patients showed motor neuron signs, and 2 of them also had parkinsonism.
We identified A315E TARDBP mutation in one patient per clinical disease type and found loss of anterior horn cells, Bunina bodies, and phosphorylated TDP-43-positive neuronal and glial cytoplasmic inclusions in both the patients.
However, the patient with only motor neuron signs had degeneration of the posterior column and spinocerebellar tracts as well as neuronal loss of the Clarke column, and the patient with both motor neuron signs and parkinsonism had severe nigral degeneration without Lewy pathology.
The clinical and neuropathologic phenotypes of FALS may differ even with the same mutation of TARDBP, encoding TDP-43.
Isolated TDP-43 pathology can produce ALS-plus syndrome.
PMID: 22878663
FUS/TLS-immunoreactive neuronal and glial cell inclusions increase with disease duration in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with an R521C FUS/TLS mutation.
Basophilic inclusions (BIs) are pathological features of a subset of frontotemporal lobar degeneration disorders, including sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and familial ALS (FALS).
Mutations in the fused in sarcoma/translocated in liposarcoma (FUS/TLS) gene have recently been identified as a cause of FALS.
The FUS/TLS-immunoreactive inclusions are consistently found in cases of frontotemporal lobar degeneration with BIs; however, the association between ALS cases with BIs and FUS/TLS accumulation is not well understood.
We used immunohistochemistry to analyze 3 autopsy cases of FALS with the FUS/TLS mutation and with BIs using anti-FUS/TLS antibodies.
The disease durations were 1, 3, and 9 years.
As the disease duration becomes longer, there were broader distributions of neuronal and glial FUS/TLS-immunoreactive inclusions.
As early as 1 year after the onset, BIs, neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions and glial cytoplasmic inclusions were found in the substantia nigra in addition to the anterior horn of the spinal cord.
Glial cytoplasmic inclusions are found earlier and in a wider distribution than neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions.
The distribution of FUS/TLS-immunoreactive inclusions in FUS/TLS-mutated FALS with BIs was broader than that of BIs alone, suggesting that the pathogenetic mechanism may have originated from the FUS/TLS proteinopathy.
PMID: 21956718
Conjoint pathologic cascades mediated by ALS/FTLD-U linked RNA-binding proteins TDP-43 and FUS.
The RNA-binding proteins TAR DNA-binding protein (TDP-43) and fused in sarcoma (FUS) play central roles in neurodegeneration associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive inclusions (FTLD-U).
Normally localized in the nucleus, in sites affected by ALS and FTLD-U they are mislocalized to the cytoplasm and form cytoplasmic inclusions.
TDP-43 and FUS are transported to the nucleus in a Ran-GTPase-dependent manner via nuclear import receptors, but they also contribute to the formation of stress granules (SGs), which are intracytoplasmic structures incorporating RNA.
C-terminal truncations of TDP-43 eliminate the nuclear transport signal and cause mislocalization of the protein to the cytoplasm, where it accumulates and forms SGs.
ALS-associated FUS mutations impair nuclear transport and cause mislocalization of FUS to the cytoplasm, where it also contributes to assembly of SGs.
Furthermore, the ALS susceptibility factor ataxin-2, recently identified as a potent modifier of TDP-43 toxicity, is also a predicted cytoplasmic RNA-binding protein and a constituent protein of SGs, suggesting that it is a part of the common pathologic cascade formed by TDP-43 and FUS.
Thus, we propose that excessive mislocalization of the RNA-binding proteins TDP-43, FUS, and ataxin-2 into the cytoplasm leads to impairment of the RNA quality control system, forming the core of the ALS/FTLD-U degenerative cascade.
In this review, we discuss the molecular basis of the novel disease spectrum of ALS/FTLD-U, including the neurodegenerative mechanism of the cytoplasmic RNA-binding proteins TDP-43 and FUS and the possibility of a novel therapeutic strategy.
PMID: 23172389
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with positive anti-acetylcholine receptor antibodies. Case report and review of the literature.
Myasthenia gravis is a nerve-muscle junction disease, for which the most specific test is an increase in the anti-acetylcholine receptor antibodies (anti-AChR-Abs) titer.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disease affecting both upper and lower motor neurons.
Positive AChR-Ab in patients with pure ALS are exceedingly rare.
We report the case of a patient with confirmed ALS and very high levels of AChR-Ab and review the literature on this topic.
PMID: 22396786
CSF concentrations of cAMP and cGMP are lower in patients with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease but not Parkinson's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The cyclic nucleotides cyclic adenosine-3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP) and cyclic guanosine-3',5'-monophosphate (cGMP) are important second messengers and are potential biomarkers for Parkinson's disease (PD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD).
Here, we investigated by liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) concentrations of cAMP and cGMP of 82 patients and evaluated their diagnostic potency as biomarkers.
For comparison with a well-accepted biomarker, we measured tau concentrations in CSF of CJD and control patients.
CJD patients (n = 15) had lower cAMP (-70%) and cGMP (-55%) concentrations in CSF compared with controls (n = 11).
There was no difference in PD, PD dementia (PDD) and ALS cases.
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analyses confirmed cAMP and cGMP as valuable diagnostic markers for CJD indicated by the area under the curve (AUC) of 0.86 (cAMP) and 0.85 (cGMP).
We calculated a sensitivity of 100% and specificity of 64% for cAMP and a sensitivity of 67% and specificity of 100% for cGMP.
The combination of both nucleotides increased the sensitivity to 80% and specificity to 91% for the term cAMPxcGMP (AUC 0.92) and to 93% and 100% for the ratio tau/cAMP (AUC 0.99).
We conclude that the CSF determination of cAMP and cGMP may easily be included in the diagnosis of CJD and could be helpful in monitoring disease progression as well as in therapy control.
PMID: 23312631
Brain-computer interfaces.
Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) are systems that give their users communication and control capabilities that do not depend on muscles.
The user's intentions are determined from activity recorded by electrodes on the scalp, on the cortical surface, or within the brain.
BCIs can enable people who are paralyzed by amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), brainstem stroke, or other disorders to convey their needs and wishes to others, to operate word-processing programs or other software, or possibly to control a wheelchair or a neuroprosthesis.
BCI technology might also augment rehabilitation protocols aimed at restoring useful motor function.
With continued development and clinical implementation, BCIs could substantially improve the lives of those with severe disabilities.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23312632
Epidemiology of neurologically disabling disorders.
Neurological disorders place a considerable burden upon individuals, their families, and society.
Some like stroke are common, while others like amyotrophic lateral sclerosis are much rarer.
Some conditions such as multiple sclerosis are reported to vary by latitude, while others such as traumatic brain injury can vary considerably by locality.
Depending upon the nature of the lesion, and factors such as time since onset, the consequences to the individual may also vary considerably, not just among different disorders, but within a given disorder.
Consequently the patterns of disease incidence, its prevalence, and its consequences are complex and may vary not just because of the condition itself, but also because, for example, case ascertainment may vary from study to study.
The cumulative annual incidence of disabling neurological disorders is likely to exceed 1000 per 100000, or 1% of the population.
The incidence is characterized by significant variation, which is mediated by genetic, geographical, demographic, and environmental factors.
While useful comparisons can be made through standardization techniques, planning for local services should be based upon local epidemiology, whenever available.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21933809
The risk to relatives of patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a neurodegenerative disease of motor neurons with a median survival of 2 years.
Most patients have no family history of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, but current understanding of such diseases suggests there should be an increased risk to relatives.
Furthermore, it is a common question to be asked by patients and relatives in clinic.
We therefore set out to determine the risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis to first degree relatives of patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis attending a specialist clinic.
Case records of patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis seen at a tertiary referral centre over a 16-year period were reviewed, and pedigree structures extracted.
All individuals who had originally presented with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, but who subsequently had an affected first degree relative, were identified.
Calculations were age-adjusted using clinic population demographics.
Probands (n = 1502), full siblings (n = 1622) and full offspring (n = 1545) were identified.
Eight of the siblings and 18 offspring had developed amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The unadjusted risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis over the observation period was 0.5% for siblings and 1.0% for offspring.
Age information was available for 476 siblings and 824 offspring.
For this subset, the crude incidence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis was 0.11% per year (0.05-0.21%) in siblings and 0.11% per year (0.06-0.19%) in offspring, and the clinic age-adjusted incidence rate was 0.12% per year (0.04-0.21%) in siblings.
By age 85, siblings were found to have an 8-fold increased risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, in comparison to the background population.
In practice, this means the risk of remaining unaffected by age 85 dropped from 99.7% to 97.6%.
Relatives of people with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis have a small but definite increased risk of being affected.
PMID: 22513921
Treatment for cramps in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/motor neuron disease.
Cramps are painful, involuntary muscle contractions.
They commonly affect people with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/motor neuron disease (ALS/MND) at all stages of the disease.
To date, the treatment of muscle cramps in ALS has been largely empirical without any evidence from randomised controlled trials.
To systematically assess the effect of interventions on muscle cramps as a primary or secondary endpoint or adverse event in people with ALS/MND.
We searched the Cochrane Neuromuscular Disease Group Specialized Register (14 February 2011), the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (Issue 1, 2011 in The Cochrane Library), MEDLINE (January 1966 to January 2011) and EMBASE (January 1980 to January 2011) and reference lists of articles searched using the terms motor neuron disease, motor neurone disease, motoneuron disease or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
We contacted authors of trials for further information.
We included all randomised and quasi-randomised trials of oral medications in people with ALS which assessed cramps as a primary or secondary outcome measure or as an adverse event.
We also included trials using subcutaneous or intravenous medications or physical therapy.
All authors applied the selection criteria and assessed study quality independently, and all authors performed independent data extraction.
Twenty studies including 4789 participants were identified.
Only one trial, of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), assessed cramps as the primary endpoint.
Thirteen studies assessed cramps as a secondary endpoint.
The medications comprised vitamin E, baclofen, riluzole, L-threonine, xaliproden, indinavir, and memantine.
Six studies assessed cramps as an adverse event.
The medications comprised creatine, gabapentin, dextromethorphan, quinidine, and lithium.
In all 20 studies no favourable effect for the treatment of cramps in ALS/MND could be demonstrated, but many studies were underpowered to draw a definite conclusion.
A meta-analysis of two small studies showed a statistically nonsignificant result for the amino acid L-threonine for the treatment of cramps in ALS/MND.
No study was identified using physical therapy as a therapeutic intervention for cramps.
There is no evidence to support the use of any intervention for muscle cramps in ALS/MND.
More and larger randomised controlled trials evaluating treatments for muscle cramps in ALS/MND are needed.
PMID: 23146213
Cobalamin as a regulator of serum and cerebrospinal fluid levels of normal prions.
We have previously demonstrated that the concentration of normal prion proteins (PrP(C)) is increased in the serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of rats deficient in vitamin B(12) (cobalamin, Cbl).
In this study, we investigated whether similar increases also occur in the serum and CSF of patients deficient in Cbl (Cbl-D), and whether the increase in serum levels can be corrected by Cbl therapy.
The study involved two sample populations.
The first consisted of 45 patients (13 patients with pernicious anemia [PA], 19 with other forms of anemia, and 13 healthy controls); and the second, 68 patients (five with subacute combined degeneration [SCD], 18 with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 22 with multiple sclerosis [MS], and 23 neurological controls).
Serum PrP(C) levels were measured using an enzyme-linked-immunosorbent-assay before as well as after Cbl therapy.
The mean serum PrP(C) levels in patients with PA were significantly higher than those of the controls (p=0.0017) but normalized after Cbl therapy; there was no significant change in the patients with other forms of anemia.
Mean CSF PrP(C) levels in the patients with SCD were significantly higher than in the neurological controls (p&lt;0.03).
The serum and CSF PrP(C) levels of patients with PA and those with SCD were correlated significantly with serum (p=0.004) and CSF (p=0.0018) Cbl levels.
In patients with MS, CSF PrP(C) concentrations were significantly lower than those of the controls regardless of their CSF Cbl levels.
We found a correlation between Cbl and PrP(C) levels in the serum and CSF of Cbl-D patients, which suggests that Cbl may regulate the PrP(C) levels in the serum and CSF in humans.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23300829
Molecular imaging of microglial activation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
There is growing evidence of activated microglia and inflammatory processes in the cerebral cortex in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Activated microglia is characterized by increased expression of the 18 kDa translocator protein (TSPO) in the brain and may be a useful biomarker of inflammation.
In this study, we evaluated neuroinflammation in ALS patients using a radioligand of TSPO, (18)F-DPA-714.
Ten patients with probable or definite ALS (all right-handed, without dementia, and untreated by riluzole or other medication that might bias the binding on the TSPO), were enrolled prospectively and eight healthy controls matched for age underwent a PET study.
Comparison of the distribution volume ratios between both groups were performed using a Mann-Whitney's test.
Significant increase of distribution of volume ratios values corresponding to microglial activation was found in the ALS sample in primary motor, supplementary motor and temporal cortex (p = 0.009, p = 0.001 and p = 0.004, respectively).
These results suggested that the cortical uptake of (18)F-DPA-714 was increased in ALS patients during the time of diagnosis phase of the disease.
This finding might improve our understanding of the pathophysiology of ALS and might be a surrogate marker of efficacy of treatment on microglial activation.
PMID: 23152885
The effect of PRMT1-mediated arginine methylation on the subcellular localization, stress granules, and detergent-insoluble aggregates of FUS/TLS.
Fused in sarcoma/translocated in liposarcoma (FUS/TLS) is one of causative genes for familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
In order to identify binding partners for FUS/TLS, we performed a yeast two-hybrid screening and found that protein arginine methyltransferase 1 (PRMT1) is one of binding partners primarily in the nucleus.
In vitro and in vivo methylation assays showed that FUS/TLS could be methylated by PRMT1.
The modulation of arginine methylation levels by a general methyltransferase inhibitor or conditional over-expression of PRMT1 altered slightly the nucleus-cytoplasmic ratio of FUS/TLS in cell fractionation assays.
Although co-localized primarily in the nucleus in normal condition, FUS/TLS and PRMT1 were partially recruited to the cytoplasmic granules under oxidative stress, which were merged with stress granules (SGs) markers in SH-SY5Y cell.
C-terminal truncated form of FUS/TLS (FUS-dC), which lacks C-terminal nuclear localization signal (NLS), formed cytoplasmic inclusions like ALS-linked FUS mutants and was partially co-localized with PRMT1.
Furthermore, conditional over-expression of PRMT1 reduced the FUS-dC-mediated SGs formation and the detergent-insoluble aggregates in HEK293 cells.
These findings indicate that PRMT1-mediated arginine methylation could be implicated in the nucleus-cytoplasmic shuttling of FUS/TLS and in the SGs formation and the detergent-insoluble inclusions of ALS-linked FUS/TLS mutants.
PMID: 22537412
Trauma and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a case-control study from a population-based registry.
Published reports on the association between amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and trauma are controversial suggesting the need for a new case-control study done in a large population.
A case-control study was undertaken in Italy to assess this association.
Cases were patients with newly diagnosed ALS from four population-based registries.
For each case, two hospital controls were selected, matched for age, sex, and province of residence, one with a neurological (non-degenerative) disease and one with a non-neurological disease (other than orthopedic or surgical).
Traumatic events (defined as accidental events causing injuries requiring medical care) were recorded with details on type, site, timing, severity, and complications.
The risks were assessed as odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CI), crude and adjusted for age, sex, education, interviewee (patient or surrogate), physical activity, smoking, alcohol, and coffee.
The study population comprised 377 patients in each of the three groups.
One or more traumatic events were reported by 225 cases (59.7%), 191 neurological controls (50.7%), and 179 non-neurological controls (47.5%) (P &lt; 0.01) (OR 1.63; 95% CI 1.25-2.14) (P &lt; 0.01).
The ORs were 3.07 (95% CI 1.86-5.05) for patients reporting 3+ traumatic events and 2.44 (95% CI 1.36-4.40) for severe traumatic events.
The ORs remained significant when the analysis was limited to events that occurred 5+ and 10+ years before ALS onset, to incident ALS, and direct informant.
Antecedent trauma, repeated trauma, and severe trauma may be risk factors for ALS.
© 2012 The Author(s) European Journal of Neurology © 2012 EFNS.
PMID: 22466825
Lung inflation training using a positive end-expiratory pressure valve in neuromuscular disorders.
Respiratory muscle weakness causes alveolar hypoventilation and reduced lung compliance in neuromuscular disorders.
Lung inflation is important to prevent secondary pulmonary complications however respiratory and laryngeal dysfunction often hamper lung inflation.
There is a need for a convenient and low-cost device that enables effective lung inflation.
We tested a lung inflation training method using a positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) valve.
Vital capacity (VC), maximum insufflation capacity (MIC) and peak cough flow (PCF) as well as PEEP lung inflation capacity (PIC) were assessed in 93 neuromuscular patients.
Consecutive PIC training was done for 4 months in six tracheostomized Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) patients and PIC was assessed before and after training.
PIC training was practicable in all participants and no serious adverse events were detected.
PIC was significantly higher than VC or MIC in all disorders, although MIC was higher than VC in DMD only.
Patients with dysphagia showed lower MIC and PCF compared with non dysphagic patients.
PIC was as low as 345±77 mL in tracheostomized DMD patients; however consecutive training increased it up to 619±205 mL.
The PEEP valve enabled effective lung inflation regardless of laryngeal function.
Consecutive training can improve lung condition even in advanced cases.
Early introduction of PIC training could be effective at preventing respiratory complications in patients with neuromuscular disorders.
PMID: 23541756
An antisense oligonucleotide against SOD1 delivered intrathecally for patients with SOD1 familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a phase 1, randomised, first-in-man study.
Mutations in SOD1 cause 13% of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
In the SOD1 Gly93Ala rat model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, the antisense oligonucleotide ISIS 333611 delivered to CSF decreased SOD1 mRNA and protein concentrations in spinal cord tissue and prolonged survival.
We aimed to assess the safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of ISIS 333611 after intrathecal administration in patients with SOD1-related familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
In this randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 1 trial, we delivered ISIS 333611 by intrathecal infusion using an external pump over 11·5 h at increasing doses (0·15 mg, 0·50 mg, 1·50 mg, 3·00 mg) to four cohorts of eight patients with SOD1-positive amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (six patients assigned to ISIS 333611, two to placebo in each cohort).
We did the randomisation with a web-based system, assigning patients in blocks of four.
Patients and investigators were masked to treatment assignment.
Participants were allowed to re-enrol in subsequent cohorts.
Our primary objective was to assess the safety and tolerability of ISIS 333611.
Assessments were done during infusion and over 28 days after infusion.
This study was registered with Clinicaltrials.gov, number NCT01041222.
Seven of eight (88%) patients in the placebo group versus 20 of 24 (83%) in the ISIS 333611 group had adverse events.
The most common events were post-lumbar puncture syndrome (3/8 [38%] vs 8/24 [33%]), back pain (4/8 [50%] vs 4/24 [17%]), and nausea (0/8 [0%] vs 3/24 [13%]).
We recorded no dose-limiting toxic effects or any safety or tolerability concerns related to ISIS 333611.
No serious adverse events occurred in patients given ISIS 333611.
Re-enrolment and re-treatment were also well tolerated.
This trial is the first clinical study of intrathecal delivery of an antisense oligonucleotide.
ISIS 333611 was well tolerated when administered as an intrathecal infusion.
Antisense oligonucleotides delivered to the CNS might be a feasible treatment for neurological disorders.
The ALS Association, Muscular Dystrophy Association, Isis Pharmaceuticals.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21780215
Hydrogen-deuterium exchange in vivo to measure turnover of an ALS-associated mutant SOD1 protein in spinal cord of mice.
Mutations of cytosolic Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) in humans and overexpression of mutant human SOD1 genes in transgenic mice are associated with the motor neuron degenerative condition known as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS; Lou Gehrig's disease).
Gain-of-function toxicity from the mutant protein expressed in motor neurons, associated with its misfolding and aggregation, leads to dysfunction and cell death, associated with paralyzing disease.
Here, using hydrogen-deuterium exchange in intact mice in vivo, we have addressed whether an ALS-associated mutant protein, G85R SOD1-YFP, is subject to the same rate of turnover in spinal cord both early in the course of the disease and later.
We find that the mutant protein turns over about 10-fold faster than a similarly expressed wild-type fusion and that there is no significant change in the rate of turnover as animals age and disease progresses.
Copyright © 2011 The Protein Society.
PMID: 22647475
[Are neurodegenerative diseases protein cancers?].
In the last 30 years, the elucidation of the molecular pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases has undergone remarkable progress, including the discoveries of the causative genes and risk factors of Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
However, the fundamental questions of why different neurons degenerate in different diseases and why these diseases are progressive have received little attention.
I have proposed the protein cancer hypothesis, which states that abnormal or malignant proteins--such as prion proteins--generated in a cell grow and propagate from cell to cell by converting normal proteins, and this propagation causes disease progression, analogous to the metastasis of cancer cells to multiple different tissues during cancer progression.
Intracellular filamentous inclusions composed of amyloid-like proteins, such as tau, α-synuclein, and TDP-43, are common neuropathological features of many neurodegenerative disorders, and the extent of the abnormal protein pathologies is closely related to disease progression.
Recent results of experimental model studies as well as biochemical analyses of abnormal proteins in patients have provided support for this hypothesis.
Therefore, small molecules or antibodies that can inhibit the intra- and intercellular propagation of abnormal proteins are expected to be promising candidates for clinical therapy.
PMID: 23381195
hnRNP A3 binds to GGGGCC repeats and is a constituent of p62-positive/TDP43-negative inclusions in the hippocampus of patients with C9orf72 mutations.
Genetic analysis revealed the hexanucleotide repeat expansion GGGGCC within the regulatory region of the gene C9orf72 as the most common cause of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and the second most common cause of frontotemporal lobar degeneration.
Since repeat expansions might cause RNA toxicity via sequestration of RNA-binding proteins, we searched for proteins capable of binding to GGGGCC repeats.
In vitro-transcribed biotinylated RNA containing hexanucleotide GGGGCC or, as control, AAAACC repeats were incubated with nuclear protein extracts.
Using stringent filtering protocols 20 RNA-binding proteins with a variety of different functions in RNA metabolism, translation and transport were identified.
A subset of these proteins was further investigated by immunohistochemistry in human autopsy brains.
This revealed that hnRNP A3 formed neuronal cytoplasmic and intranuclear inclusions in the hippocampus of patients with C9orf72 repeat extensions.
Confocal microcopy showed that these inclusions belong to the group of the so far enigmatic p62-positive/TDP-43 negative inclusions characteristically seen in autopsy cases of diseased C9orf72 repeat expansion carriers.
Thus, we have identified one protein component of these pathognomonic inclusions.
PMID: 23197892
Nutritional support teams increase percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy uptake in motor neuron disease.
To examine factors influencing percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) uptake and outcomes in motor neuron disease (MND) in a tertiary care centre.
Case notes from all patients with a confirmed diagnosis of MND who had attended the clinic at the Repatriation General Hospital between January 2007 and January 2011 and who had since died, were audited.
Data were extracted for demographics (age and gender), disease characteristics (date of onset, bulbar or peripheral predominance, complications), date and nature of discussion of gastrostomy insertion, nutritional status [weight measurements, body mass index (BMI)], date of gastrostomy insertion and subsequent progress (duration of survival) and quality of life (QoL) [Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Functional Rating Scale-Revised (ALSFRS-R)].
In addition, the type of clinician initiating the discussion regarding gastrostomy was recorded as Nutritional Support Team (involved in providing nutrition input viz Gastroenterologist, Speech Pathologist, Dietitian) and other (involved in non-nutritional aspects of patient care).
Factors affecting placement and outcomes including length of survival, change in weight and QoL were determined.
Case records were available for all 86 patients (49 men, mean age at diagnosis 66.4 years).
Thirty-eight patients had bulbar symptoms and 48 had peripheral disease as their presenting feature.
Sixty-six patients reported dysphagia.
Thirty-one patients had undergone gastrostomy insertion.
The major indications for PEG placement were dysphagia and weight loss.
Nine patients required immediate full feeding, whereas 17 patients initially used the gastrostomy to supplement oral intake, 4 for medication administration and 1 for hydration.
Initially the PEG regime met 73% ± 31% of the estimated total energy requirements, increasing to 87% ± 32% prior to death.
There was stabilization of weight in patients undergoing gastrostomy [BMI at 3 mo (22.6 ± 2.2 kg/m(2)) and 6 mo (22.5 ± 2.0 kg/m(2)) after PEG placement compared to weight at the time of the procedure (22.5 ± 3.0 kg/m(2))].
However, weight loss recurred in the terminal stages of the illness.
There was a strong trend for longer survival from diagnosis among MND in PEG recipients with limb onset presentation compared to similar patients who did not undergo the procedure (P = 0.063).
Initial discussions regarding PEG insertion occurred earlier after diagnosis when seen by nutrition support team (NST) clinicians compared to other clinicians.
(5.4 ± 7.0 mo vs 11.9 ± 13.4 mo, P = 0.028).
There was a significant increase in PEG uptake (56% vs 24%, P = 0.011) if PEG discussions were initiated by the NST staff compared to other clinicians.
There was no change in the ALSFRS-R score in patients who underwent PEG (pre 34.1 ± 8.6 vs post 34.8 ± 7.4), although in non-PEG recipients there was a non-significant fall in this score (33.7 ± 7.9 vs 31.6 ± 8.8).
Four patients died within one month of the procedure, 4 developed bacterial site infection requiring antibiotics and 1 required endoscopic therapy for gastric bleeding.
Less serious complications attributed to the procedure included persistent gastrostomy site discomfort, poor appetite, altered bowel function and bloating.
Initial discussion with NST clinicians increases PEG uptake in MND.
Gastrostomy stabilizes patient weight but weight loss recurs with advancing disease.
PMID: 21877919
Recurrent G41S mutation in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase gene (SOD1) causing familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in a large Polish family.
Mutations in the superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1) gene have been found in 12-23% of patients with a diagnosis of ALS.
Here we describe a large ALS Polish family with a branch in France, carrying a G41S mutation in the SOD1, and characterized by an early onset of the disease and extremely short survival time.
The mutation has been initially detected in Italian ALS families with common founder effect.
However, in the Polish population the G41S mutation most probably originated from an independent mutation event, as indicated by haplotype analysis.
Collected data support the hypothesis that a SOD1 mutation is not the sole factor determining the clinical ALS phenotype.
PMID: 22137929
Mutational analysis of VCP gene in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Mutations in valosin-containing protein (VCP) gene, already known to be associated with the multisystemic disorder, inclusion body myopathy with Paget's disease and frontotemporal dementia (IBMPFD), have been recently found also in familial cases of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
To further define the frequency of VCP mutations in ALS Italian population, we screened a cohort of 166 familial ALS and 14 ALS-frontotemporal dementia (FTD) individuals.
We identified a previously reported synonymous mutation (c.2093A&gt;C; p.Q568Q), 2 intronic variants (c.1749-14C&gt;T; c.2085-3C&gt;T), and 1 nucleotide change (c.2814G&gt;T) in the 3' untranslated region (UTR).
Bioinformatical analyses predicted no changes in splicing process or microRNA binding sites.
Our results do not confirm a main contribution of VCP gene to familial ALS in the Italian population.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23317354
Premature death of TDP-43 (A315T) transgenic mice due to gastrointestinal complications prior to development of full neurological symptoms of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Abnormal distribution, modification and aggregation of transactivation response DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) are the hallmarks of multiple neurodegenerative diseases, especially frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive inclusions (FTLD-U) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Transgenic mouse lines overexpressing wild-type or mutant TDP-43 exhibit ALS-like symptom, motor abnormalities and early paralysis followed by death.
Reports on lifespan and phenotypic behaviour in Prp-TDP-43 (A315T) vary, and these animals are not fully characterized.
Although it has been proposed that the approximate 20% loss of motor neurons at end stage is responsible for the severe weakness and death in TDP-43 mice, this degree of neurologic damage appears insufficient to cause death.
Hence we studied these mice to further characterize and determine the reason for the death.
Our characterization of TDP-43 transgenic mice showed that these mice develop ALS-like symptoms that later become compounded by gastrointestinal (GI) complications that resulted in death.
This is the first report of a set of pathological evidence in the GI track that is strong indicator for the cause of death of Prp-hTDP-43 (A315T) transgenic mice.
© 2012 The Authors.
International Journal of Experimental Pathology © 2012 International Journal of Experimental Pathology.
PMID: 23024788
Elevated serum ferritin is associated with reduced survival in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disorder caused by the loss of motor neurons.
Its etiology remains unknown, but several hypothesis have been raised to explain motor neuron death, including oxidative stress.
Dysregulation of cellular iron metabolism can lead to increased oxidative stress, and existing data argue for a role of iron metabolism in ALS pathophysiology.
We performed a retrospective analysis of iron metabolism (IM) variables (serum levels of iron, transferrin, ferritin, and TSC for Transferrin Saturation Coefficient) in a cohort of 694 ALS patients and 297 healthy controls.
Serum ferritin levels and TSC were higher, whereas serum transferrin levels were lower in ALS patients than controls.
In addition, patients with a high level serum ferritin had a shorter survival time compared to those with low level serum ferritin (618 days versus 921 days for men subgroup; p = .007).
Site of onset and ALS-FRS score were not associated with IM variables.
This study suggests that ALS patients may have increased iron storage, as measured by increased serum ferritin and TSC.
Elevated serum ferritin may also have a deleterious impact on survival in ALS.
PMID: 22078486
VCP mutations in familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Mutations in the valosin-containing protein (VCP) gene were recently reported to be the cause of 1%-2% of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) cases.
VCP mutations are known to cause inclusion body myopathy (IBM) with Paget's disease (PDB) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD).
The presence of VCP mutations in patients with sporadic ALS, sporadic ALS-FTD, and progressive muscular atrophy (PMA), a known clinical mimic of inclusion body myopathy, is not known.
To determine the identity and frequency of VCP mutations we screened a cohort of 93 familial ALS, 754 sporadic ALS, 58 sporadic ALS-FTD, and 264 progressive muscular atrophy patients for mutations in the VCP gene.
Two nonsynonymous mutations were detected; 1 known mutation (p.R159H) in a patient with familial ALS with several family members suffering from FTD, and 1 mutation (p.I114V) in a patient with sporadic ALS.
Conservation analysis and protein prediction software indicate the p.I114V mutation to be a rare benign polymorphism.
VCP mutations are a rare cause of familial ALS.
The role of VCP mutations in sporadic ALS, if present, appears limited.
Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21847013
RNA-binding proteins with prion-like domains in ALS and FTLD-U.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, also known as Lou Gehrig's disease) is a debilitating, and universally fatal, neurodegenerative disease that devastates upper and lower motor neurons.
The causes of ALS are poorly understood.
A central role for RNA-binding proteins and RNA metabolism in ALS has recently emerged.
The RNA-binding proteins, TDP-43 and FUS, are principal components of cytoplasmic inclusions found in motor neurons of ALS patients and mutations in TDP-43 and FUS are linked to familial and sporadic ALS.
Pathology and genetics also connect TDP-43 and FUS with frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive inclusions (FTLD-U).
It was unknown whether mechanisms of FUS aggregation and toxicity were similar or different to those of TDP-43.
To address this issue, we have employed yeast models and pure protein biochemistry to define mechanisms underlying TDP-43 and FUS aggregation and toxicity, and to identify genetic modifiers relevant for human disease.
We have identified prion-like domains in FUS and TDP-43 and provide evidence that these domains are required for aggregation.
Our studies have defined key similarities as well as important differences between the two proteins.
Collectively, however, our findings lead us to suggest that FUS and TDP-43, though similar RNA-binding proteins, likely aggregate and confer disease phenotypes via distinct mechanisms.
PMID: 22881448
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in Sardinia (Italy): epidemiologic features from 1957 to 2000.
To evaluate epidemiological variables of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) in Sardinia (Italy) in the 1991-2000 periods and compare them with the preceding decades.
Survey, critical reappraisal or clinical re-evaluation of all ALS cases with onset in the decade 1991-2000; calculation of crude and age-adjusted incidence, duration of disease, survival rates and the latency between onset of symptoms and diagnosis.
A significant increase in the mean annual incidence was observed in comparison with the values found in the two previous decades, 1971-1980 and 1981-1990.
The distribution of the disease in various areas of the island was found to be not at all homogeneous.
No significant modifications of the duration of the disease and survival rates were observed.
The role of particular exogenous factors, albeit still unclear, can be invoked.
© 2012 John Wiley &amp; Sons A/S.
PMID: 22526021
Distinct TDP-43 pathology in ALS patients with ataxin 2 intermediate-length polyQ expansions.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive, adult-onset neurodegenerative disease characterized by degeneration of motor neurons, resulting in paralysis and death.
A pathological hallmark of the degenerating motor neurons in most ALS patients is the presence of cytoplasmic inclusions containing the protein TDP-43.
The morphology and type of TDP-43 pathological inclusions is variable and can range from large round Lewy body-like inclusions to filamentous skein-like inclusions.
The clinical significance of this variable pathology is unclear.
Intermediate-length polyglutamine (polyQ) expansions in ataxin 2 were recently identified as a genetic risk factor for ALS.
Here we have analyzed TDP-43 pathology in a series of ALS cases with or without ataxin 2 intermediate-length polyQ expansions.
The motor neurons of ALS cases harboring ataxin 2 polyQ expansions (n = 6) contained primarily skein-like or filamentous TDP-43 pathology and only rarely, if ever, contained large round inclusions, whereas the ALS cases without ataxin 2 polyQ expansions (n = 13) contained abundant large round and skein-like TDP-43 pathology.
The paucity of large round TDP-43 inclusions in ALS cases with ataxin 2 polyQ expansions suggests a distinct pathological subtype of ALS and highlights the possibility for distinct pathogenic mechanisms.
PMID: 22813866
Morphological and functional changes in innervation of a fast forelimb muscle in SOD1-G85R mice.
Muscle endplates become denervated in mice that express mutations of human superoxide dismutase 1 (hSOD1), models of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
This denervation is especially marked in fast limb muscles, and precedes death of motor neuron somata.
This study used mice that expressed yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) in neurons to investigate changes in the morphology and function of axons and motor terminals innervating a fast forelimb muscle (epitrochleoanconeus, ETA) in presymptomatic and symptomatic hSOD1-G85R mice, compared to those in mice that express wild-type (wt) hSOD1.
The percentage of endplates (identified using fluorescently-labeled α-bungarotoxin) innervated by motor terminals remained high in presymptomatic SOD1-G85R mice, but fell to ~50% in symptomatic mice.
The number of large diameter (≥4 μm) axons in the ETA nerve also decreased as mice became symptomatic, and endplate innervation correlated best with the number of large diameter axons.
Motor terminal function was assessed using changes in terminal YFP fluorescence evoked by trains of action potentials; different components of the pH-dependent YFP signals reflect stimulation-induced Ca2+ entry and vesicular exo/endocytosis.
Most visible motor terminals (&gt;90%) remained capable of responding to nerve stimulation in both pre- and symptomatic hSOD1-G85R mice, but with functional alterations.
Responses in presymptomatic terminals suggested reduced acidification and increased vesicular release, whereas symptomatic terminals exhibited increased acidification and reduced vesicular release.
The fact that most remaining terminals were able to respond to nerve stimulation suggests that motor terminal-protective therapies might contribute to preserving neuromuscular function in fALS mice.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22676852
UBQLN2 in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in The Netherlands.
Recently it was discovered that mutations in the UBQLN2 gene were a cause of an X-linked dominant type of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
We investigated the frequency of mutations in this gene in a cohort of 92 families with ALS in the Netherlands.
Eight families were excluded because of male-to-male transmission.
In the remaining 84 familial ALS cases no mutations were discovered in UBQLN2.
Hence, UBQLN2 was not found to be a cause of familial ALS in the Netherlands.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21074900
Pathogenicity of exonic indels in fused in sarcoma in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Insertion and deletion variants (indels) within poly glycine tracts of fused in sarcoma (FUS) were initially reported as causative of disease in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Subsequent studies identified similar indels in controls and suggested that these indels may confer susceptibility to ALS.
We aimed to elucidate the role of previously published and novel exonic indels in FUS in an extensive cohort of 630 ALS patients and 1063 controls.
We detected indels in FUS exons 5, 6, 12, and 14 with similar frequencies in patients (0.95%) and controls (0.75%).
Exonic indels in poly glycine tracts were also observed with similar frequencies.
The largest indel (p.Gly138_Tyr143del) was observed in 1 control.
In 1 patient, a 3 base pair deletion in exon 14 (p.Gly475del) was identified, however in vitro studies did not reveal abnormal localization of p.Gly475del mutant FUS.
These findings suggest that not all exonic indels in FUS cause disease.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21074902
Analysis of optineurin in frontotemporal lobar degeneration.
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) can occur jointly with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and these 2 conditions share a genetic risk factor on chromosome 9.
It has been reported that mutations in optineurin (OPTN) can cause ALS.
Therefore, we sequenced OPTN in 371 FTLD cases but no mutations were detected, suggesting changes in OPTN do not cause FTLD.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22934129
Widespread binding of FUS along nascent RNA regulates alternative splicing in the brain.
Fused in sarcoma (FUS) and TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) are RNA-binding proteins pathogenetically linked to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), but it is not known if they regulate the same transcripts.
We addressed this question using crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (iCLIP) in mouse brain, which showed that FUS binds along the whole length of the nascent RNA with limited sequence specificity to GGU and related motifs.
A saw-tooth binding pattern in long genes demonstrated that FUS remains bound to pre-mRNAs until splicing is completed.
Analysis of FUS(-/-) brain demonstrated a role for FUS in alternative splicing, with increased crosslinking of FUS in introns around the repressed exons.
We did not observe a significant overlap in the RNA binding sites or the exons regulated by FUS and TDP-43.
Nevertheless, we found that both proteins regulate genes that function in neuronal development.
PMID: 21842496
A mutation in sigma-1 receptor causes juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by loss of motor neurons in the brain and spinal cord, leading to muscle weakness and eventually death from respiratory failure.
ALS is familial in about 10% of cases, with SOD1 mutations accounting for 20% of familial cases.
Here we describe a consanguineous family segregating juvenile ALS in an autosomal recessive pattern and describe the genetic variant responsible for the disorder.
We performed homozygosity mapping and direct sequencing to detect the genetic variant and tested the effect of this variant on a motor neuron-like cell line model (NSC34) expressing the wild-type or mutant gene.
We identified a shared homozygosity region in affected individuals that spans ~120 kbp on chromosome 9p13.3 containing 9 RefSeq genes.
Sequencing the SIGMAR1 gene revealed a mutation affecting a highly conserved amino acid located in the transmembrane domain of the encoded protein, sigma-1 receptor.
The mutated protein showed an aberrant subcellular distribution in NSC34 cells.
Furthermore, cells expressing the mutant protein were less resistant to apoptosis induced by endoplasmic reticulum stress.
Sigma-1 receptors are known to have neuroprotective properties, and recently Sigmar1 knockout mice have been described to have motor deficiency.
Our findings emphasize the role of sigma-1 receptors in motor neuron function and disease.
Copyright © 2011 American Neurological Association.
PMID: 23831581
Intracellular seeded aggregation of mutant Cu,Zn-superoxide dismutase associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Once a protein adopts the fibrillar aggregate conformation, a seeding reaction becomes operative in which pre-formed fibrils function as seeds for soluble protein molecules to be fibrillized.
Such a seeding reaction accelerates the protein fibrillation in vitro; however, more investigation is required to test the seeded fibrillation inside cells.
Here, we show that in vitro Cu,Zn-superoxide dismutase (SOD1) fibrils are transduced into cells and function as seeds to trigger the aggregation of endogenously expressed SOD1.
Seeded aggregation of mutant SOD1 will thus play roles in a molecular pathomechanism of SOD1-linked amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.
Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22269588
Concurrent multiple sclerosis and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: where inflammation and neurodegeneration meet?
The concurrence of multiple sclerosis (MS) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is exceedingly rare and the pathological features have not been examined extensively.
Here we describe the key pathological features of a 40 year old man with pathologically confirmed concurrent MS and ALS.This is the most pathologically illustrative case of coincident MS and ALS demonstrating inflammatory and neurodegenerative features characteristic of each disease, and is the first to exhibit the presence of TDP-43 inclusions in this clinical entity.
The intricate relationship between neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration in these diseases is discussed.
PMID: 22399427
Mitochondria in neurodegeneration.
Many neurodegenerative diseases demonstrate abnormal mitochondrial morphology and biochemical dysfunction.
Alterations are often systemic rather than brain-limited.
Mitochondrial dysfunction may arise as a consequence of abnormal mitochondrial DNA, mutated nuclear proteins that interact directly or indirectly with mitochondria, or through unknown causes.
In most cases it is unclear where mitochondria sit in relation to the overall disease cascades that ultimately causes neuronal dysfunction and death, and there is still controversy regarding the question of whether mitochondrial dysfunction is a necessary step in neurodegeneration.
In this chapter we highlight and catalogue mitochondrial perturbations in some of the major neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and Huntington's disease (HD).
We consider data that suggest mitochondria may be critically involved in neurodegenerative disease neurodegeneration cascades.
PMID: 22098653
Primary lateral sclerosis: upper-motor-predominant amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with frontotemporal lobar degeneration--immunohistochemical and biochemical analyses of TDP-43.
Primary lateral sclerosis (PLS) is clinically defined as a disorder selectively affecting the upper motor neuron (UMN) system.
However, recently it has also been considered that PLS is heterogeneous in its clinical presentation.
To elucidate the association of PLS, or disorders mimicking PLS, with 43-kDa TAR DNA-binding protein (TDP-43) abnormality, we examined two adult patients with motor neuron disease, which clinically was limited almost entirely to the UMN system, and was followed by progressive frontotemporal atrophy.
In the present study, the distribution and severity, and biochemical profile of phosphorylated TDP-43 (pTDP-43) in the brains and spinal cords were examined immunohistochemically and biochemically.
Pathologically, in both cases, frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin inclusions (FTLD-U) was evident, with the most severe degeneration in the motor cortex.
An important feature in both cases was the presence of Bunina bodies and/or ubiquitin inclusions, albeit very rarely, in the well preserved lower motor neurons.
The amygdala and neostriatum were also affected.
pTDP-43 immunohistochemistry revealed the presence of many positively stained neuronal cytoplamic inclusions (NCIs) and dystrophic neurites/neuropil threads in the affected frontotemporal cortex and subcortical gray matter.
By contrast, such pTDP-43 lesions, including NCIs, were observed in only a few lower motor neurons.
pTDP-43 immunoblotting revealed that fragments of ∼25-kDa were present in the cortices, but not in the spinal cord in both cases.
Genetically, neither of the patients had any mutation in the TDP-43 gene.
In conclusion, we consider that although PLS may be a clinically significant disease entity, at autopsy, the majority of such clinical cases would present as upper-motor-predominant amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with FTLD-TDP.
© 2011 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.
PMID: 22189317
[Responding to patients with home mechanical ventilation after the Great East Japan Earthquake and during the planned power outages. How should we be prepared for a future disaster ?].
The unprecedented earthquake(magnitude-9 in the Japanese seismic intensity scale)hit off the east coast of Japan on March 11, 2011.
Consequently, there were planned power outages in the area nearby Tokyo to avoid massive blackouts caused by a stoppage of Fukushima nuclear plants.Our clinic located in Kawasaki city was also hit by the earthquake(magnitude- 5).During the period of two months(March and April 2011), we had a total of 52 patients with home respiratory care (5-TPPV, 11-NPPV and 36-HOT)at that time.Two out of three 24 hour-TPPV users had no external battery.After the earthquake, there was a 7-hour electricity failure in some areas, and a patient with ASV(adaptive servo ventilator)was living there.Moreover, 3-hour/day power outages were carried out from March 14 to March 28, affecting people's everyday lives.
However, the patient had no harmful influences from the power failure because a ventilation company lent us an external battery(4-9 hour life capacity)for the patients, and we were able to avoid an emergency situation caused by the power failure.In conclusion, we ought to be prepared for patients with home mechanical ventilation in the future toward unforeseen large scale power outages.
PMID: 23797905
An imbalance between excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis revealed by use of 3-T proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy.
A lack of neuroinhibitory function may result in unopposed excitotoxic neuronal damage in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
To determine whether there are reductions in γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) levels and elevations in glutamate-glutamine (Glx) levels in selected brain regions of patients with ALS by use of proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy.
Case-control study using short echo time and GABA-edited proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy at 3 T with regions of interest in the left motor cortex, left subcortical white matter, and pons; data analyzed using logistic regression, t tests, and Pearson correlations; and post hoc analyses performed to investigate differences between riluzole-naive and riluzole-treated patients with ALS.
Tertiary referral center.
Twenty-nine patients with ALS and 30 age- and sex-matched healthy controls.
Fifteen patients were taking 50 mg of riluzole twice a day as part of their routine clinical care for ALS.
Levels of GABA, Glx, choline (a marker of cell membrane turnover), creatine (a marker of energy metabolism), myo-inositol (a marker of glial cells), and N-acetylaspartate (a marker of neuronal integrity).
Patients with ALS had significantly lower levels of GABA in the motor cortex than did healthy controls (P &lt; .01).
Patients with ALS also had significantly lower levels of N-acetylaspartate in the motor cortex (P &lt; .01), subcortical white matter (P &lt; .05), and pons (P &lt; .01) and higher levels of myo-inositol in the motor cortex (P &lt; .001) and subcortical white matter (P &lt; .01) than did healthy controls.
Riluzole-naive patients with ALS had higher levels of Glx than did riluzole-treated patients with ALS (P &lt; .05 for pons and motor cortex) and healthy controls (P &lt; .05 for pons and motor cortex).
Riluzole-naive patients with ALS had higher levels of creatine in the motor cortex (P &lt; .001 for both comparisons) and subcortical white matter (P ≤ .05 for both comparisons) than did riluzole-treated patients with ALS and healthy controls.
Riluzole-naive patients with ALS had higher levels of N-acetylaspartate in the motor cortex than did riluzole-treated patients with ALS (P &lt; .01).
There are reduced levels of GABA in the motor cortex of patients with ALS.
There are elevated levels of Glx in riluzole-naive patients with ALS compared with riluzole-treated patients with ALS and healthy controls.
These results point to an imbalance between excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters as being important in the pathogenesis of ALS and an antiglutamatergic basis for the effects of riluzole, although additional research efforts are needed.
PMID: 22884547
Association analysis of PON polymorphisms in sporadic ALS in a Chinese population.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the paraoxonase gene family (ordered PON1, PON2, and PON3) have been associated with the risk of developing sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (SALS) in Caucasian populations.
However, this association has yet to be confirmed in Chinese SALS patients.
Nine SNPs across the PON gene cluster (i.e., rs662, rs705381, rs705382, rs854548, rs854560, rs7493, rs11981433, rs757158, and rs10487132) were analyzed in a large cohort consisting of 373 SALS patients and 248 controls from Southwest China.
The data from the present study suggest that these SNPs of the PON gene cluster do not contribute to the risk for developing SALS in a Chinese population.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21846494
Protective effects of valproic acid on the nigrostriatal dopamine system in a 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine mouse model of Parkinson's disease.
The use of animal models (including the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine [MPTP] mouse model) to mimic dopaminergic (DAergic) cell loss and striatal dopamine (DA) depletion, as seen in Parkinson's disease (PD), has implicated a multitude of factors that might be associated with DAergic cell death in PD including excitotoxicity, inflammation, and oxidative stress.
All of these factors have been shown to be reduced by administration of histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors (HDACis) resulting in some degree of neuroprotection in various models of neurodegenerative disease including in Huntington's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
However, there is limited information of effects of HDACis in PD models.
We have previously shown HDACis to be partially protective against 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP(+))-mediated cell loss in vitro.
The present study was conducted to extend these findings to an in vivo PD model.
The HDACi valproic acid (VPA) was co-administered with MPTP for 5 days to male FVBn mice and continued for an additional 2 weeks, throughout the period of active neurodegeneration associated with MPTP-mediated DAergic cell loss.
VPA was able to partially prevent striatal dopamine depletion and almost completely protect against substantia nigra DAergic cell loss.
These results suggest that VPA may be a potential disease-modifying therapy for PD.
Copyright © 2011 IBRO.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21831105
Factors that facilitate and hinder the manageability of living with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in both patients and next of kin.
This study aims to illuminate factors that facilitate and hinder the manageability of living with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in patients and next of kin.
Fourteen patients and 13 next of kin were interviewed.
The whole family becomes affected when a person gets the disease.
Therefore, it is important to identify strategies for managing the life situation among both patients and their next of kin.
A qualitative descriptive study.
This study based on individual interviews was performed in spring 2007.
The interviews were subjected to qualitative content analysis.
The results indicate constant fluctuation between opportunities and limitations in individual ability - of patients and family members - to manage the life situation.
Both patients and next of kin devised strategies to manage their situations through acceptance, living in the present and perceiving real presence and support from family, friends and authorities.
Dysfunctional relationships with family members, friends, or authorities reduced the manageability of the situation.
Furthermore, patients experienced difficulties managing their situations when forced into passivity and increased dependence.
Next of kin experienced decreased ability to manage because of burden, lack of own time and feelings of being controlled.
The fluctuations in manageability and the similarities and differences between the pairs, indicate the importance of support, both for the individual and the family.
Fluctuations in manageability and similarities and differences between approaches to managing the situation suggest a need for input from caregivers, for the whole family.
Family members need support and time for their own needs and also the opportunity to increase their awareness and understanding of the needs of other family members.
This study may give health personnel insight into how to help families devise strategies to manage a complex life situation.
© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
PMID: 23220913
Intermittent hypoxia and stem cell implants preserve breathing capacity in a rodent model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Rationale: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating motor neuron disease causing paralysis and death from respiratory failure.
Strategies to preserve and/or restore respiratory function are critical for successful treatment.
Although breathing capacity is maintained until late in disease progression in rodent models of familial ALS (SOD1(G93A) rats and mice), reduced numbers of phrenic motor neurons and decreased phrenic nerve activity are observed.
Decreased phrenic motor output suggests imminent respiratory failure.
Objectives: To preserve or restore phrenic nerve activity in SOD1(G93A) rats at disease end stage.
Methods: SOD1(G93A) rats were injected with human neural progenitor cells (hNPCs) bracketing the phrenic motor nucleus before disease onset, or exposed to acute intermittent hypoxia (AIH) at disease end stage.
Measurements and Main Results: The capacity to generate phrenic motor output in anesthetized rats at disease end stage was: (1) transiently restored by a single presentation of AIH; and (2) preserved ipsilateral to hNPC transplants made before disease onset.
hNPC transplants improved ipsilateral phrenic motor neuron survival.
Conclusions: AIH-induced respiratory plasticity and stem cell therapy have complementary translational potential to treat breathing deficits in patients with ALS.
PMID: 22334178
Significant CMAP decrement by repetitive nerve stimulation is more frequent in median than ulnar nerves of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Several studies have shown a significant amplitude decrement in compound muscle action potentials (CMAPs) on repetitive nerve stimulation (RNS) of muscles involved in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
In ALS, muscle wasting preferentially affects the thenar muscles (APB) rather than the hypothenar muscles (ADM).
We performed RNS studies in the APB and ADM muscles of 32 ALS patients to determine whether the effect of RNS differs between the median and ulnar nerves.
The decremental responses to RNS were greater in the APB than in the ADM.
Reduced CMAP amplitude was negatively correlated with CMAP decrement in median but not in ulnar nerves.
The greater CMAP decrement in median nerve is attributable to preferential involvement of the APB in the pathophysiology of ALS or some underlying difference in the biology of the two muscles/nerves.
Further investigations will better our understanding of the pathophysiology of ALS.
Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22240165
Fused in sarcoma (FUS) interacts with the cytolinker protein plectin: implications for FUS subcellular localization and function.
Fused in sarcoma (FUS) is a multifunctional protein involved in transcriptional control, pre-mRNA processing, RNA transport and translation.
The domain structure of FUS reflects its functions in gene regulation and its ability to interact with other proteins, RNA and DNA.
By use of a recombinant fragment of FUS in pull-down experiments followed by mass spectrometry analysis we have identified a novel interaction between the FUS N-terminal and the cytolinker plectin.
An in situ proximity ligation assay confirmed that FUS-plectin interactions take place in the cytoplasm of cells.
Furthermore, plectin deficient cells showed an altered subcellular localization of FUS and a deregulated expression of mRNAs bound to FUS.
Our results show that plectin is important for normal FUS localization and function.
Mutations involving FUS are causative factors in sarcomas and leukemias and also hereditary forms of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration.
Plectin deficiency causes epidermolysis bullosa, a disease involving the skin and neuromuscular system.
The novel FUS-plectin interaction offers new perspectives for understanding the role of FUS and plectin mutations in the pathogenesis of these diseases.
Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23234315
GM-CSF increases LPS-induced production of proinflammatory mediators via upregulation of TLR4 and CD14 in murine microglia.
Microglia are resident macrophage-like cells in the central nervous system (CNS) and cause innate immune responses via the LPS receptors, Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 and CD14, in a variety of neuroinflammatory disorders including bacterial infection, Alzheimer's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) activates microglia and induces inflammatory responses via binding to GM-CSF receptor complex composed of two different subunit GM-CSF receptor α (GM-CSFRα) and common β chain (βc).
GM-CSF has been shown to be associated with neuroinflammatory responses in multiple sclerosis and Alzheimer's disease.
However, the mechanisms how GM-CSF promotes neuroinflammation still remain unclear.
Microglia were stimulated with 20 ng/ml GM-CSF and the levels of TLR4 and CD14 expression were evaluated by RT-PCR and flowcytometry.
LPS binding was analyzed by flowcytometry.
GM-CSF receptor complex was analyzed by immunocytochemistry.
The levels of IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α in culture supernatant of GM-CSF-stimulated microglia and NF-κB nuclear translocation were determined by ELISA.
Production of nitric oxide (NO) was measured by the Griess method.
The levels of p-ERK1/2, ERK1/2, p-p38 and p38 were assessed by Western blotting.
Statistically significant differences between experimental groups were determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey test for multiple comparisons.
GM-CSF receptor complex was expressed in microglia.
GM-CSF enhanced TLR4 and CD14 expressions in microglia and subsequent LPS-binding to the cell surface.
In addition, GM-CSF priming increased LPS-induced NF-κB nuclear translocation and production of IL-1β, IL-6, TNF-α and NO by microglia.
GM-CSF upregulated the levels of p-ERK1/2 and p-p38, suggesting that induction of TLR4 and CD14 expression by GM-CSF was mediated through ERK1/2 and p38, respectively.
These results suggest that GM-CSF upregulates TLR4 and CD14 expression in microglia through ERK1/2 and p38, respectively, and thus promotes the LPS receptor-mediated inflammation in the CNS.
PMID: 23743751
Fiberoptic endoscopy evaluation of swallowing in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive degenerative motor neuron disease that adversely affects the muscles responsible for swallowing.
To assess the oral preparatory, oral transit and pharyngeal phases of swallowing in ALS patients through endoscopic evaluation.
This cross-sectional historical cohort study included ALS patients submitted to endoscopic examination.
Eleven patients (six males and five females; mean age of 61.7 years) were enrolled in the study from january to december of 2011.
All patients had alterations in phases of the swallowing process, but only 72.7% complained of dysphagia.
The oral preparatory phase was altered in 63.6% of the subjects; the oral transit and pharyngeal phases were altered in all studied individuals, regardless of food consistency.
Laryngeal penetration or tracheal aspiration were seen in 90.9% of the patients during the pharyngeal phase while they were swallowing fluids.
Even in the absence of complaints, dysphagia is a frequent comorbidity in ALS patients.
The oral transit and pharyngeal phases were the most frequently affected.
Laryngeal penetration or tracheal aspiration occurred more frequently during the pharyngeal phase while patients were swallowing fluids.
PMID: 21863317
Progranulin and TDP-43: mechanistic links and future directions.
Loss-of-function mutations in the multifunctional growth factor progranulin (GRN) cause frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) with TDP-43 protein accumulation.
Nuclear TDP-43 protein with key roles in RNA metabolism is also aggregated in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), suggesting that ALS and FTLD constitute a broad disease continuum.
However, the fact that mutations in GRN are associated with FTLD, while mutations in TDP-43 cause a preferential loss of motor neurons resulting in ALS-end of the disease spectrum, suggests involvement of both cell-autonomous and non-autonomous mechanisms.
Studies on animal models and in vitro studies have been instrumental in understanding the link between GRN and TDP-43 and also their role in neurodegeneration.
For instance, in mouse models, allelic deficiencies of Grn do not recapitulate human pathology of TDP-43 brain accumulations, but embryonic neurons derived from these mice do show abnormal TDP-43 accumulation after additional cellular challenges, suggesting that TDP-43 changes observed in GRN mutation carriers might also relate to stress.
Recent results have shown that the dual action of GRN in growth modulation and inflammation could be due to its negative regulation of TNF-α signaling.
In addition, GRN also interacts with sortilin and is endocytosed, thereby regulating its own levels and possibly also modulating the turnover of other proteins including that of TDP-43.
Accumulating evidence suggests that TDP-43 abnormal cellular aggregation causes a possible gain of function, also suggested by recently constructed mouse models of TDP-43 proteinopathy; however, it would be inconvincible that sequestration of physiological TDP-43 within cellular aggregates observed in patients would be innocuous for disease pathogenesis.
This review discusses some of these data on the possible link between GRN and TDP-43 as well as mechanisms involved in TDP-43-led neurodegeneration.
Continued multitiered efforts on genetic, cell biological, and animal modeling approaches would prove crucial in finding a cure for GRN-related diseases.
PMID: 22178654
The anabolic/androgenic steroid nandrolone exacerbates gene expression modifications induced by mutant SOD1 in muscles of mice models of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Anabolic/androgenic steroids (AAS) are drugs that enhance muscle mass, and are often illegally utilized in athletes to improve their performances.
Recent data suggest that the increased risk for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) in male soccer and football players could be linked to AAS abuse.
ALS is a motor neuron disease mainly occurring in sporadic (sALS) forms, but some familial forms (fALS) exist and have been linked to mutations in different genes.
Some of these, in their wild type (wt) form, have been proposed as risk factors for sALS, i.e. superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) gene, whose mutations are causative of about 20% of fALS.
Notably, SOD1 toxicity might occur both in motor neurons and in muscle cells.
Using gastrocnemius muscles of mice overexpressing human mutant SOD1 (mutSOD1) at different disease stages, we found that the expression of a selected set of genes associated to muscle atrophy, MyoD, myogenin, atrogin-1, and transforming growth factor (TGF)β1, is up-regulated already at the presymptomatic stage.
Atrogin-1 gene expression was increased also in mice overexpressing human wtSOD1.
Similar alterations were found in axotomized mouse muscles and in cultured ALS myoblast models.
In these ALS models, we then evaluated the pharmacological effects of the synthetic AAS nandrolone on the expression of the genes modified in ALS muscle.
Nandrolone administration had no effects on MyoD, myogenin, and atrogin-1 expression, but it significantly increased TGFβ1 expression at disease onset.
Altogether, these data suggest that, in fALS, muscle gene expression is altered at early stages, and AAS may exacerbate some of the alterations induced by SOD1 possibly acting as a contributing factor also in sALS.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23319195
Immunoexpression of gemins 2 and 4 in the rat spinal cord. Is the SMN complex a new target in investigations of sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis pathogenesis?
Sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (sALS) is a neurodegenerative disease leading to degeneration and loss of motoneurons in different structures of the nervous system.
Although aetiology of the disease is unknown, it is hypothesized that the survival motor neuron (SMN) protein which protects motoneurons in spinal muscular atrophy, may play a similar role in ALS.
Relatively little is known about normal expression and functions of the SMN complex compounds, i.e.
SMN protein and the related gemins.
Therefore, we have decided to examine the physiological expression of SMN and gemins 2 and 4 in spinal cords of healthy Wistar rats at different age using immunofluorescence and immunohistochemical methods.
Our study revealed that (1) in rat spinal cord neurons, the immunoexpression of SMN and gemins 2 and 4 is present through the whole animal lifespan although the reactive cells reveal different intensity of the immunolabeling, (2) both SMN and gemin 2, and SMN and gemin 4 are present in the same motoneurons, (3) immunoexpression of gemin 2 and 4 decreases slightly with aging.
PMID: 22591195
Safety, tolerability and pharmacodynamics of a skeletal muscle activator in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
This study was designed to evaluate the safety and tolerability of single doses of CK-2017357, an orally bioavailable fast skeletal muscle troponin activator, in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and to explore pharmacodynamic markers related to strength, endurance, and function.
Sixty-seven patients with ALS received single doses of placebo, CK-2017357 at 250 mg and 500 mg in random order, separated by one week.
Safety measures assessments were performed, as well as tests of pulmonary function, limb muscle strength and endurance, and global impression of change.
Pharmacokinetics of both CK-2017357 and riluzole were studied.
Sixty-three patients completed all three dosing periods.
CK-2017357 was well tolerated, with dizziness and general fatigue being the most frequent adverse events.
Both patients and investigators perceived a dose-dependent benefit of CK-2017357 as measured by global impression of change.
Maximum voluntary ventilation and submaximal handgrip endurance also improved.
Only small changes were seen in maximal strength.
In conclusion, single doses of 250 mg and 500 mg of CK-2017357 were safe and well tolerated by patients with ALS.
Measures of endurance appear to be improved in a dose-related fashion, and both patients and investigators perceived a global benefit.
Further study of this agent is warranted.
PMID: 22591194
Treatment with a coinducer of the heat shock response delays muscle denervation in the SOD1-G93A mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
We undertook a longitudinal study of the histological and biochemical changes at the neuromuscular junction (NMJ) in muscles of SOD1-G93A mice.
We also assessed these functions in mice treated with a known heat shock protein inducer, arimoclomol.
Tissue samples of treated and untreated mSOD mice were analysed for AChE and ChAT enzyme activities as markers of neuromuscular function.
Sections of hindlimb muscles (TA, EDL and soleus) were also stained for succinate dehydrogenase and silver cholinesterase activities as well as for immunohistochemistry.
Hsp70 levels were also measured from muscle samples using ELISA.
Results showed that denervation and nerve sprouting were present at symptom onset in fast muscles, although slow muscles remained fully innervated.
Cholinergic enzyme activities were reduced prior to denervation and declined further with disease progression.
Reduction of endplate size, a slow to fast shift in muscle phenotype was also observed.
Treatment with arimoclomol delayed the appearance of these changes, increased innervation, cholinergic enzyme activities and endplate size and reversed muscle fibre transformation.
These beneficial effects of arimoclomol in muscles were accompanied by an increase in Hsp70 expression.
In conclusion, our results indicate that pharmacological targeting of muscles at early stages of disease may be a successful strategy to ameliorate disease progression in ALS.
PMID: 22591193
Multiplet discharges after electrical stimulation: new evidence for distal excitability changes in motor neuron disease.
We hypothesized that action potentials evoked by distal stimulation might trigger ectopic activity (multiplet discharges, MDs).
By studying MDs, we investigated the involvement of the axonal part of the peripheral motor neuron in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and progressive muscular atrophy (PMA).
We performed stimulated high-density surface EMG recordings of the thenar muscles in 10 ALS/PMA patients, five recordings per patient over a three-month period.
Furthermore, motor unit number estimates (MUNE) and ALSFRS-R scores were obtained in sessions 1 and 5.
MDs were found in all patients, in 21% of the sampled motor units, and in response to 2.4% of the stimulations.
The interspike interval range of the MD components was 2.9-6.5 ms, which is compatible only with a distal MD origin.
The number of MDs, as percentage of the number of applied stimuli, was correlated with a decline in ALSFRS-R (r =0.80, p =0.006) and MUNE (r =0.72, p =0.02).
In conclusion, MDs can be elicited with electrical stimulation in ALS and PMA patients.
Analysis of MD characteristics provides further indications for pathophysiological excitability changes in the most distal part of the motor neuron.
MDs are associated with clinical deterioration.
PMID: 22035690
Long-term consequences of repetitive brain trauma: chronic traumatic encephalopathy.
Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) has been linked to participation in contact sports such as boxing and American football.
CTE results in a progressive decline of memory and cognition, as well as depression, suicidal behavior, poor impulse control, aggressiveness, parkinsonism, and, eventually, dementia.
In some individuals, it is associated with motor neuron disease, referred to as chronic traumatic encephalomyelopathy, which appears clinically similar to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Results of neuropathologic research has shown that CTE may be more common in former contact sports athletes than previously believed.
It is believed that repetitive brain trauma, with or possibly without symptomatic concussion, is responsible for neurodegenerative changes highlighted by accumulations of hyperphosphorylated tau and TDP-43 proteins.
Given the millions of youth, high school, collegiate, and professional athletes participating in contact sports that involve repetitive brain trauma, as well as military personnel exposed to repeated brain trauma from blast and other injuries in the military, CTE represents an important public health issue.
Focused and intensive study of the risk factors and in vivo diagnosis of CTE will potentially allow for methods to prevent and treat these diseases.
Research also will provide policy makers with the scientific knowledge to make appropriate guidelines regarding the prevention and treatment of brain trauma in all levels of athletic involvement as well as the military theater.
Copyright © 2011 American Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23984220
Chronic traumatic encephalopathy: the dangers of getting dinged.
Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) is a form of neurodegeneration that results from repetitive brain trauma.
Not surprisingly, CTE has been linked to participation in contact sports such as boxing, hockey and American football.
In American football getting dinged equates to moments of dizziness, confusion, or grogginess that can follow a blow to the head.
There are approximately 100,000 to 300,000 concussive episodes occurring in the game of American football alone each year.
It is believed that repetitive brain trauma, with or possibly without symptomatic concussion, sets off a cascade of events that result in neurodegenerative changes highlighted by accumulations of hyperphosphorylated tau and neuronal TAR DNA-binding protein-43 (TDP-43).
Symptoms of CTE may begin years or decades later and include a progressive decline of memory, as well as depression, poor impulse control, suicidal behavior, and, eventually, dementia similar to Alzheimer's disease.
In some individuals, CTE is also associated with motor neuron disease similar to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Given the millions of athletes participating in contact sports that involve repetitive brain trauma, CTE represents an important public health issue.
In this review, we discuss recent advances in understanding the etiology of CTE.
It is now known that those instances of mild concussion or dings that we may have previously not noticed could very well be causing progressive neurodegenerative damage to a player's brain.
In the future, focused and intensive study of the risk factors could potentially uncover methods to prevent and treat this disease.
PMID: 22952827
Influence of methylene blue on microglia-induced inflammation and motor neuron degeneration in the SOD1(G93A) model for ALS.
Mutations in SOD1 cause hereditary variants of the fatal motor neuron disease amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Pathophysiology of the disease is non-cell-autonomous, with toxicity deriving also from glia.
In particular, microglia contribute to disease progression.
Methylene blue (MB) inhibits the effect of nitric oxide, which mediates microglial responses to injury.
In vivo 2P-LSM imaging was performed in ALS-linked transgenic SOD1(G93A) mice to investigate the effect of MB on microglia-mediated inflammation in the spinal cord.
Local superfusion of the lateral spinal cord with MB inhibited the microglial reaction directed at a laser-induced axon transection in control and SOD1(G93A) mice.
In vitro, MB at high concentrations inhibited cytokine and chemokine release from microglia of control and advanced clinical SOD1(G93A) mice.
Systemic MB-treatment of SOD1(G93A) mice at early preclinical stages significantly delayed disease onset and motor dysfunction.
However, an increase of MB dose had no additional effect on disease progression; this was unexpected in view of the local anti-inflammatory effects.
Furthermore, in vivo imaging of systemically MB-treated mice also showed no alterations of microglia activity in response to local lesions.
Thus although systemic MB treatment had no effect on microgliosis, instead, its use revealed an important influence on motor neuron survival as indicated by an increased number of lumbar anterior horn neurons present at the time of disease onset.
Thus, potentially beneficial effects of locally applied MB on inflammatory events contributing to disease progression could not be reproduced in SOD1(G93A) mice via systemic administration, whereas systemic MB application delayed disease onset via neuroprotection.
PMID: 23861206
Triple A syndrome in Japan.
Triple A syndrome is an autosomal recessive disease, characterized by esophageal achalasia, alacrima, and adrenal insufficiency, as well as involvement of the central, peripheral, and autonomic nervous systems.
This disease mimics amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in some patients.
The causative gene encodes ALADIN, a nuclear pore complex (NPC) component.
Only 5 patients have been reported in Japan.
We conducted the first nationwide survey of triple A syndrome.
Identified mutants were expressed as GFP-fusion proteins in cultured cells.
Two new patients were identified, and 1 had a novel mutation (p.Ser182fsX19).
All mutant proteins tested were mislocalized from NPC to cytoplasm.
The most consistent neurological manifestation of triple A syndrome in Japanese patients was progressive bulbospinal muscular atrophy with both upper and lower motor neuron involvement, which mimicked motor neuron disease, similar to that seen in patients in Western countries.
The identification of the new patients suggests that more cases are undiagnosed in Japan.
Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22435076
Neuroimaging of motor neuron diseases.
It is agreed that conventional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and spine is one of the core elements in the differential diagnostic work up of patients with clinical signs of motor neuron diseases (MNDs), for example amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), to exclude MND mimics.
However, the sensitivity and specificity of MRI signs in these disorders are moderate to low and do not have an evidence level higher than class IV (good clinical practice point).
Currently computerized MRI analyses in ALS and other MNDs are not techniques used for individual diagnosis.
However, they have improved the anatomical understanding of pathomorphological alterations in gray and white matter in various MNDs and the changes in functional networks by quantitative comparisons between patients with MND and controls at group level.
For multiparametric MRI protocols, including T1-weighted three-dimensional datasets, diffusion-weighted imaging and functional MRI, the potential as a 'dry' surrogate marker is a subject of investigation in natural history studies with well defined patients.
The additional value of MRI with respect to early diagnosis at an individual level and for future disease-modifying multicentre trials remains to be defined.
There is still the need for more longitudinal studies in the very early stages of disease or when there is clinical uncertainty and for better standardization in the acquisition and postprocessing of computer-based MRI data.
These requirements are to be addressed by establishing quality-controlled multicentre neuroimaging databases.
PMID: 22732773
Advances in understanding the molecular basis of frontotemporal dementia.
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is a clinical syndrome with a heterogeneous molecular basis.
Until recently, the underlying cause was known in only a minority of cases that were associated with abnormalities of the tau protein or gene.
In 2006, however, mutations in the progranulin gene were discovered as another important cause of familial FTD.
That same year, TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) was identified as the pathological protein in the most common subtypes of FTD and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Since then, substantial efforts have been made to understand the functions and regulation of progranulin and TDP-43, as well as their roles in neurodegeneration.
More recently, other DNA/RNA binding proteins (FET family proteins) have been identified as the pathological proteins in most of the remaining cases of FTD.
In 2011, abnormal expansion of a hexanucleotide repeat in the gene C9orf72 was found to be the most common genetic cause of both FTD and ALS.
All common FTD-causing genes have seemingly now been discovered and the main pathological proteins identified.
In this Review, we highlight recent advances in understanding the molecular aspects of FTD, which will provide the basis for improved patient care through the development of more-targeted diagnostic tests and therapies.
PMID: 22703692
Self-perceived burden in chronic pain: relevance, prevalence, and predictors.
Chronic pain is a debilitating condition that can have an impact on various facets of interpersonal functioning.
Although some studies have examined the extent to which family members are affected by an individual's chronic pain, none have examined patients' perceptions of feeling that they have become a burden to others.
Research on self-perceived burden in different medical populations, such as cancer, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and stroke, has shown that it is associated with physical symptoms and, more robustly, with psychological difficulties and concerns.
The present study examined the prevalence and predictors of self-perceived burden in a tertiary chronic pain sample.
Participants were consecutive patients (N = 238) admitted to an outpatient, interdisciplinary, chronic pain management program at a rehabilitation hospital.
At admission, participants completed a battery of psychometric questionnaires assessing self-perceived burden, as well as a number of clinically relevant constructs.
Their significant others (n = 80) also completed a measure of caregiver burden.
Self-perceived burden was a commonly reported experience among chronic pain patients, with more than 70% of participants endorsing clinically elevated levels.
It was significantly correlated with pain intensity ratings, functional limitations, depressive symptoms, attachment anxiety, pain self-efficacy, and caregiver burden.
Self-perceived burden was also correlated with an item assessing suicidal ideation.
In a hierarchical regression model, depressive symptoms, pain self-efficacy, and adult attachment significantly predicted self-perceived burden after controlling for demographic and pain-related variables.
In conclusion, self-perceived burden is a clinically relevant and commonly reported interpersonal experience in patients with longstanding pain.
Copyright © 2012 International Association for the Study of Pain.
Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21893121
Non-viral gene therapy for neurological diseases, with an emphasis on targeted gene delivery.
Non-viral gene therapy systems are considered safer than viral delivery.
This article reviews recent research describing novel, non-viral gene delivery to the central nervous system, with a special emphasis on receptor mediated gene delivery using antibodies (termed immunogenes) to specific receptors.
By using targeting agents such as antibodies that can be retrogradely transported within neurons, non-viral gene therapies can deliver genes to specific neurons protected by the blood brain barrier.
Components of effective non-viral gene therapy are described including DNA/RNA carriers, receptor-mediated endocytosis, endosomal escape and nuclear entry.
In addition, stealth agents such as polyethylene glycol that can be used to improve in-vivo delivery are discussed.
The value of immunogenes as therapeutic agents for fatal diseases such as Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis is significant but further in-vivo work to confirm efficacy is required before truly effective therapies can be achieved.
Crown Copyright © 2011.
Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23261994
[The Parkinson puzzle].
Parkinson's disease is one of the most frequent progressive degenerative disorders with unknown origin of the nervous system.
The commutation of the disease on Guam led to the discovery of a neurotoxin which was also found in other continents.
This neurotoxin was identified in the common cyanobacteria (blue-green algae).
Early clinical observations suggested some loose correlations with gastric and duodenal ulcer and Parkinson's disease, while recent studies revealed a toxin, almost identical to that found in cyanobacteria in one strain of Helicobacter pylori, which proved to cause Parkinson like symptoms in animals.
Therefore, it cannot be ruled out that there is a slowly progressive poisoning in Parkinson's disease.
The disease specific alpha-sinuclein inclusions can be found in nerve cells of the intestinal mucosa far before the appearance of clinical symptoms indicating that the disease may start in the intestines.
These results are strengthened by the results of Borody's fecal transplants, after which in Parkinson patients showed a symptomatic improvement.
Based on these observations the Parkinson puzzle is getting complete.
Although these observations are not evidence based, they may indicate a new way for basic clinical research, as well as a new way of thinking for clinicians.
These new observations in psycho-neuro-immunology strengthen the fact that immunological factors may also play a critical factor facilitating local cell necrosis which may be influenced easily.
PMID: 22651090
Redox properties of the disulfide bond of human Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase and the effects of human glutaredoxin 1.
The intramolecular disulfide bond in hSOD1 [human SOD1 (Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase 1)] plays a key role in maintaining the protein's stability and quaternary structure.
In mutant forms of SOD1 that cause familial ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis), this disulfide bond is more susceptible to chemical reduction, which may lead to destabilization of the dimer and aggregation.
During hSOD1 maturation, disulfide formation is catalysed by CCS1 (copper chaperone for SOD1).
Previous studies in yeast demonstrate that the yeast GSH/Grx (glutaredoxin) redox system promotes reduction of the hSOD1 disulfide in the absence of CCS1.
In the present study, we probe further the interaction between hSOD1, GSH and Grxs to provide mechanistic insight into the redox kinetics and thermodynamics of the hSOD1 disulfide.
We demonstrate that hGrx1 (human Grx1) uses a monothiol mechanism to reduce the hSOD1 disulfide, and the GSH/hGrx1 system reduces ALS mutant SOD1 at a faster rate than WT (wild-type) hSOD1.
However, redox potential measurements demonstrate that the thermodynamic stability of the disulfide is not consistently lower in ALS mutants compared with WT hSOD1.
Furthermore, the presence of metal cofactors does not influence the disulfide redox potential.
Overall, these studies suggest that differences in the GSH/hGrx1 reaction rate with WT compared with ALS mutant hSOD1 and not the inherent thermodynamic stability of the hSOD1 disulfide bond may contribute to the greater pathogenicity of ALS mutant hSOD1.
PMID: 22369757
Delayed administration of VEGF rescues spinal motor neurons from death with a short effective time frame in excitotoxic experimental models in vivo.
VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) prevents neuronal death in different models of ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis), but few studies have addressed the efficacy of VEGF to protect motor neurons after the onset of symptoms, a critical point when considering VEGF as a potential therapeutic target for ALS.
We studied the capability of VEGF to protect motor neurons after an excitotoxic challenge in two models of spinal neurodegeneration in rats induced by AMPA (α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid) administered either chronically with osmotic minipumps or acutely by microdialysis.
VEGF was administered through osmotic minipumps in the chronic model or injected intracerebroventricularly in the acute model, and its effects were assessed by immunohistochemical and histological analyses and motor performance tests.
In the chronic model, VEGF stopped the progression of the paralysis and protected motor neurons when administered after AMPA before the onset of the motor symptoms, whereas no protection was observed when administered after the onset.
VEGF was also protective in the acute model, but with a short time window, since the protection was effective when administered 1 h but not 2 h after AMPA.
Our results indicate that while VEGF has an indubitable neuroprotective effect, its therapeutic potential for halting or delaying the progression of motor neuron loss in ALS would likely have a short effective time frame.
PMID: 23175734
Electric shocks at work in Europe: development of a job exposure matrix.
Electric shocks have been suggested as a potential risk factor for neurological disease, in particular for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
While actual exposure to shocks is difficult to measure, occurrence and variation of electric injuries could serve as an exposure proxy.
We assessed risk of electric injury, using occupational accident registries across Europe to develop an electric shock job-exposure-matrix (JEM).
Injury data were obtained from five European countries, and the number of workers per occupation and country from EUROSTAT was compiled at a 3-digit International Standard Classification of Occupations 1988 level.
We pooled accident rates across countries with a random effects model and categorised jobs into low, medium and high risk based on the 75th and 90th percentile.
We next compared our JEM to a JEM that classified extremely low frequency magnetic field exposure of jobs into low, medium and high.
Of 116 job codes, occupations with high potential for electric injury exposure were electrical and electronic equipment mechanics and fitters, building frame workers and finishers, machinery mechanics and fitters, metal moulders and welders, assemblers, mining and construction labourers, metal-products machine operators, ships' decks crews and power production and related plant operators.
Agreement between the electrical injury and magnetic field JEM was 67.2%.
Our JEM classifies occupational titles according to risk of electric injury as a proxy for occurrence of electric shocks.
In addition to assessing risk potentially arising from electric shocks, this JEM might contribute to disentangling risks from electric injury from those of extremely low frequency magnetic field exposure.
PMID: 23413259
C9orf72 repeat expansions are a rare genetic cause of parkinsonism.
The recently identified C9orf72 gene accounts for a large proportion of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degenerations.
As several forms of these disorders are associated with parkinsonism, we hypothesized that some patients with Parkinson's disease or other forms of parkinsonism might carry pathogenic C9orf72 expansions.
Therefore, we looked for C9orf72 repeat expansions in 1446 unrelated parkinsonian patients consisting of 1225 patients clinically diagnosed with Parkinson's disease, 123 with progressive supranuclear palsy, 21 with corticobasal degeneration syndrome, 43 with Lewy body dementia and 25 with multiple system atrophy-parkinsonism.
Of the 1446 parkinsonian patients, five carried C9orf72 expansions: three patients with typical Parkinson's disease, one with corticobasal degeneration syndrome and another with progressive supranuclear palsy.
This study shows that (i) although rare, C9orf72 repeat expansions may be associated with clinically typical Parkinson's disease and also with other parkinsonism; (ii) in several patients, parkinsonism was levodopa-responsive and remained pure, without associated dementia, for &gt;10 years and (iii) interestingly, all C9orf72 repeat expansion carriers had positive family histories of parkinsonism, degenerative dementias or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
This study also provides the tools for identifying parkinsonian patients with C9orf72 expansions, with important consequences for genetic counselling.
PMID: 21834058
Stress signaling from the endoplasmic reticulum: A central player in the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating neurodegenerative disease characterized by the misfolding and aggregation of distinct proteins in affected tissues, however, the pathogenic cause of disease remains unknown.
Recent evidence indicates that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress plays a central role in ALS pathogenesis.
ER stress activates the unfolded protein response (UPR), a homeostatic response to misfolded proteins.
The UPR is initially protective by up-regulation of specific ER stress-regulated genes and inhibition of general protein translation.
However, long-term ER stress leads to cell death via apoptotic signaling, thus providing a link to neurodegeneration.
Activation of the UPR is one of the earliest events in affected motor neurons of transgenic rodent models expressing ALS-linked mutant superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1).
Recently, genetic manipulation of ER stress in several different SOD1 mouse models was shown to alter disease onset and progression, implicating an active role for the UPR in disease mechanisms.
Furthermore, mutations to vesicle-associated membrane protein-associated protein B (VAPB), an ER transmembrane protein involved in ER stress regulation, also cause some cases of familial ALS.
ER stress also occurs in spinal cord tissues of human sporadic ALS patients, and recent evidence suggests that perturbation of the ER could occur in ALS cases associated with TAR DNA binding protein 43 (TDP-43), fused in sarcoma (FUS) and valosin containing protein (VCP).
Together these findings implicate ER stress as a potential upstream mechanism involved in both familial and sporadic forms of ALS.
Copyright © 2011 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.
PMID: 22666587
The Neuroinflammatory Response in ALS: The Roles of Microglia and T Cells.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease characterized by upper and lower motoneuron death.
Mutations in the gene for superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) cause a familial form of ALS and have been used to develop transgenic mice which overexpress human mutant SOD1 (mSOD) and these mice exhibit a motoneuron disease which is pathologically and phenotypically similar to ALS.
Neuroinflammation is a pathological hallmark of many neurodegenerative diseases including ALS and is typified by the activation and proliferation of microglia and the infiltration of T cells into the brain and spinal cord.
Although the neuroinflammatory response has been considered a consequence of neuronal dysfunction and death, evidence indicates that manipulation of this response can alter disease progression.
Previously viewed as deleterious to neuronal survival, recent reports suggest a trophic role for activated microglia in the mSOD mouse during the early stages of disease that is dependent on instructive signals from infiltrating T cells.
However, at advanced stages of disease, activated microglia acquire increased neurotoxic potential, warranting further investigation into factors capable of skewing microglial activation towards a neurotrophic phenotype as a means of therapeutic intervention in ALS.
PMID: 22916141
Human neural stem cell replacement therapy for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis by spinal transplantation.
Mutation in the ubiquitously expressed cytoplasmic superoxide dismutase (SOD1) causes an inherited form of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS).
Mutant synthesis in motor neurons drives disease onset and early disease progression.
Previous experimental studies have shown that spinal grafting of human fetal spinal neural stem cells (hNSCs) into the lumbar spinal cord of SOD1(G93A) rats leads to a moderate therapeutical effect as evidenced by local α-motoneuron sparing and extension of lifespan.
The aim of the present study was to analyze the degree of therapeutical effect of hNSCs once grafted into the lumbar spinal ventral horn in presymptomatic immunosuppressed SOD1(G93A) rats and to assess the presence and functional integrity of the descending motor system in symptomatic SOD1(G93A) animals.
Presymptomatic SOD1(G93A) rats (60-65 days old) received spinal lumbar injections of hNSCs.
After cell grafting, disease onset, disease progression and lifespan were analyzed.
In separate symptomatic SOD1(G93A) rats, the presence and functional conductivity of descending motor tracts (corticospinal and rubrospinal) was analyzed by spinal surface recording electrodes after electrical stimulation of the motor cortex.
Silver impregnation of lumbar spinal cord sections and descending motor axon counting in plastic spinal cord sections were used to validate morphologically the integrity of descending motor tracts.
Grafting of hNSCs into the lumbar spinal cord of SOD1(G93A) rats protected α-motoneurons in the vicinity of grafted cells, provided transient functional improvement, but offered no protection to α-motoneuron pools distant from grafted lumbar segments.
Analysis of motor-evoked potentials recorded from the thoracic spinal cord of symptomatic SOD1(G93A) rats showed a near complete loss of descending motor tract conduction, corresponding to a significant (50-65%) loss of large caliber descending motor axons.
These data demonstrate that in order to achieve a more clinically-adequate treatment, cell-replacement/gene therapy strategies will likely require both spinal and supraspinal targets.
PMID: 22344582
Clinical and pathological features of familial frontotemporal dementia caused by C9ORF72 mutation on chromosome 9p.
Frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis are closely related clinical syndromes with overlapping molecular pathogenesis.
Several families have been reported with members affected by frontotemporal dementia, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or both, which show genetic linkage to a region on chromosome 9p21.
Recently, two studies identified the FTD/ALS gene defect on chromosome 9p as an expanded GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat in a non-coding region of the chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 gene (C9ORF72).
In the present study, we provide detailed analysis of the clinical features and neuropathology for 16 unrelated families with frontotemporal dementia caused by the C9ORF72 mutation.
All had an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance.
Eight families had a combination of frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis while the other eight had a pure frontotemporal dementia phenotype.
Clinical information was available for 30 affected members of the 16 families.
There was wide variation in age of onset (mean = 54.3, range = 34-74 years) and disease duration (mean = 5.3, range = 1-16 years).
Early diagnoses included behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia (n = 15), progressive non-fluent aphasia (n = 5), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (n = 9) and progressive non-fluent aphasia-amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (n = 1).
Heterogeneity in clinical presentation was also common within families.
However, there was a tendency for the phenotypes to converge with disease progression; seven subjects had final clinical diagnoses of both frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and all of those with an initial progressive non-fluent aphasia diagnosis subsequently developed significant behavioural abnormalities.
Twenty-one affected family members came to autopsy and all were found to have transactive response DNA binding protein with M(r) 43 kD (TDP-43) pathology in a wide neuroanatomical distribution.
All had involvement of the extramotor neocortex and hippocampus (frontotemporal lobar degeneration-TDP) and all but one case (clinically pure frontotemporal dementia) had involvement of lower motor neurons, characteristic of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
In addition, a consistent and relatively specific pathological finding was the presence of neuronal inclusions in the cerebellar cortex that were ubiquitin/p62-positive but TDP-43-negative.
Our findings indicate that the C9ORF72 mutation is a major cause of familial frontotemporal dementia with TDP-43 pathology, that likely accounts for the majority of families with combined frontotemporal dementia/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis presentation, and further support the concept that frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis represent a clinicopathological spectrum of disease with overlapping molecular pathogenesis.
PMID: 23373317
[Restorative therapy in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis].
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is an adult onset neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the death of upper and lower motor neurons.
About 10% of all ALS cases are familial; approximately 20% of familial ALS cases are caused by mutations in the superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) gene.
We developed rats that express a human SOD1 transgene with ALS-associated mutations, developing striking motor neuron degeneration and paralysis.
The larger size of this rat model as compared with the ALS mice, will facilitate studies involving manipulations of spinal fluid and the spinal cord.
Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is one of the most potent survival-promoting factors for motor neurons.
We administered human recombinant HGF (hrHGF) by continuous intrathecal delivery to the transgenic rats at the onset of paralysis for 4 weeks.
Intrathecal administration of hrHGF attenuated motor neuron degeneration and prolonged the duration of the disease by 63%.
To translate this strategy to human treatment, we induced a contusive cervical spinal cord injury in the common marmoset, a primate, and then administered hrHGF intrathecally.
The intrathecal administration of hrHGF promoted functional recovery.
These results prompted further clinical trials in ALS using continuous intrathecal administration of hrHGF.
PMID: 22703383
The correlation between motor impairments and event-related desynchronization during motor imagery in ALS patients.
The event-related desynchronization (ERD) in EEG is known to appear during motor imagery, and is thought to reflect cortical processing for motor preparation.
The aim of this study is to examine the modulation of ERD with motor impairment in ALS patients.
ERD during hand motor imagery was obtained from 8 ALS patients with a variety of motor impairments.
ERD was also obtained from age-matched 11 healthy control subjects with the same motor task.
The magnitude and frequency of ERD were compared between groups for characterization of ALS specific changes.
The ERD of ALS patients were significantly smaller than those of control subjects.
Bulbar function and ERD were negatively correlated in ALS patients.
Motor function of the upper extremities did was uncorrelated with ERD.
ALS patients with worsened bulbar scales may show smaller ERD.
Motor function of the upper extremities did was uncorrelated with ERD.
PMID: 22800606
Analysis of neuromuscular junctions and effects of anabolic steroid administration in the SOD1G93A mouse model of ALS.
Several lines of evidence indicate that neuromuscular junction (NMJ) destruction and disassembly is an early phenomenon in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Here we analyzed by confocal and electron microscopy the NMJ structure in the diaphragm of SOD1G93A mice at symptom onset.
In these mice, which provide a model for familial ALS, diaphragm denervation (~50%) as well as gastrocnemius denervation (~40%) was found.
In addition, the size of the synaptic vesicle pool was reduced and alterations of mitochondria were observed in approximately 40% of the remaining presynaptic terminals.
Chronic treatment of SOD1G93A mice with the anabolic steroid nandrolone during the presymptomatic stage preserved the diaphragm muscle mass and features indicative of synaptic activity.
These features were represented by the number of vesicles docked within 200 nm from the presynaptic membrane and area of acetylcholine receptor clusters.
Structural preservation of mitochondria was documented in presynaptic terminals.
However, innervation of diaphragm muscle fibers was only slightly increased in nandrolone-treated SOD1-mutant mice.
Altogether the results point out and define fine structural alterations of diaphragm NMJs in the murine model of familial ALS at symptom onset, and indicate that nandrolone may prevent or delay structural alterations in NMJ mitochondria and stimulate presynaptic activity but does not prevent muscle denervation during the disease.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23360740
Whole-brain analysis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis by using echo-planar spectroscopic imaging.
To detect regional metabolic differences in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) with whole-brain echo-planar spectroscopic imaging.
Sixteen patients with ALS (nine men, seven women; mean age, 56.6 years), five persons suspected of having ALS (four men, one woman; mean age, 62.6 years), and 10 healthy control subjects (five men, five women; mean age, 56.1 years) underwent echo-planar spectroscopic imaging after providing informed consent.
The study was approved by the institutional review board and complied with HIPAA.
Data were analyzed with the Metabolic Imaging and Data Analysis System software, and processed metabolite maps were coregistered and normalized to a standard brain template.
Metabolite maps of creatine (Cr), choline (Cho), and N-acetylaspartate (NAA) were segmented into 81 regions with Automated Anatomical Labeling software to measure metabolic changes throughout the brains of patients with ALS.
Statistical analysis involved an unpaired, uncorrected, two-sided Student t test.
The NAA/Cho ratio across six regions was significantly lower by a mean of 23% (P ≤ .01) in patients with ALS than in control subjects.
These regions included the caudate, lingual gyrus, supramarginal gyrus, and right and left superior and right inferior occipital lobes.
The NAA/Cr ratio was significantly lower (P ≤ .01) in eight regions in the patient group, by a mean of 16%.
These included the caudate, cuneus, frontal inferior operculum, Heschl gyrus, precentral gyrus, rolandic operculum, and superior and inferior occipital lobes.
The Cho/Cr ratio did not significantly differ in any region between patient and control groups.
Whole-brain echo-planar spectroscopic imaging permits detection of regional metabolic abnormalities in ALS, including not only the motor cortex but also several other regions implicated in ALS pathophysiologic findings.
PMID: 22637429
C9ORF72 repeat expansion in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in the Kii peninsula of Japan.
In the Kii peninsula of Japan, high prevalences of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and parkinsonism-dementia complex have been reported.
There are 2 major foci with a high prevalence, which include the southernmost region neighboring the Koza River (Kozagawa and Kushimoto towns in Wakayama prefecture) and the Hohara district (Mie prefecture).
To delineate the molecular basis of ALS in the Kii peninsula of Japan, we analyzed hexanucleotide repeat expansion in the chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 (C9ORF72) gene, which has recently been identified as a frequent cause of ALS and frontotemporal dementia in the white population.
Case series.
University hospitals.
Twenty-one patients (1 familial patient and 20 sporadic patients) with ALS from Wakayama prefecture, and 16 patients with ALS and 16 patients with parkinsonism-dementia complex originating from Mie prefecture surveyed in 1994 through 2011 were enrolled in the study.
In addition, 40 probands with familial ALS and 217 sporadic patients with ALS recruited from other areas of Japan were also enrolled in this study.
After screening by repeat-primed polymerase chain reaction, Southern blot hybridization analysis was performed to confirm the expanded alleles.
We identified 3 patients with ALS (20%) with the repeat expansion in 1 of the 2 disease foci.
The proportion is significantly higher than those in other regions in Japan.
Detailed haplotype analyses revealed an extended shared haplotype in the 3 patients with ALS, suggesting a founder effect.
Our findings indicate that the repeat expansion partly accounts for the high prevalence of ALS in the Kii peninsula.
PMID: 22500701
Cervical vestibular evoked myogenic potentials to air-conducted sound in early amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Cervical vestibular evoked myogenic potentials (cVEMPs) provide assessment of lower-brainstem lesions affecting their neuronal pathways.
We aimed to determine whether cVEMPs to air-conducted sound (ACS) are also abnormal in patients with early stages of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), with or without bulbar involvement.
cVEMPs were recorded in 22 ALS patients and 23 age- and sex-matched healthy volunteers.
Their latencies and amplitudes were compared between the ALS patients and the control group.
cVEMPs were obtained in all ALS patients and controls.
P(13) and N(23) latencies and P(13)-N(23) amplitudes did not significantly differ between controls and ALS patients, either with or without bulbar involvement.
We postulate that the ACS-cVEMP neural pathway is not affected in patients with early stages of ALS, even with clinical findings of bulbar involvement.
Therefore, ACS-cVEMP is not a sensitive diagnostic tool for early detection of brainstem involvement in patients with ALS.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22939820
The kynurenine pathway in neurodegenerative diseases: mechanistic and therapeutic considerations.
The kynurenine pathway (KP), the primary route of tryptophan degradation in mammalian cells, consists of many metabolites including kynurenic acid (KYNA), quinolinic acid (QUIN), 3-hydroxykynurenine (3-HK) and picolinic acid (PIC).
The former two are neuroactive, while the latter two are molecules with pro-oxidants and antioxidants properties.
These agents are considered to be involved in aging and numerous neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), Huntington's disease (HD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Several studies have demonstrated that altered kynurenine metabolism plays an important role in the pathogenesis of this group of diseases.
The important metabolites and key enzymes show significant importance in those disorders.
Both analogs of the neuroprotective metabolites and small molecule enzyme inhibitors preventing the formation of neurotoxic compounds may have potential therapeutic significance.
In this review we discuss the mechanistic and therapeutic considerations of KP in aging and the main neurodegenerative diseases and review the updated knowledge in this therapeutic field.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23246360
Aerosolization of cyanobacteria as a risk factor for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (sALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease with no known cause.
There are many clues to suggest an environmental trigger for the disease, including reports of conjugal couples and co-localized employees that developed sALS.
On the island of Guam,a very high incidence of sALS occurred among the Chamorro natives back in the 1940s and 1950s and has been linked to the neurotoxin beta-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA) that is produced by cyanobacteria that live symbiotically in the roots of the cycad plant, the seeds from which were a staple of the Chamorro diet.
It has been shown that BMAA was biomagnified up the food chain from the cycad seeds to the now largely extinct, indigenous flying foxes, a former delicacy of the Chamorro natives.
Recent evidence suggests that long term, chronic exposure to low levels of BMAA might cause ALS in genetically predisposed individuals.
Many exposure routes to BMAA have been implicated thus far, including consumption of contaminated food and exposure to water harboring cyanobacterial blooms which have the capability of producing BMAA.
Aerosolization is a well documented means for bacterial or toxin exposure causing subsequent illness, as in the case of brevetoxins and pulmonary disease and Legionnaire's disease.
We hypothesize that some cases of ALS may be related to chronic exposure to the aerosolization of cyanobacteria derived BMAA from cooling towers and might explain the observation of conjugal ALS couples.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22542526
Early steps in oxidation-induced SOD1 misfolding: implications for non-amyloid protein aggregation in familial ALS.
Among the diseases of protein misfolding, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is unusual in that the proteinaceous neuronal inclusions that are the hallmark of the disease have neither the classic fibrillar appearance of amyloid by transmission electron microscopy nor the affinity for the dye Congo red that is a defining feature of amyloid.
Mutations in the Cu, Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) cause the largest subset of inherited ALS cases.
The mechanism by which this highly stable enzyme misfolds to form non-amyloid aggregates is currently poorly understood, as are the stresses that initiate misfolding.
The oxidative damage hypothesis proposes that SOD1's normal free radical scavenger role puts it at risk of oxidative damage and that it is this damage that triggers the misfolding primed by mutation.
Here, we present evidence that hydrogen peroxide treatment, which generates free radical species at the SOD1 active site, causes oxidative damage to active-site histidine residues, leading to major structural changes and non-amyloid aggregation similar to that seen in ALS.
Time-resolved measurements of release of bound metal ligands, exposure of hydrophobic surface area, and alterations in the SOD1 proton NMR spectrum have allowed us to model the early structural changes occurring as SOD1 misfolds, prior to aggregation.
ALS-causing SOD1 mutations apparently alter this pathway by increasing exposure of buried epitopes in misfolded species populated at endpoint.
We have identified a well-populated early misfolding intermediate that could serve as a target for therapies designed to block downstream misfolding and aggregation events and thereby treat SOD1-associated ALS.
Copyright © 2012.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
PMID: 23076378
Efficient gene expression from integration-deficient lentiviral vectors in the spinal cord.
Gene transfer to spinal cord cells may be crucial for therapy in spinal muscular atrophy, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and spinal cord injury.
Lentiviral vectors are efficient for transduction of a variety of cells, but like all integrating vectors they pose a risk of insertional mutagenesis.
Integration-deficient lentiviral vectors (IDLVs) remain episomal but retain the transduction efficiency of standard integrating lentiviral vectors, particularly when the episomes are not diluted out through repeated cell division.
We have now applied IDLVs for transduction of spinal cord in vitro, in explants and in vivo.
Our results demonstrate similar efficiency of eGFP expression from integrating lentiviral vectors and IDLVs in most cell types analyzed, including motor neurons, interneurons, dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons and astroglia.
IDLV-mediated expression of pro-glial-cell-derived neurotrophic factor (Gdnf) rescues motor neuron cultures from death caused by removal of exogenous trophic support.
IDLVs also mediate efficient RNA interference in DRG neuron cultures.
After intraparenchymal injection in the rat and mouse cervical and lumbar regions in vivo, transduction is mainly neuronal, with both motor neurons and interneurons being efficiently targeted.
These results suggest that IDLVs could be efficient and safer tools for spinal cord transduction in future therapeutic strategies.
PMID: 23001631
The cognitive and behavioural profile of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: application of the consensus criteria.
The study aims to assess the spectrum of cognitive and behavioural disorders in patients affected by Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) according to the recent consensus criteria [9].
The study also intends to assess the impact of physical disability on cognitive and behavioural abnormalities.
Detailed neurological, neuropsychological and neurobehavioral evaluations were administered to 23 ALS patients, 11 Lower Motor Neuron Disease (LMND) patients and 39 healthy controls.
Strong et al.'s criteria [9] were applied to diagnose the presence of cognitive/behavioural impairment.
Clinical and neuropsychological scores were used for group comparisons and correlation analyses.
In comparison with LMND and controls, a subgroup of ALS patients (∼30%) manifested executive dysfunction, which was severe enough to classify them as cognitively impaired.
Action naming difficulties and short-term memory deficits were also observed.
Aspontaneity, disorganization and mental rigidity reached clinical relevance in 20% of ALS patients.
A small percentage of ALS patients (13%) also had comorbid dementia.
The cognitive or behavioural status was not related to the clinical features of ALS.
The use of consensus criteria for cognitive and behavioural impairment and the comparison with the LMND group proved useful in defining the spectrum of non-motor manifestations of ALS.
PMID: 22981160
[Chronic central nervous system effects of pesticides: state-of-the-art].
Given the neurotoxic properties of pesticides, suggested by experimental results and clinical observations, many epidemiological studies have investigated neurological effects following acute or chronic exposure to pesticides.
This review provides an overview of current knowledge about pesticide effects on the central nervous system: neurodegenerative diseases (Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis), cognitive disorders, and psychiatric disorders (mood disorders, anxiety, depression and suicide).
Parkinson's disease, the most widely studied in relation with pesticide exposure, particularly with insecticides and herbicides, was observed to be a risk factor of the disease.
Evidence is scarce for Alzheimer's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, but quite consistent.
Cognitive and psychiatric disorders were often observed in relation with organophosphate insecticide exposure.
Cognitive disorders were found associated with acute and chronic exposures, and psychiatric disorders mostly with poisonings.
These epidemiologic studies were limited by a lack of detailed and reliable exposure assessment.
The role of genetic susceptibilities has been recently observed, but must be further investigated.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 20703739
Distance-constrained orthogonal Latin squares for brain-computer interface.
The P300 brain-computer interface (BCI) using electroencephalogram (EEG) signals can allow amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients to instruct computers to perform tasks.
To strengthen the P300 response and increase classification accuracy, we proposed an experimental design where characters are intensified according to orthogonal Latin square pairs.
These orthogonal Latin square pairs satisfy certain distance constraint so that neighboring characters are not intensified simultaneously.
However, it is unknown whether such distance-constrained, orthogonal Latin square pairs actually exist.
In this paper, we show that for every matrix size commonly used in P300 BCI, thousands to millions of such distance-constrained, orthogonal Latin square pairs can be systematically and efficiently constructed and are sufficient for the purpose of being used in P300 BCI.
PMID: 22117117
Impact of patient suffering on caregiver well-being: the case of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients and their caregivers.
The impact of patient suffering on family caregivers is an understudied but important topic.
This study of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and their caregivers examined the associations of two components of patient suffering: patient physical symptoms, and mental distress, as well as the patient's support for the caregiver, with caregiver well-being.
The sample consisted of 52 patients with ALS and their caregivers.
Patients and caregivers each completed a structured survey assessing multiple domains including demographics, health, and well-being.
Specifically, patients rated their own physical symptoms and mental distress.
Caregivers rated their own daily affect, and the extent to which they perceived the patient as supportive.
Caregivers also reported whether or not they had found any benefit in dealing with the patient's illness.
Regression analyses yielded significant associations of patient distress with caregiver negative affect; patient support was associated with greater caregiver positive affect, and patient symptoms and support were associated with greater likelihood of caregiver benefit finding.
There was a significant two-way interaction of patient symptoms by support, namely, benefit finding was not only more likely with greater physical suffering and patient support, but it was also the case that caregivers who perceived the care recipient as unsupportive could only find benefit when this person experienced intense physical suffering.
Support interventions for ALS patients and their caregivers should devote particular attention to how caregivers may be affected by witnessing their loved one's sufferings, as well as identify and address challenges in support exchanges between caregivers and patients.
PMID: 22680643
Glutamate transporter 1: target for the treatment of alcohol dependence.
Emerging evidence indicates that many aspects of alcohol and drug dependence involve changes in glutamate transmission.
A number of studies have reported that drugs of abuse, including alcohol and cocaine, alter glutamate transport.
Extracellular glutamate is regulated by a number of glutamate transporters in various brain regions.
Of these transporters, glutamate transporter (GLT1) is a key player in the removal of most of the extracellular glutamate.
Similar to neurodegenerative disease models, in which there is dysfunction of the glutamatergic excitatory system, the role of GLT1 has been tested in drug dependence models that show dysfunction of glutamate transmission.
We and others have recently found that ceftriaxone, an FDA-approved drug known to elevate GLT1 expression, attenuates cue-induced cocaine relapse.
Moreover, we recently found that alcohol-preferring rats treated with ceftriaxone showed a significant dosedependent reduction in alcohol consumption.
We also demonstrated that ceftriaxone-induced upregulation of GLT1 expression was associated with increases in glutamate uptake in Huntington's disease mouse model.
Importantly, ceftriaxone is currently in clinical trials for the treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
This review provides information about the potential therapeutic role of GLT1 for the treatment of alcohol abuse and dependence.
PMID: 22350501
EEG correlates of P300-based brain-computer interface (BCI) performance in people with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The purpose of this study was to identify electroencephalography (EEG) features that correlate with P300-based brain-computer interface (P300 BCI) performance in people with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Twenty people with ALS used a P300 BCI spelling application in copy-spelling mode.
Three types of EEG features were found to be good predictors of P300 BCI performance: (1) the root-mean-square amplitude and (2) the negative peak amplitude of the event-related potential to target stimuli (target ERP) at Fz, Cz, P3, Pz, and P4; and (3) EEG theta frequency (4.5-8 Hz) power at Fz, Cz, P3, Pz, P4, PO7, PO8 and Oz.
A statistical prediction model that used a subset of these features accounted for &gt;60% of the variance in copy-spelling performance (p &lt; 0.001, mean R(2) = 0.6175).
The correlations reflected between-subject, rather than within-subject, effects.
The results enhance understanding of performance differences among P300 BCI users.
The predictors found in this study might help in: (1) identifying suitable candidates for long-term P300 BCI operation; (2) assessing performance online.
Further work on within-subject effects needs to be done to establish whether P300 BCI user performance could be improved by optimizing one or more of these EEG features.
PMID: 23285768
[Combination of chronic obstructive lung disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis].
A case of chronic obstructive lung disease in combination with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is described.
It resulted in progressive respiratory insufficiency with the fatal outcome.
PMID: 23631660
Human marrow stromal cells reduce microglial activation to protect motor neurons in a transgenic mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Human marrow stromal cells (hMSCs) injected intrathecally can effectively increase the lifespan and protect motor neurons in a transgenic mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
However, how the transplanted cells exert a neuroprotective effect is still unclear.
More recently, the anti-inflammation effect of marrow stromal cells has generated a great deal of interest.
In the present study, we sought to investigate whether intrathecally injected hMSCs protect motor neurons through attenuating microglial activation and the secretion of inflammatory factors in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) transgenic mice.
In addition, we also focused on the mode of hMSCs inhibiting microglial activation.
We transplanted hMSCs into the cisterna magna of SOD1 mice at the age of 8, 10 and 12 weeks.
At sacrifice, tissues were harvested for analysis of neuron counts, microglial activation, TNFα secretion and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) protein expression.
In vitro, microglial cells were treated with hMSC co-culture, hMSC transwell culture or hMSC conditioned medium to investigate the mode of hMSCs exerting an anti-inflammation effect.
Intrathecally transplanted hMSCs inhibited inflammatory response in SOD1 transgenic mice, which was evidenced by the decreases in microglial activation, TNFα secretion and iNOS protein expression.
In addition, the inhibitory effect on microglial activation of hMSCs was through secretion of diffusible molecules adjusted to environmental cues.
Intrathecally injected hMSCs can attenuate microglial activation through secretion of diffusible molecules to exert a therapeutic effect in SOD1 transgenic mice.
Further studies are needed to explore the exact mechanisms by which hMSCs inhibit inflammation for facilitating the therapeutic effect.
PMID: 23620769
Protein arginine methyltransferase 1 and 8 interact with FUS to modify its sub-cellular distribution and toxicity in vitro and in vivo.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a late onset and progressive motor neuron disease.
Mutations in the gene coding for fused in sarcoma/translocated in liposarcoma (FUS) are responsible for some cases of both familial and sporadic forms of ALS.
The mechanism through which mutations of FUS result in motor neuron degeneration and loss is not known.
FUS belongs to the family of TET proteins, which are regulated at the post-translational level by arginine methylation.
Here, we investigated the impact of arginine methylation in the pathogenesis of FUS-related ALS.
We found that wild type FUS (FUS-WT) specifically interacts with protein arginine methyltransferases 1 and 8 (PRMT1 and PRMT8) and undergoes asymmetric dimethylation in cultured cells.
ALS-causing FUS mutants retained the ability to interact with both PRMT1 and PRMT8 and undergo asymmetric dimethylation similar to FUS-WT.
Importantly, PRMT1 and PRMT8 localized to mutant FUS-positive inclusion bodies.
Pharmacologic inhibition of PRMT1 and PRMT8 activity reduced both the nuclear and cytoplasmic accumulation of FUS-WT and ALS-associated FUS mutants in motor neuron-derived cells and in cells obtained from an ALS patient carrying the R518G mutation.
Genetic ablation of the fly homologue of human PRMT1 (DART1) exacerbated the neurodegeneration induced by overexpression of FUS-WT and R521H FUS mutant in a Drosophila model of FUS-related ALS.
These results support a role for arginine methylation in the pathogenesis of FUS-related ALS.
PMID: 23458708
Lack of sigma-1 receptor exacerbates ALS progression in mice.
The function of the sigma-1 receptor (S1R) has been implicated in modulating the activity of various ion channels.
In the CNS S1R is enriched in cholinergic postsynaptic densities in spinal cord motoneurons (MNs).
Mutations in S1R have been found in familial cases of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
In this study we show that a knockout of S1R in the SOD1*G93A mouse model of ALS significantly reduces longevity (end stage).
Electrophysiological experiments demonstrate that MN of mice lacking S1R exhibit increased excitability.
Taken together the data suggest the S1R acts as a brake on excitability, an effect that might enhance longevity in an ALS mouse model.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
PMID: 22892309
Screening in ALS and FTD patients reveals 3 novel UBQLN2 mutations outside the PXX domain and a pure FTD phenotype.
Mutations in UBQLN2 have recently been shown to cause dominant X-linked amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and ALS plus frontotemporal dementia (FTD).
Information on their frequency in different populations is still rare, and a pure FTD phenotype has not yet been reported.
Moreover, the mutational spectrum of known UBQLN2 mutations is still limited to its PXX repeat region.
Based on a screening of 206 ALS and FTD patients, we here report 3 novel UBQLN2 mutations, accounting for 1.2% (2/161) ALS and 2.2% (1/45) FTD patients, including a patient with pure FTD.
All mutations were located in highly conserved domains outside the PXX repeat region and not observed in 1450 ethnically matched control X-chromosomes.
All affected patients presented with apparently sporadic disease.
UBQLN2 mutations are rare in Central European ALS and FTD patients, but contribute significantly to patients with seemingly sporadic disease.
UBQLN2 is able to cause any disease on the ALS-FTD continuum, including pure FTD.
Because the pathogenic mechanism of UBQLN2 mutations is not limited to its PXX region, UBQLN2 screening in neurodegenerative patients should not be limited to this region.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21404355
1H MRS of basal ganglia and thalamus in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Previous studies have evaluated motor and extramotor cerebral cortical regions in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) using (1) H MRS, but none have evaluated the thalamus or basal ganglia.
The objective of this exploratory study was to evaluate the subclinical involvement of the basal ganglia and thalamus in patients with ALS using (1) H MRS.
Fourteen patients (52±7 years) with sporadic definite ALS and 17 age-matched controls were studied using volumetric MRSI on a 3-T scanner.
The concentration of the metabolites N-acetylaspartate (NAA), choline (Cho) and their ratio (NAA/Cho) were obtained bilaterally from the basal ganglia (lentiform nucleus, caudate) and thalamus.
The maximum rates of finger and foot tap and lip and tongue movements were obtained to assess extrapyramidal and pyramidal tract function.
In patients with ALS, relative to controls, the NAA concentration was significantly lower (p&lt;0.02) in the basal ganglia and thalamus, and the Cho concentration was higher (p&lt;0.01) in these structures, except in the caudate (p=0.04).
Correspondingly, the NAA/Cho ratio was significantly lower (p&lt;0.01) in these structures, except in the caudate (p=0.03), in patients than in controls.
There were mild to strong correlations (r=0.4-0.7) between the metabolites of the basal ganglia and finger tap, foot tap and lip and tongue movement rates.
In conclusion, decreased NAA in the basal ganglia and thalamus and increased Cho and decreased NAA/Cho in the lentiform nucleus and thalamus are indicative of neuronal loss or dysfunction and alterations in choline-containing membranes in these structures.
Copyright © 2011 John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd.
PMID: 23017503
Split-hand index for the diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Preferential wasting of the thenar group of muscles, the split hand sign, appears to be a specific feature of ALS.
The present study developed a novel split-hand index (SI) and assessed its diagnostic utility in ALS.
One hundred and seventy consecutive patients with neuromuscular symptoms (44 ALS, 126 patients with other neuromuscular disorders) were prospectively recruited according to standards for reporting of diagnostic accuracy (STARD) criteria.
The SI was derived by dividing the product of the compound muscle action potential (CMAP) amplitude recorded over the first dorsal interosseous and abductor pollicis brevis by the CMAP amplitude recorded over the abductor digiti minimi.
The SI was significantly reduced in ALS patients (ALS 3.5 ± 0.6; patients with other neuromuscular disorders 9.1 ± 0.3, P &lt; 0.0001), particularly in limb-onset ALS (2.3 ± 0.5, P &lt; 0.0001).
Receiver operating characteristic curve analysis indicated that SI reliably differentiated ALS from patients with other neuromuscular disorders (area under curve ALS 0.83, P &lt; 0.0001) with an optimal SI cut-off value of 5.2 exhibiting a sensitivity of 74% and specificity 80%.
The split-hand index robustly differentiates ALS from mimic disorders.
The split-hand index is a simple measure that could be utilized in a standard neurophysiology setting.
A reduction in SI distinguishes ALS from mimic disorders, potentially facilitating an earlier diagnosis of ALS.
Copyright © 2012 International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22989611
Tracheostomy mechanical ventilation in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: clinical features and survival analysis.
Tracheostomy mechanical ventilation (TMV) is performed in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients with a respiratory failure or when the non-invasive ventilation (NIV) is no longer effective.
We evaluated the clinical characteristics and survival of a cohort of tracheostomized ALS patients, followed in a single ALS Clinical Center.
Between 2001 and 2010, 87 out of 279 ALS patients were submitted to TMV.
Onset was spinal in 62 and bulbar in 25.
After tracheostomy, most patients were followed up through telephone interviews to caregivers.
A complete survival analysis could be performed in fifty-two TMV patients.
31.3% ALS patients underwent tracheostomy, with a male prevalence (M/F=1.69) and a median age of 61 years (interquartile range=47-66).
After tracheostomy, nearly all patients were under home care.
TMV ALS patients were more likely than non-tracheostomized (NT) patients to be implanted with a PEG device, although the bulbar-/spinal-onset ratio did not differ between the two groups.
Kaplan-Meyer analysis showed that tracheostomy increases median survival (TMV, 47 months vs NT, 31 months, p=0.008), with the greatest effect in patients younger than 60 at onset (TMV ≤ 60 years, 57.5 months vs NT ≤ 60 years, 38.5 months, p=0.002).
TMV is increasingly performed in ALS patients.
Nearly all TMV patients live at home and most of them are fed through a PEG device.
Survival after tracheostomy is generally increased, with the stronger effect in patients younger than 60.
This survival advantage is apparently lost when TMV is performed in patients older than 60.
The results of this study might be useful for the decision-making process of patients and their families about this advanced palliative care.
Copyright © 2012.
Published by Elsevier B.V.
PMID: 23264567
Neurodegenerative diseases: quantitative predictions of protein-RNA interactions.
Increasing evidence indicates that RNA plays an active role in a number of neurodegenerative diseases.
We recently introduced a theoretical framework, catRAPID, to predict the binding ability of protein and RNA molecules.
Here, we use catRAPID to investigate ribonucleoprotein interactions linked to inherited intellectual disability, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Creutzfeuld-Jakob, Alzheimer's, and Parkinson's diseases.
We specifically focus on (1) RNA interactions with fragile X mental retardation protein FMRP; (2) protein sequestration caused by CGG repeats; (3) noncoding transcripts regulated by TAR DNA-binding protein 43 TDP-43; (4) autogenous regulation of TDP-43 and FMRP; (5) iron-mediated expression of amyloid precursor protein APP and α-synuclein; (6) interactions between prions and RNA aptamers.
Our results are in striking agreement with experimental evidence and provide new insights in processes associated with neuronal function and misfunction.
PMID: 22863620
Modulating inflammatory monocytes with a unique microRNA gene signature ameliorates murine ALS.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive disease associated with neuronal cell death that is thought to involve aberrant immune responses.
Here we investigated the role of innate immunity in a mouse model of ALS.
We found that inflammatory monocytes were activated and that their progressive recruitment to the spinal cord, but not brain, correlated with neuronal loss.
We also found a decrease in resident microglia in the spinal cord with disease progression.
Prior to disease onset, splenic Ly6Chi monocytes expressed a polarized macrophage phenotype (M1 signature), which included increased levels of chemokine receptor CCR2.
As disease onset neared, microglia expressed increased CCL2 and other chemotaxis-associated molecules, which led to the recruitment of monocytes to the CNS by spinal cord-derived microglia.
Treatment with anti-Ly6C mAb modulated the Ly6Chi monocyte cytokine profile, reduced monocyte recruitment to the spinal cord, diminished neuronal loss, and extended survival.
In humans with ALS, the analogous monocytes (CD14+CD16-) exhibited an ALS-specific microRNA inflammatory signature similar to that observed in the ALS mouse model, linking the animal model and the human disease.
Thus, the profile of monocytes in ALS patients may serve as a biomarker for disease stage or progression.
Our results suggest that recruitment of inflammatory monocytes plays an important role in disease progression and that modulation of these cells is a potential therapeutic approach.
PMID: 22833725
Genetic inactivation of mitochondria-targeted redox enzyme p66ShcA preserves neuronal viability and mitochondrial integrity in response to oxidative challenges.
Mitochondria are essential to neuronal viability and function due to their roles in ATP production, intracellular calcium regulation, and activation of apoptotic pathways.
Accordingly, mitochondrial dysfunction has been indicated in a wide variety of neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease (AD), Huntington's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, stroke, and multiple sclerosis (MS).
Recent evidence points to the permeability transition pore (PTP) as a key player in mitochondrial dysfunction in these diseases, in which pathologic opening leads to mitochondrial swelling, rupture, release of cytochrome c, and neuronal death.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS), which are inducers of PTP opening, have been prominently implicated in the progression of many of these neurodegenerative diseases.
In this context, inactivation of a mitochondria-targeted redox enzyme p66ShcA (p66) has been recently shown to prevent the neuronal cell death leading to axonal severing in the murine model of MS, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE).
To further characterize the response of neurons lacking p66, we assessed their reaction to treatment with stressors implicated in neurodegenerative pathways.
Specifically, p66-knockout (p66-KO) and wild-type (WT) neurons were treated with hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) and nitric oxide (NO), and assessed for cell viability and changes in mitochondrial properties, including morphology and ROS production.
The results showed that p66-KO neurons had greater survival following treatment with each stressor and generated less ROS when compared to WT neurons.
Correspondingly, mitochondria in p66-KO neurons showed diminished morphological changes in response to these challenges.
Overall, these findings highlight the importance of developing mitochondria-targeted therapeutics for neurodegenerative disorders, and emphasize p66, mitochondrial ROS, and the PTP as key targets for maintaining mitochondrial and neuronal integrity.
PMID: 23527531
Prognostic value of efficiently correcting nocturnal desaturations after one month of non-invasive ventilation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a retrospective monocentre observational cohort study.
Abstract NIV adherence ('quantity' of ventilation) has a prognostic impact in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
We hypothesized that NIV effectiveness ('quality') could also have a similar impact.
NIV effectiveness was evaluated in 82 patients within the first month (M1) and every three months (symptoms, arterial blood bases, and nocturnal pulsed oxygen saturation - SpO2).
Kaplan-Meier survival and risk factors for mortality one year after NIV initiation were evaluated.
Forty patients were considered 'correctly ventilated' at M1 (Group 1, less than 5% of nocturnal oximetry time with an SpO2&lt;90% - TS90) while 42 were not (Group 2).
Both groups were comparable in terms of respiratory and neurological baseline characteristics.
Survival was better in Group 1 (75% survival at 12 months) than in Group 2 (43% survival at 12 months, p = 0.002).
In 12 Group 2 patients corrective measures were efficient in correcting TS90 at six months.
In this subgroup, one-year mortality was not different from that in Group 1.
Multivariate analysis identified independent mortality risk factors expectedly including bulbar involvement (HR = 4.31 (1.73 - 10.76), p = 0.002), 'rapid respiratory decline' (HR = 3.55 (1.29 - 9.75), p = 0.014) and vital capacity (HR = 0.97 (0.95 - 0.99), p = 0.010), but also inadequate ventilation in the first month (HR = 2.32 (1.09 - 4.94), p = 0.029).
In conclusion, in ALS patients NIV effectiveness to correct nocturnal desaturations is an independent prognostic factor.
PMID: 22566594
Motor axonal excitability properties are strong predictors for survival in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The aim of this study was to investigate whether axonal excitability indices are associated with survival in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Previous nerve excitability studies suggested increased persistent sodium currents in motor axons of patients with ALS, which lead to axonal hyperexcitability and potentially enhance neuronal death.
112 patients with sporadic ALS were followed up until endpoint (death or tracheostomy).
Multivariate analyses were performed using the Cox proportional hazard model.
Threshold tracking was used to measure multiple axonal excitability indices in median motor axons, such as strength-duration time constant (SDTC; a measure of nodal persistent sodium current).
Latent addition was also used to estimate the magnitude of persistent sodium currents.
The overall median tracheostomy-free survival from onset was 37 months.
Prolonged SDTC was strongly associated with shorter survival (adjusted HR 4.07; 95% CI 1.7 to 9.8; p=0.0018) compared with older onset age (&gt;60 years; HR=1.80) and bulbar onset (HR=1.80).
Estimated median survival was 34 months in the longer SDTC group and 51 months in the shorter SDTC group.
This index was highly statistically significant even after multiple testing adjustments with age and site of onset (bulbar or limb).
Latent addition study results were consistent with these findings.
Axonal persistent sodium currents, estimated by SDTC and latent addition, are strong and independent predictors for shorter survival in patients with ALS.
Membrane hyperexcitability is possibly associated with motor neuronal death, and modulation of excessive sodium currents could be a novel therapeutic option for ALS.
PMID: 23689371
Structural transformation of the amyloidogenic core region of TDP-43 protein initiates its aggregation and cytoplasmic inclusion.
TDP-43 (TAR DNA-binding protein of 43 kDa) is a major deposited protein in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia with ubiquitin.
A great number of genetic mutations identified in the flexible C-terminal region are associated with disease pathologies.
We investigated the molecular determinants of TDP-43 aggregation and its underlying mechanisms.
We identified a hydrophobic patch (residues 318-343) as the amyloidogenic core essential for TDP-43 aggregation.
Biophysical studies demonstrated that the homologous peptide formed a helix-turn-helix structure in solution, whereas it underwent structural transformation from an α-helix to a β-sheet during aggregation.
Mutation or deletion of this core region significantly reduced the aggregation and cytoplasmic inclusions of full-length TDP-43 (or TDP-35 fragment) in cells.
Thus, structural transformation of the amyloidogenic core initiates the aggregation and cytoplasmic inclusion formation of TDP-43.
This particular core region provides a potential therapeutic target to design small-molecule compounds for mitigating TDP-43 proteinopathies.
PMID: 22570068
[Molecular link between inefficient GluA2 RNA editing and TDP-43 pathology in ALS motor neurons].
The motor neurons of sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients exhibit several molecular abnormalities, including 2 that are specific to ALS motor neurons: (1) pathological changes related to the mislocalization of the TAR DNA-binding protein (TDP-43), including both the appearance of phosphorylated TDP-43-containing inclusions in the cytoplasm and the loss of TDP-43 from the nucleus; and (2) inefficient RNA editing at the Q/R site of GluA2, a subunit of the AMPA receptor.
TDP-43-related pathological features are closely associated with ALS in most ALS patients and with significant behavioral and pathological changes in genetically engineered mice; therefore, abnormal TDP-43 processing is believed to play a role in the pathogenesis of ALS.
The extent of GluA2 RNA editing decreases in the motor neurons of sporadic ALS patients in a disease-specific and motor neuron-selective manner.
Importantly, this molecular abnormality is a direct cause of death of motor neurons in conditional knockout mice for adenosine deaminase acting on RNA 2 (ADAR2), the enzyme that specifically catalyzes RNA editing at the GluA2 Q/R site.
Notably, these molecular abnormalities, i.e., TDP-43-related pathological features and inefficient GluA2 RNA editing, are found in approximately half of the motor neurons in sporadic ALS patients and both of them always occur in the same motor neurons.
Because TDP-43-related pathological features and inefficient GluA2 RNA editing are highly disease specific in ALS motor neurons, investigation into the molecular link between these abnormalities is likely to provide new insights into ALS pathogenesis.
PMID: 23851159
Impairment of autophagy: from hereditary disorder to drug intoxication.
At first, the molecular mechanism of autophagy was unveiled in a unicellular organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae (budding yeast), followed by the discovery that the basic mechanism of autophagy is conserved in multicellular organisms including mammals.
Although autophagy was considered to be a non-selective bulk protein degradation system to recycle amino acids during periods of nutrient starvation, it is also believed to be an essential mechanism for the selective elimination of proteins/organelles that are damaged under pathological conditions.
Research advances made using autophagy-deficient animals have revealed that impairments of autophagy often underlie the pathogenesis of hereditary disorders such as Danon, Parkinson's, Alzheimer's, and Huntington's diseases, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
On the other hand, there are many reports that drugs and toxicants, including arsenic, cadmium, paraquat, methamphetamine, and ethanol, induce autophagy during the development of their toxicity on many organs including heart, brain, lung, kidney, and liver.
Although the question as to whether autophagic machinery is involved in the execution of cell death or not remains controversial, the current view of the role of autophagy during cell/tissue injury is that it is an important, often essential, cytoprotective reaction; disturbances in cytoprotective autophagy aggravate cell/tissue injuries.
The purpose of this review is to provide (1) a gross summarization of autophagy processes, which are becoming more important in the field of toxicology, and (2) examples of important studies reporting the involvement of perturbations in autophagy in cell/tissue injuries caused by acute as well as chronic intoxication.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23406666
Role of metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 signaling and homer in oxygen glucose deprivation-mediated astrocyte apoptosis.
Group I metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR) are coupled via Gαq/11 to the activation of phospholipase Cβ, which hydrolyzes membrane phospholipids to form inositol 1,4,5 trisphosphate and diacylglycerol.
In addition to functioning as neurotransmitter receptors to modulate synaptic activity, pathological mGluR5 signaling has been implicated in a number of disease processes including Fragile X, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, epilepsy, and drug addiction.
The expression of mGluR5 in astrocytes has been shown to be increased in several acute and chronic neurodegenerative conditions, but little is known about the functional relevance of mGluR5 up-regulation in astrocytes following injury.
In the current study, we investigated primary mouse cortical astrocyte cell death in response to oxygen glucose deprivation (OGD) and found that OGD induced both necrotic and apoptotic cell death of astrocytes.
OGD resulted in an increase in astrocytic mGluR5 protein expression, inositol phosphate formation and extracellular regulated kinase (ERK1/2) phosphorylation, but only inositol phosphate formation was blocked with the mGluR5 selective antagonist MPEP.
Cortical astrocytes derived from mGluR5 knockout mice exhibited resistance to OGD-stimulated apoptosis, but a lack of mGluR5 expression did not confer protection against necrotic cell death.
The antagonism of the inositol 1,4,5 trisphosphate receptor also reduced apoptotic cell death in wild-type astrocytes, but did not provide any additional protection to astrocytes derived from mGluR5 null mice.
Moreover, the disruption of Homer protein interactions with mGluR5 also reduced astrocyte apoptosis.
Taken together these observations indicated that mGluR5 up-regulation contributed selectively to the apoptosis of astrocytes via the activation of phospholipase C and the release of calcium from intracellular stores as well as via the association with Homer proteins.
PMID: 22710833
Loss of fused in sarcoma (FUS) promotes pathological Tau splicing.
A subset of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) patients present pathological redistribution and aggregation of the nuclear protein fused in sarcoma (FUS) in the cytoplasm.
Although FUS associates with the spliceosomal complex, no endogenous neuronal splicing targets have been identified.
Here we identify Tau mRNA as a physiological splicing target of FUS.
In mouse brain, FUS directly binds to Tau pre-mRNA, and knockdown of FUS in hippocampal neurons leads to preferential inclusion of Tau exons 3 and 10.
FUS knockdown causes significant growth cone enlargement and disorganization reminiscent of Tau loss of function.
These findings suggest that disturbed cytoskeletal function and enhanced expression of the neurodegeneration-associated Tau exon 10 might contribute to FTLD/ALS with FUS inclusions.
PMID: 22570065
[Biomarkers for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis].
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a relentlessly progressive neurodegenerative disorder.
Modern technology has brought new insights in the underlying pathophysiology of ALS through examination of genomic, proteomic and physiological changes in patients.
However, the diagnosis of this disorder is still based on clinical findings, and there is a pronounced delay between the onset of symptoms and diagnosis.
Functional rating scales, forced vital capacity, and patient survival have been used as measures of therapeutic response so far.
Although effective treatments for ALS are lacking, the discovery of biomarkers for this disease offers clinicians the tools for rapid diagnosis, improved ways to monitor disease progression, and insights into the pathophysiology of sporadic ALS.
Potential biomarkers that are useful in the diagnosis of ALS and sensitive to the progression of disease, which might enhance the diagnostic algorithm and provide new drug targets, are now being eagerly investigated through blood and cerebrospinal fluid analyses, as well as physiological and neuroimaging studies.
These biomarkers, when used in combination, might be sensitive to early therapeutic effects.
Such biomarkers might also resolve complexities of phenotypic heterogeneity in clinical trials.
In this review article, I have discussed the development of biochemical, physiological and neuroimaging biomarkers for ALS including our recent results on CSF TDP-43 (TAR DNA-binding protein 43 kDa), and have considered the potential future directions for research.
We should ultimately aim to broaden the available therapeutic options for patients with this disease.
PMID: 22986236
Mitochondrial dysfunction in human TDP-43 transfected NSC34 cell lines and the protective effect of dimethoxy curcumin.
TAR-DNA-binding protein of 43kDa (TDP-43) was recently found to be one of the major disease proteins in the pathological inclusions of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
The effect of TDP-43 on mitochondrial function remains poorly understood.
Here, we show that human TDP-43 caused mitochondrial morphologic abnormality, decrease of mitochondrial complex I activity and mitochondrial transmembrane potential, and increased expression of mitochondrial uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2) in human TDP-43 stably transfected NSC-34 cells by using flow cytometric analysis, spectrophotometric assays, electron microscopy and Western blotting.
We also show that dimethoxy curcumin (DMC) could ameliorate mitochondrial dysfunction in mutated TDP-43 stably transfected cell lines.
DMC could be potentially useful for neurodegenerative diseases linked with mutated TDP-43.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23393146
Co-induction of the heat shock response ameliorates disease progression in a mouse model of human spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy: implications for therapy.
Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy, also known as Kennedy's disease, is an adult-onset hereditary neurodegenerative disorder caused by an expansion of the polyglutamine repeat in the first exon in the androgen receptor gene.
Pathologically, the disease is defined by selective loss of spinal and bulbar motor neurons causing bulbar, facial and limb weakness.
Although the precise disease pathophysiology is largely unknown, it appears to be related to abnormal accumulation of the pathogenic androgen receptor protein within the nucleus, leading to disruption of cellular processes.
Using a mouse model of spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy that exhibits many of the characteristic features of the human disease, in vivo physiological assessment of muscle function revealed that mice with the pathogenic expansion of the androgen receptor develop a motor deficit characterized by a reduction in muscle force, abnormal muscle contractile characteristics, loss of functional motor units and motor neuron degeneration.
We have previously shown that treatment with arimoclomol, a co-inducer of the heat shock stress response, delays disease progression in the mutant superoxide dismutase 1 mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, a fatal motor neuron disease.
We therefore evaluated the therapeutic potential of arimoclomol in mice with spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy.
Arimoclomol was administered orally, in drinking water, from symptom onset and the effects established at 18 months of age, a late stage of disease.
Arimoclomol significantly improved hindlimb muscle force and contractile characteristics, rescued motor units and, importantly, improved motor neuron survival and upregulated the expression of the vascular endothelial growth factor which possess neurotrophic activity.
These results provide evidence that upregulation of the heat shock response by treatment with arimoclomol may have therapeutic potential in the treatment of spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy and may also be a possible approach for the treatment of other neurodegenerative diseases.
PMID: 21965298
Arginine methylation by PRMT1 regulates nuclear-cytoplasmic localization and toxicity of FUS/TLS harbouring ALS-linked mutations.
Mutations in FUS/TLS (fused in sarcoma/translated in liposarcoma) cause an inheritable form of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS6).
In contrast to FUS(WT), which is concentrated in the nucleus, these mutants are abnormally distributed in the cytoplasm where they form inclusions and associate with stress granules.
The data reported herein demonstrate the importance of protein arginine methylation in nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling of FUS and abnormalities of ALS-causing mutants.
Depletion of protein arginine methyltransferase 1 (PRMT1; the enzyme that methylates FUS) in mouse embryonic fibroblasts by gene knockout, or in human HEK293 cells by siRNA knockdown, diminished the ability of ALS-linked FUS mutants to localize to the cytoplasm and form inclusions.
To examine properties of FUS mutants in the context of neurons vulnerable to the disease, FUS(WT) and ALS-linked FUS mutants were expressed in motor neurons of dissociated murine spinal cord cultures.
In motor neurons, shRNA-mediated PRMT1 knockdown concomitant with the expression of FUS actually accentuated the shift in distribution of ALS-linked FUS mutants from the nucleus to the cytoplasm.
However, when PRMT1 was inhibited prior to expression of ALS-linked FUS mutants, by pretreatment with a global methyltransferase inhibitor, ALS-linked FUS mutants were sequestered in the nucleus and cytoplasmic inclusions were reduced, as in the cell lines.
Mitochondria were significantly shorter in neurons with cytoplasmic ALS-linked FUS mutants, a factor that could contribute to toxicity.
We propose that arginine methylation by PRMT1 participates in the nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling of FUS, particularly of ALS6-associated mutants, and thus contributes to the toxic gain of function conferred by these disease-causing mutations.
PMID: 22745895
A case of motor neuron disease presenting as dyspnea in the emergency department.
Motor neuron disease encompasses a group of progressive neurologic disorders that destroy cells responsible for the control of essential muscles.
The disorders are characterized by progressive weakness, muscle atrophy and fasciculation, spasticity, dysarthria, dysphagia, and respiratory compromise.
A 66-year-old male presented to the emergency department with progressive dyspnea and, ultimately, respiratory failure.
In spite of extensive cardiopulmonary evaluation, a cause could not be identified except aging.
After complete history taking, physical and neurologic examination, motor neuron disease was suspected at last.
Thus, elderly patients with dyspnea in the emergency department could have hidden diseases beyond the normal aging process.
PMID: 21907703
Alfa-class prefoldin protein UXT is a novel interacting partner of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 2 (Als2) protein.
Mutations in Als2 gene cause several autosomal recessive forms of motor neuron diseases including Juvenile Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (JALS), Juvenile Primary Lateral Sclerosis (PLSJ) and Infantile-onset Ascending Hereditary Spastic Paralysis (IAHSP).
To find novel protein-protein interactions of Als2 protein we performed a yeast two hybrid screen and fished out the Ubiquitously Expressed Transcript (UXT) protein.
UXT is a novel gene encoding for an α-class prefoldin type chaperone which acts as a co-activator for various transcriptional factors such as Nf-κB and AR.
The interaction between Als2 and UXT was confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation.
Co-localization between endogenous Als2 and UXT was mainly found in the cytoplasm of neuronal Neuro2a cells with immunofluorescence microscopy.
Cell cycle arrest of Neuro2a cells showed that Als2 and Uxt transcriptional levels are synchronously changing.
Our results suggest that Als2 is a binding partner of Uxt and Als2/Uxt interaction could be important for the activation of Nf-κB pathway.
These results provides basis for future research to investigate the role of Nf-κB pathway in the development of motor neuron diseases.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23474849
RNA dysfunction and aggrephagy at the centre of an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/frontotemporal dementia disease continuum.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia form two poles of a genetically, pathologically and clinically-related disease continuum.
Analysis of the genes and proteins at the heart of this continuum highlights dysfunction of RNA processing and aggrephagy as crucial disease-associated pathways.
TAR DNA binding protein and fused in sarcoma (FUS) are both RNA processing proteins whose dysfunction impacts on global cellular RNA regulation.
The recent discovery that expression of repeat expansions in the C9orf72 gene may induce RNA foci that could sequester RNA binding proteins such as TAR DNA binding protein and FUS highlights a further possibly important mechanism of RNA dysfunction in disease.
Furthermore, sequestration of key RNA binding proteins may also play an important role in sporadic disease due to the association of TAR DNA binding protein and FUS with stress granules.
In a further functional convergence, ubiquilin 2, p62, valosin-containing protein and optineurin are all linked to aggrephagy, a cargo-specific subtype of autophagy important for degrading ubiquitinated target proteins through the lysosome.
Notably these two key pathways interact; TAR DNA binding protein and FUS bind and regulate key aggrephagy-related genes whereas dysfunction of aggrephagy leads to cytoplasmic relocalization and aggregation of TAR DNA binding protein.
The convergence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia linked genes into these two pathways highlights RNA dysfunction and aggrephagy as promising areas for drug discovery.
In this review we discuss the importance of each of these pathways and suggest mechanisms by which they may cause both sporadic and familial disease.
PMID: 22430187
Two potential biomarkers identified in mesenchymal stem cells and leukocytes of patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal, neurodegenerative disorder caused by degeneration of motor neurons.
The cause for most cases of ALS is multi-factorial,this enhances the need to characterize and isolate specific biomarkers found in biological samples from ALS patients.
To this end we use human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC) derived from the bone marrow of six ALS patients (ALS hMSC) and identified two genes, Cytoplasmic FMR Interacting Protein 2 (CyFIP2) and Retinoblastoma (Rb) Binding Protein 9 (RbBP9) with a significant decrease in post transcriptional A to I RNA editing compared to hMSC of healthy individuals.
At the transcriptional level we show abnormal expression of these two genes in ALS hMSC by quantitative real time-PCR (qRT-PCR) and Western blot suggesting a problem in the regulation of these genes in ALS.
To strengthen this view we tested by qRT-PCR the expression of these genes in peripheral blood leukocytes (PBL) isolated from blood samples of 17 ALS patients and found that CyFIP2 and RbBP9 levels of expression were significantly different compared to the levels of expression of these two genes in 19 normal PBL samples.
Altogether we found two novel ALS potential biomarkers in non-neural tissues from ALS patients that may have direct diagnostic and therapeutic implications to the disease.
PMID: 22521219
Pesticide exposure and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Our objectives were to summarize literature on the association of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) with pesticides as a group and to evaluate associations of ALS with specific pesticides.
We conducted a meta-analysis of published studies of ALS and pesticides as a group and investigated the association of ALS with specific pesticides, using data from the Agricultural Health Study (AHS), a cohort including 84,739 private pesticide applicators and spouses.
AHS participants provided information on pesticide use at enrollment in 1993-1997.
In mortality data collected through February 2010, ALS was recorded on death certificates of 41 individuals whom we compared to the remaining cohort (controls), using unconditional logistic regression adjusted for age and gender to calculate odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals.
In the meta-analysis, ALS was associated with use of pesticides as a group (1.9, 1.1-3.1).
In the AHS, ALS was not associated with pesticides as a group, but was associated with use of organochlorine insecticides (OCs) (1.6, 0.8-3.5), pyrethroids (1.4, 0.6-3.4), herbicides (1.6, 0.7-3.7), and fumigants (1.8, 0.8-3.9).
ORs were elevated forever use of the specific OCs aldrin (2.1, 0.8-5.1), dieldrin (2.6, 0.9-7.3), DDT (2.1, 0.9-5.0), and toxaphene (2.0, 0.8-4.9).
None of these associations was statistically significant.
Similar results were observed in an analysis restricted to men.
In conclusion, the meta-analysis suggests that ALS risk is associated with use of pesticides as a group, and our analysis of AHS data points to OC use in particular.
The latter results are novel but based on a small number of cases and require replication in other populations.
Published by Elsevier B.V.
PMID: 23255347
Spliceosome integrity is defective in the motor neuron diseases ALS and SMA.
Two motor neuron diseases, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), are caused by distinct genes involved in RNA metabolism, TDP-43 and FUS/TLS, and SMN, respectively.
However, whether there is a shared defective mechanism in RNA metabolism common to these two diseases remains unclear.
Here, we show that TDP-43 and FUS/TLS localize in nuclear Gems through an association with SMN, and that all three proteins function in spliceosome maintenance.
We also show that in ALS, Gems are lost, U snRNA levels are up-regulated and spliceosomal U snRNPs abnormally and extensively accumulate in motor neuron nuclei, but not in the temporal lobe of FTLD with TDP-43 pathology.
This aberrant accumulation of U snRNAs in ALS motor neurons is in direct contrast to SMA motor neurons, which show reduced amounts of U snRNAs, while both have defects in the spliceosome.
These findings indicate that a profound loss of spliceosome integrity is a critical mechanism common to neurodegeneration in ALS and SMA, and may explain cell-type specific vulnerability of motor neurons.
Copyright © 2013 The Authors.
Published by John Wiley and Sons, Ltd on behalf of EMBO.
PMID: 22133357
Using induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) to model human neuromuscular connectivity: promise or reality?
Motor neuron diseases (MND) such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and spinal muscular atrophy are devastating, progressive and ultimately fatal diseases for which there are no effective treatments.
Recent evidence from systematic studies of animal models and human patients suggests that the neuromuscular junction (NMJ) is an important early target in MND, demonstrating functional and structural abnormalities in advance of pathological changes occurring in the motor neuron cell body.
The ability to study pathological changes occurring at the NMJ in humans is therefore likely to be important for furthering our understanding of disease pathogenesis, and also for designing and testing new therapeutics.
However, there are many practical and technical reasons why it is not possible to visualise or record from NMJs in pre- and early-symptomatic MND patients in vivo.
Other approaches are therefore required.
The development of stem cell technologies has opened up the possibility of creating human NMJs in vitro, using pluripotent cells generated from healthy individuals and patients with MND.
This review covers historical attempts to develop mature and functional NMJs in vitro, using co-cultures of muscle and nerve from animals, and discusses how recent developments in the generation and specification of human induced pluripotent stem cells provides an opportunity to build on these previous successes to recapitulate human neuromuscular connectivity in vitro.
© 2011 The Authors.
Journal of Anatomy © 2011 Anatomical Society.
PMID: 22539580
Phenotype and genotype analysis in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with TARDBP gene mutations.
To describe the phenotype and phenotype-genotype correlations in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) with TARDBP gene mutations.
French TARDBP+ patients with ALS (n = 28) were compared first to 3 cohorts: 737 sporadic ALS (SALS), 192 nonmutated familial ALS (FALS), and 58 SOD1 + FALS, and then to 117 TARDBP+ cases from the literature.
Genotype-phenotype correlations were studied for the most frequent TARDBP mutations.
In TARDBP+ patients, onset was earlier (p = 0.0003), upper limb (UL) onset was predominant (p = 0.002), and duration was longer (p = 0.0001) than in patients with SALS.
TARDBP+ and SOD1+ groups had the longest duration but diverged for site of onset: 64.3% UL onset for TARDBP+ and 74.1% on lower limbs for SOD1+ (p &lt; 0.0001).
The clinical characteristics of our 28 patients were similar to the 117 cases from the literature.
In Caucasians, 51.3% of had UL onset, while 58.8% of Asians had bulbar onset (p = 0.02).
The type of mutation influenced survival (p &lt; 0.0001), and the G298S1, lying in the TARDBP super rich glycine-residue domain, was associated with the worst survival (27 months).
Differences in phenotype between the groups as well as the differential influence of TARBDP mutations on survival may help physicians in ALS management and allow refining the strategy of genetic diagnosis.
PMID: 23118353
Protein disulfide isomerase in ALS mouse glia links protein misfolding with NADPH oxidase-catalyzed superoxide production.
Protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) is an oxidoreductase assisting oxidative protein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum of all types of cells, including neurons and glia.
In neurodegenerative disorders, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), up-regulation of PDI is an important part of unfolded protein response (UPR) that is thought to represent an adaption reaction and thereby protect the neurons.
Importantly, studies on animal models of familial ALS with mutant Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) have shown that the mutant SOD1 in astrocytes or microglia strongly regulates the progression of the disease.
Here, we found an early up-regulation of PDI in microglia of transgenic (tg) mutant SOD1 mice, indicating that in addition to neurons, UPR takes place in glial cells in ALS.
The observation was supported by the finding that also the expression of a UPR marker GADD34 (growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible protein) was induced in the spinal cord glia of tg mutant SOD1 mice.
Because mutant SOD1 can cause sustained activation of NADPH oxidase (NOX), we investigated the role of PDI in UPR-induced NOX activation in microglia.
In BV-2 microglia, UPR resulted in NOX activation with increased production of superoxide and increased release of tumor necrosis factor-α.
The phenomenon was recapitulated in primary rat microglia, murine macrophages and human monocytes.
Importantly, pharmacological inhibition of PDI or its down-regulation by short interfering RNAs prevented NOX activation in microglia and subsequent production of superoxide.
Thus, results strongly demonstrate that UPR, caused by protein misfolding, may lead to PDI-dependent NOX activation and contribute to neurotoxicity in neurodegenerative diseases including ALS.
PMID: 22938881
Prevention and management of limb contractures in neuromuscular diseases.
Limb contractures are a common impairment in neuromuscular diseases.
They contribute to increased disability from decreased motor performance, mobility limitations, reduced functional range of motion, loss of function for activities of daily living, and increased pain.
The pathogenesis of contractures is multifactorial.
Myopathic conditions are associated with more severe limb contractures compared with neuropathic disorders.
Although the evidence supporting the efficacy of multiple interventions to improve range of motion in neuromuscular diseases in a sustained manner is lacking, there are generally accepted principles with regard to splinting, bracing, stretching, and surgery that help minimize the impact or disability from contractures.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22718760
Targeted depletion of TDP-43 expression in the spinal cord motor neurons leads to the development of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-like phenotypes in mice.
ALS, or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, is a progressive and fatal motor neuron disease with no effective medicine.
Importantly, the majority of the ALS cases are with TDP-43 proteinopathies characterized with TDP-43-positive, ubiquitin-positive inclusions (UBIs) in the cytosol.
However, the role of the mismetabolism of TDP-43 in the pathogenesis of ALS with TDP-43 proteinopathies is unclear.
Using the conditional mouse gene targeting approach, we show that mice with inactivation of the Tardbp gene in the spinal cord motor neurons (HB9:Cre-Tardbp(lx/-)) exhibit progressive and male-dominant development of ALS-related phenotypes including kyphosis, motor dysfunctions, muscle weakness/atrophy, motor neuron loss, and astrocytosis in the spinal cord.
Significantly, ubiquitinated proteins accumulate in the TDP-43-depleted motor neurons of the spinal cords of HB9:Cre-Tardbp(lx/-) mice with the ALS phenotypes.
This study not only establishes an important role of TDP-43 in the long term survival and functioning of the mammalian spinal cord motor neurons, but also establishes that loss of TDP-43 function could be one major cause for neurodegeneration in ALS with TDP-43 proteinopathies.
PMID: 23043510
S-nitrosylated protein disulfide isomerase contributes to mutant SOD1 aggregates in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
A major hallmark of mutant superoxide dismutase (SOD1)-linked familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is SOD1-immunopositive inclusions found within motor neurons.
The mechanism by which SOD1 becomes aggregated, however, remains unclear.
In this study, we aimed to investigate the role of nitrosative stress and S-nitrosylation of protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) in the formation of SOD1 aggregates.
Our data show that with disease progression inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) was up-regulated, which generated high levels of nitric oxide (NO) and subsequently induced S-nitrosylation of PDI in the spinal cord of mutant SOD1 transgenic mice.
This was further confirmed by in vitro observation that treating SH-SY5Y cells with NO donor S-nitrosocysteine triggered a dose-dependent formation of S-nitrosylated PDI.
When mutant SOD1 was over-expressed in SH-SY5Y cells, the iNOS expression was up-regulated, and NO generation was consequently increased.
Furthermore, both S-nitrosylation of PDI and the formation of mutant SOD1 aggregates were detected in the cells expressing mutant SOD1(G93A).
Blocking NO generation with the NOS inhibitor N-nitro-L-arginine attenuated the S-nitrosylation of PDI and inhibited the formation of mutant SOD1 aggregates.
We conclude that NO-mediated S-nitrosylation of PDI is a contributing factor to the accumulation of mutant SOD1 aggregates in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
© 2012 International Society for Neurochemistry.
PMID: 21861815
Hypoxia inducible factor-1 as a target for neurodegenerative diseases.
Hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a transcriptional factor responsible for cellular and tissue adaption to low oxygen tension.
HIF-1, a heterodimer consisting of a constitutively expressed β subunit and an oxygen-regulated α subunit, regulates a series of genes that participate in angiogenesis, iron metabolism, glucose metabolism, and cell proliferation/survival.
The activity of HIF-1 is controlled by post-translational modifications on different amino acid residues of its subunits, mainly the alpha subunit.
Besides in ischemic stroke (see review [1]), emerging evidence has revealed that HIF-1 activity and expression of its down-stream genes, such as vascular endothelial growth factor and erythropoietin, are altered in a range of neurodegenerative diseases.
At the same time, experimental and clinical evidence has demonstrated that regulating HIF-1 might ameliorate the cellular and tissue damage in the neurodegenerative diseases.
These new findings suggest HIF-1 as a potential medicinal target for the neurodegenerative diseases.
This review focuses on HIF-1α protein modifications and HIF-1's potential neuroprotective roles in Alzheimer's (AD), Parkinson's (PD), Huntington's diseases (HD), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
PMID: 23808257
[Clinical case of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis management and treatment in the non-core clinic].
The article points out the problems of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) diagnostics, management and treatment in the non-core clinic (oncological dispensary intensive care unit).
There is no legislative base for medical and social protection of patients with ALS in Russia.
Article stresses the need to attract the attention of Ministry of healthcare of Russia to this problem.
PMID: 21651502
Alterations of T cell subsets in ALS: a systemic immune activation?
There is evidence that immunological factors may involved in pathogenetic mechanisms of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Few studies to date have explored the status of the systemic immune response in patients with ALS.
In order to examine whether systemic immune activation is observed in patients with ALS, we measured the number of T cell subsets by flow cytometry in 36 patients with ALS and 35 normal controls.
CD8 cytotoxic T cells and natural killer (NK) T cells were significantly increased in our patients with ALS compared with the control group (P = 0.02 and P = 0.04, respectively).
Treg cells were significantly reduced compared with normal controls (P = 0.01).
Treg cells were also negatively correlated with progression of the disease (P = 0.017).
Our results suggest a systemic immune activation in patients with ALS.
The high production of CD8(+) T and NKT cells may suggest an immunological reaction to some unknown or undetected endogenous proteins or viruses.
A probably dual (neurodestructive or neuroprotective) inflammatory function of Treg cells cannot be excluded.
© 2011 John Wiley &amp; Sons A/S.
PMID: 22143032
Characterization and expression analysis in the developing embryonic brain of the porcine FET family: FUS, EWS, and TAF15.
The FET protein family consists of FUS (TLS), EWS (EWSR1), and TAF15.
The FET proteins bind DNA and RNA and are involved in transcriptional regulation and RNA processing.
Translocations involving the FET genes have been identified in human sarcomas, and mutations in the FUS and TAF15 genes are associated with Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
We here describe the characterization of the porcine FET proteins and an expression analysis during embryonic brain development.
The FET proteins are well conserved between pig and human.
FET protein mutations associated with Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis affect evolutionary conserved amino acids.
In cultured cells the porcine FET proteins have a nuclear localization with some specific cytoplasmic aggregation of TAF15 in neuronal progenitor cells.
Immunohistochemical analyses supported a predominant nuclear localization, but also faint cytoplasmic localization.
The FET proteins have similar expression profiles throughout the development of the embryonic porcine brain and most cell types appeared positive for expression.
Quantitative RT-PCR analyses showed that the FET mRNA expression decreased during embryonic development of hippocampus and for FUS and EWS during embryonic development of cortex.
FET mRNA expression was relatively constant in brain stem, basal ganglia, and cerebellum.
Overall the FET protein localization and mRNA and protein expression analyses were concordant with previous analysis from the human brain.
The presented results indicate that the porcine brain could be an alternative model for the future examination of the normal functions as well as neurological disease associated functions of the FET proteins.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22578468
HO-1 induction in motor cortex and intestinal dysfunction in TDP-43 A315T transgenic mice.
TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) has been found to be related to the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
TDP-43 A315T transgenic mice develop degeneration of specific motor neurons, and accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins has been observed in the pyramidal cells of motor cortex of these mice.
In this study, we found stress-responsive HO-1 induction and no autophagic alteration in motor cortex of TDP-43 A315T transgenic mice.
Glial activation, especially astrocytic proliferation, occurred in cortical layer 5 and sub-meningeal region.
Interestingly, we noticed that progressively thinned colon, swollen small intestine and reduced food intake, rather than severe muscle weakness, contributed to the death of TDP-43 A315T transgenic mice.
Increased TDP-43 accumulation in the myenteric nerve plexus and increased thickness of muscular layer of colon were related to the intestinal dysfunction.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22368970
Brain FDG-PET changes in ALS and ALS-FTD.
FDG-PET in ALS most typically demonstrates a primary (and sometimes also supplementary) motor cortex hypometabolism, often associated with more diffuse cortical hypometabolism involving mostly the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, the medial and lateral premotor cortices, and the bilateral insular cortex involvement.
In ALS-FTD, extensive temporal hypometabolism is seen in addition to severe diffuse frontal hypometabolism.
This study analyses FDG-PET findings in 6 ALS patients and 4 ALS-FTD patients.
In addition to earlier described areas of hypometabolism in ALS, we found also reduced FDG-PET metabolism in the medial frontal cortex, the orbitofrontal cortex, and the anterior temporal lobe in our ALS patients.
The anterolateral area was the best preserved part of the frontal lobe in ALS patients.
In ALS-FTD, frontal and temporal hypometabolism was severe (and parietal hypometabolism was often also present) with relatively preserved perirolandic metabolism.
In ALS, more diffuse frontal and temporal FDG-PET hypometabolism was seen than earlier reported, with the anterolateral area as the best preserved part of the frontal lobe.
In ALS-FTD, relatively preserved perirolandic metabolism was seen, associated with severe frontal and temporal hypometabolism.
PMID: 23421600
Randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial of acetyl-L-carnitine for ALS.
Our objective was to assess the effects of acetyl-L-carnitine (ALC) with riluzole on disability and mortality of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Definite/probable ALS patients, 40-70 years of age, duration 6-24 months, self-sufficient (i.e. able to swallow, cut food/handle utensils, and walk), and with forced vital capacity (FVC) &gt; 80% entered a pilot double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel group trial and were followed for 48 weeks.
ALC or placebo 3 g/day was added to riluzole 100 mg/day.
Primary endpoint: number of patients no longer self-sufficient.
Secondary endpoints: changes in ALSFRS-R, MRC, FVC and McGill Quality of Life (QoL) scores.
Analysis was made in the intention-to-treat (ITT) and per-protocol (PP) population, completers and completers/compliers (i.e. taking &gt; 75% of study drug).
Forty-two patients received ALC and 40 placebo.
In the ITT population, 34 (80.9%) patients receiving ALC and 39 (97.5%) receiving placebo became non-self-sufficient (p = 0.0296).
In the PP analysis, percentages were 84.4 and 100.0% (p = 0.0538), respectively.
Mean ALSFRS-R scores at 48 weeks were 33.6 (SD 10.4) and 27.6 (9.9) (p = 0.0388), respectively, and mean FVC scores 90.3 (32.6) and 58.6 (31.2) (p = 0.0158), respectively.
Median survival was 45 months (ALC) and 22 months (placebo) (p = 0.0176).
MRC, QoL and adverse events were similar.
In conclusion, ALC may be effective, well-tolerated and safe in ALS.
A pivotal phase III trial is needed.
PMID: 21998667
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis multiprotein biomarkers in peripheral blood mononuclear cells.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal progressive motor neuron disease, for which there are still no diagnostic/prognostic test and therapy.
Specific molecular biomarkers are urgently needed to facilitate clinical studies and speed up the development of effective treatments.
We used a two-dimensional difference in gel electrophoresis approach to identify in easily accessible clinical samples, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC), a panel of protein biomarkers that are closely associated with ALS.
Validations and a longitudinal study were performed by immunoassays on a selected number of proteins.
The same proteins were also measured in PBMC and spinal cord of a G93A SOD1 transgenic rat model.
We identified combinations of protein biomarkers that can distinguish, with high discriminatory power, ALS patients from healthy controls (98%), and from patients with neurological disorders that may resemble ALS (91%), between two levels of disease severity (90%), and a number of translational biomarkers, that link responses between human and animal model.
We demonstrated that TDP-43, cyclophilin A and ERp57 associate with disease progression in a longitudinal study.
Moreover, the protein profile changes detected in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of ALS patients are suggestive of possible intracellular pathogenic mechanisms such as endoplasmic reticulum stress, nitrative stress, disturbances in redox regulation and RNA processing.
Our results indicate that PBMC multiprotein biomarkers could contribute to determine amyotrophic lateral sclerosis diagnosis, differential diagnosis, disease severity and progression, and may help to elucidate pathogenic mechanisms.
PMID: 22084410
Deregulation of TDP-43 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis triggers nuclear factor κB-mediated pathogenic pathways.
TDP-43 (TAR DNA-binding protein 43) inclusions are a hallmark of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
In this study, we report that TDP-43 and nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) p65 messenger RNA and protein expression is higher in spinal cords in ALS patients than healthy individuals.
TDP-43 interacts with and colocalizes with p65 in glial and neuronal cells from ALS patients and mice expressing wild-type and mutant TDP-43 transgenes but not in cells from healthy individuals or nontransgenic mice.
TDP-43 acted as a co-activator of p65, and glial cells expressing higher amounts of TDP-43 produced more proinflammatory cytokines and neurotoxic mediators after stimulation with lipopolysaccharide or reactive oxygen species.
TDP-43 overexpression in neurons also increased their vulnerability to toxic mediators.
Treatment of TDP-43 mice with Withaferin A, an inhibitor of NF-κB activity, reduced denervation in the neuromuscular junction and ALS disease symptoms.
We propose that TDP-43 deregulation contributes to ALS pathogenesis in part by enhancing NF-κB activation and that NF-κB may constitute a therapeutic target for the disease.
PMID: 23349634
A newly uncovered group of distantly related lysine methyltransferases preferentially interact with molecular chaperones to regulate their activity.
Methylation is a post-translational modification that can affect numerous features of proteins, notably cellular localization, turnover, activity, and molecular interactions.
Recent genome-wide analyses have considerably extended the list of human genes encoding putative methyltransferases.
Studies on protein methyltransferases have revealed that the regulatory function of methylation is not limited to epigenetics, with many non-histone substrates now being discovered.
We present here our findings on a novel family of distantly related putative methyltransferases.
Affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry shows a marked preference for these proteins to associate with various chaperones.
Based on the spectral data, we were able to identify methylation sites in substrates, notably trimethylation of K135 of KIN/Kin17, K561 of HSPA8/Hsc70 as well as corresponding lysine residues in other Hsp70 isoforms, and K315 of VCP/p97.
All modification sites were subsequently confirmed in vitro.
In the case of VCP, methylation by METTL21D was stimulated by the addition of the UBX cofactor ASPSCR1, which we show directly interacts with the methyltransferase.
This stimulatory effect was lost when we used VCP mutants (R155H, R159G, and R191Q) known to cause Inclusion Body Myopathy with Paget's disease of bone and Fronto-temporal Dementia (IBMPFD) and/or familial Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS).
Lysine 315 falls in proximity to the Walker B motif of VCP's first ATPase/D1 domain.
Our results indicate that methylation of this site negatively impacts its ATPase activity.
Overall, this report uncovers a new role for protein methylation as a regulatory pathway for molecular chaperones and defines a novel regulatory mechanism for the chaperone VCP, whose deregulation is causative of degenerative neuromuscular diseases.
PMID: 22040667
Optineurin with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-related mutations abrogates inhibition of interferon regulatory factor-3 activation.
Optineurin has been shown to be involved in primary open-angle glaucoma.
We recently found that optineurin is involved in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
On the other hand, optineurin has been shown to inhibit transcription factors related to innate immunity such as NF-κB and interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF3).
In the present study, the effect of ALS-associated optineurin mutations on IRF3 activation was investigated.
Optineurin inhibited IRF3 activation induced by melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 or Toll-IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor-inducing interferon-β.
The inhibition was abrogated by mutations related to ALS but not by a mutation related to glaucoma.
Reporter assay indicated that the JAK-STAT signaling pathway was not affected by optineurin.
These results show that ALS-related optineurin is involved in the IRF3 activation pathway.
Pathogenesis of ALS may be associated with some kind of innate immunity, especially that against virus infection, through IRF3 activation.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21956723
ALS clinical trials: do enrolled patients accurately represent the ALS population?
To assess the effect of eligibility criteria in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) clinical trials on the representativeness of the enrolled population.
Patients enrolled in 8 placebo-controlled clinical trials in our ALS center from 2003 to 2008 were compared 1) to the patients included a prospective epidemiologic register (Piemonte and Valle d'Aosta register for ALS, PARALS) in the same period and 2) the subset of PARALS patients who met the usual criteria for inclusion in clinical trials (PARALS-ct) (definite, probable, probable laboratory-supported ALS; age between 18 and 75 years; disease duration &lt;36 months; vital capacity at diagnosis ≥70%; score ≥3 at the items swallowing and respiratory insufficiency at the Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Functional Rating Scale-revised scale; riluzole therapy).
A total of 164 patients were enrolled in 8 different clinical trials.
The PARALS cohort included 813 patients, of whom 539 (66.3%) met the entry criteria for clinical trials.
Patients enrolled in clinical trials were different from both epidemiologic cohorts, since they were younger, had a longer diagnostic delay, and were more likely to have a spinal onset, and to be men.
Tracheostomy-free survival was significantly longer in the group of patients enrolled in clinical trials (median survival time, trial patients, 3.9 years [95% confidence interval (CI) 3.4-4.4]; PARALS, 2.6 [2.4-2.8]; PARALS-ct, 2.9 [2.7-3.1]).
Patients enrolled in clinical trials do not satisfactorily represent the ALS population; consequently, the findings of ALS trials lack of external validity (generalizability).
Efforts should be made to improve patients' recruitment in trials, particularly enrolling incident rather than prevalent cases.
PMID: 23110760
Inflammation and neurovascular changes in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Neuroinflammation in now established as an important factor in the pathogenesis of many neurodegenerative diseases, including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
At various time points, astrocytes and microglia are markedly activated, either producing neuroprotective or pro-inflammatory molecules, which can decrease or increase the rate of primary motor neuron degeneration respectively.
Recent research has shown that this neuroinflammatory component is affected by the peripheral immune system; T lymphocytes in particular are able to cross into the brain and spinal cord parenchyma, where they interact with resident microglia, either inducing them to adopt an M1 (cytotoxic) or M2 (protective) phenotype, depending on the stage of disease.
Clearly understanding the changes that occur to allow the interaction between peripheral and central immune responses will be essential in any attempt to manipulate the disease process via neuroinflammatory mechanisms.
However, our understanding of the endothelial changes, which facilitate the infiltration of peripheral immune cells into the brain and spinal cord, is still in its infancy.
There are suggestions, though, of up-regulation of cellular adhesion molecules, which are able to arrest circulating leukocytes and facilitate diapedesis into the brain parenchyma.
In addition, tight junction proteins appear to be down-regulated, leading to an increase in vascular permeability, an effect that is amplified by vascular damage late in the disease process.
This review summarises our current knowledge regarding neuroinflammation, peripheral immune involvement, and endothelial changes in ALS.
This article is part of a Special Issue entitled 'Neuroinflammation in neurodegeneration and neurodysfunction'.
Copyright © 2012.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
PMID: 22017980
FTD and ALS: genetic ties that bind.
Curiously, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD), seemingly disparate neurodegenerative disorders, can be inherited together.
Two groups (DeJesus-Hernandez et al.
and Renton et al.) show that the long sought after ALS/FTD mutation on chromosomal region 9p is a hexanucleotide expansion in C90RF72.
These studies, plus a study on X-linked ALS/FTD, provide molecular starting points for identifying pathways that link ALS and FTD pathogenesis.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23415570
Controversies and priorities in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Two decades after the discovery that 20% of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) cases were linked to mutations in the superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1) gene, a substantial proportion of the remainder of cases of familial ALS have now been traced to an expansion of the intronic hexanucleotide repeat sequence in C9orf72.
This breakthrough provides an opportunity to re-evaluate longstanding concepts regarding the cause and natural history of ALS, coming soon after the pathological unification of ALS with frontotemporal dementia through a shared pathological signature of cytoplasmic inclusions of the ubiquitinated protein TDP-43.
However, with profound clinical, prognostic, neuropathological, and now genetic heterogeneity, the concept of ALS as one disease appears increasingly untenable.
This background calls for the development of a more sophisticated taxonomy, and an appreciation of ALS as the breakdown of a wider network rather than a discrete vulnerable population of specialised motor neurons.
Identification of C9orf72 repeat expansions in patients without a family history of ALS challenges the traditional division between familial and sporadic disease.
By contrast, the 90% of apparently sporadic cases and incomplete penetrance of several genes linked to familial cases suggest that at least some forms of ALS arise from the interplay of multiple genes, poorly understood developmental, environmental, and age-related factors, as well as stochastic events.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21941533
Oxidative stress in neurodegeneration.
It has been demonstrated that oxidative stress has a ubiquitous role in neurodegenerative diseases.
Major source of oxidative stress due to reactive oxygen species (ROS) is related to mitochondria as an endogenous source.
Although there is ample evidence from tissues of patients with neurodegenerative disorders of morphological, biochemical, and molecular abnormalities in mitochondria, it is still not very clear whether the oxidative stress itself contributes to the onset of neurodegeneration or it is part of the neurodegenerative process as secondary manifestation.
This paper begins with an overview of how oxidative stress occurs, discussing various oxidants and antioxidants, and role of oxidative stress in diseases in general.
It highlights the role of oxidative stress in neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and Huntington's diseases and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The last part of the paper describes the role of oxidative stress causing deregulation of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5) hyperactivity associated with neurodegeneration.
PMID: 23635965
Motor neuron involvement in multisystem proteinopathy: implications for ALS.
To explore the putative connection between inclusion body myopathy, Paget disease, frontotemporal dementia (IBMPFD) and motor neuron disease (MND).
Clinical, genetic, and EMG characterization of 17 patients from 8 IBMPFD families.
Limb weakness was the most common clinical manifestation (present in 15 patients, median onset age 38 years, range 25-52), with unequivocal evidence of upper motor neuron dysfunction in 3.
EMG, abnormal in all 17, was purely neurogenic in 4, purely myopathic in 6, and mixed neurogenic/myopathic in 7.
Cognitive/behavioral impairment was detected in at least 8.
Mutations in VCP (R155H, R159G, R155C) were identified in 6 families, and in hnRNPA2B1 (D290V) in another family.
The genetic cause in the eighth family has not yet been identified.
Mutations in at least 4 genes may cause IBMPFD, and its phenotypic spectrum extends beyond IBM, Paget disease, and frontotemporal dementia (FTD).
Weakness, the most common and disabling manifestation, may be caused by muscle disease or MND.
The acronym IBMPFD is, therefore, insufficient to describe disorders due to VCP mutations or other recently identified IBMPFD-associated genes.
Instead, we favor the descriptor multisystem proteinopathy (MSP), which encompasses both the extended clinical phenotype and the previously described prominent pathologic feature of protein aggregation in affected tissues.
The nomenclature MSP1, MSP2, and MSP3 may be used for VCP-, HNRNPA2B1-, and HNRNPA1-associated disease, respectively.
Genetic defects in MSP implicate a range of biological mechanisms including RNA processing and protein homeostasis, both with potential relevance to the pathobiology of more common MNDs such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and providing an additional link between ALS and FTD.
PMID: 21941530
Comparison of classification methods for P300 brain-computer interface on disabled subjects.
We report on tests with a mind typing paradigm based on a P300 brain-computer interface (BCI) on a group of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), middle cerebral artery (MCA) stroke, and subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) patients, suffering from motor and speech disabilities.
We investigate the achieved typing accuracy given the individual patient's disorder, and how it correlates with the type of classifier used.
We considered 7 types of classifiers, linear as well as nonlinear ones, and found that, overall, one type of linear classifier yielded a higher classification accuracy.
In addition to the selection of the classifier, we also suggest and discuss a number of recommendations to be considered when building a P300-based typing system for disabled subjects.
PMID: 23475517
[Personal genome analysis in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis].
In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 5% of cases are familial, and most of the remaining cases are sporadic.
In familial ALS, many causative genes have been identified during the last 20 years of the golden age of genetics.
In particular, the recent discovery of a hexanucleotide repeat expansion in chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 (C9orf72) has had a large impact on ALS research, as this mutation is the most frequent cause of familial ALS in Europe and the US.
However, the relative rarity of this mutation in Japan and Asia suggests the need to identify further other causative genes of familial ALS.
In this regard, the advent of next-generation sequencing technology is expected to accelerate the identification of novel genes.
In addition, next-generation sequencing will supersede Sanger sequencing in the molecular diagnosis of familial ALS.
A number of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have been conducted to identify the disease-susceptibility genes of sporadic ALS.
In 1,305 Japanese ALS samples, the ZNF512B gene was associated with susceptibility to ALS.
This gene has been shown to be one of the prognostic factors in sporadic ALS.
Although GWAS that are based on the 'common disease-common variants hypothesis' have successfully revealed many disease-susceptibility genes, including ZNF512B, in sporadic ALS, the odds ratios associated with these risk alleles are generally low.
The next challenge in ALS research is to use next-generation sequencing techniques to identify disease-relevant alleles with large effect sizes based on the 'common disease-multiple rare variants hypothesis'.
PMID: 22819986
Cognitive and affective Theory of Mind in neurodegenerative diseases: neuropsychological, neuroanatomical and neurochemical levels.
The paper reviews of all of the current evidence on Theory of Mind (ToM) abilities in patients with neurodegenerative diseases.
ToM refers to the abilities to attribute mental states to others.
Two neural systems are involved in processing other people's beliefs and intentions (cognitive component) and others' emotions and feelings (affective component).
We hypothesize that patients with different neurodegenerative diseases may present different patterns of ToM deficits on the basis of how different neuropathological processes affect the neural bases of ToM components during the progression of a disease.
The studies we reviewed provided evidence of a deficit of the cognitive ToM component in cortical (Alzheimer's disease and frontotemporal dementia) and frontal-subcortical (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and basal ganglia disorders) neurodegenerative diseases.
As regards the affective ToM component, it resulted markedly impaired in frontotemporal dementia; it also resulted that performances in tasks assessing this process are heterogeneous in Parkinson's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The findings presented support the opportunity to introduce validated ToM tasks in the neuropsychological assessment of neurodegenerative diseases.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21946215
Molecular properties of TAR DNA binding protein-43 fragments are dependent upon its cleavage site.
Aggregation of TAR DNA binding protein-43 (TDP-43) is a hallmark feature of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration.
Under pathogenic conditions, abnormal cleavage of TDP-43 produces the phosphorylated C-terminal fragments (CTFs), which are enriched in neuronal inclusions; however, molecular properties of those TDP-43 fragments remain to be characterized.
Here we show distinct degrees of solubility and phosphorylation among fragments truncated at different sites of TDP-43.
Truncations were tested mainly within a second RNA recognition motif (RRM2) of TDP-43; when the truncation site was more C-terminal in an RRM2 domain, a TDP-43 CTF basically became less soluble and more phosphorylated in differentiated Neuro2a cells.
We also found that cleavage at the third β-strand in RRM2 leads to the formation of SDS-resistant soluble oligomers.
Molecular properties of TDP-43 fragments thus significantly depend upon its cleavage site, which might reflect distinct molecular pathologies among sub-types of TDP-43 proteinopathies.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23475514
[Personal genome research and neurological diseases: overview].
Neurological diseases include those caused by a single defective gene,e.g., Huntington's disease, other polyglutamine diseases, and muscular dystrophies, and those that are mostly sporadic but rarely show Mendelian inheritance in some families, e.g., Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and epilepsy.
The latter diseases are considered polygenic disorders.
Both sporadic and Mendelian cases of these diseases are believed to share some common pathological mechanisms.
Since the detection of causal genes for the Mendelian cases, studies have been initiated on disease pathology.
SNPs and rare gene variants play important roles in common neurological diseases.
From a technological perspective, next-generation sequencers have become widely available and have contributed to the advancement of research based on individual genome sequences (personal genome).
This paper presents an overview, as well as a historical context, of the contribution of personal genome research to neurological disease studies.
PMID: 22257884
Neuronal autophagy and neurodegenerative diseases.
Autophagy is a dynamic cellular pathway involved in the turnover of proteins, protein complexes, and organelles through lysosomal degradation.
The integrity of postmitotic neurons is heavily dependent on high basal autophagy compared to non-neuronal cells as misfolded proteins and damaged organelles cannot be diluted through cell division.
Moreover, neurons contain the specialized structures for intercellular communication, such as axons, dendrites and synapses, which require the reciprocal transport of proteins, organelles and autophagosomes over significant distances from the soma.
Defects in autophagy affect the intercellular communication and subsequently, contributing to neurodegeneration.
The presence of abnormal autophagic activity is frequently observed in selective neuronal populations afflicted in common neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
These observations have provoked controversy regarding whether the increase in autophagosomes observed in the degenerating neurons play a protective role or instead contribute to pathogenic neuronal cell death.
It is still unknown what factors may determine whether active autophagy is beneficial or pathogenic during neurodegeneration.
In this review, we consider both the normal and pathophysiological roles of neuronal autophagy and its potential therapeutic implications for common neurodegenerative diseases.
PMID: 23291526
Mechanical probes of SOD1 predict systematic trends in metal and dimer affinity of ALS-associated mutants.
Mutations and oxidative modification in the protein Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) have been implicated in the death of motor neurons in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a presently incurable, invariably fatal neurodegenerative disease.
Here we employ steered, all-atom molecular dynamics simulations in implicit solvent to investigate the significance of either mutations or post-translational modifications (PTMs) to SOD1 on metal affinity, dimer stability, and mechanical malleability.
The work required to induce moderate structural deformations as a function of sequence index constitutes a mechanical fingerprint measuring structural rigidity in the native basin, from which we are able to unambiguously distinguish wild-type SOD1 from PTM variants and measure the severity of a given PTM on structural integrity.
The cumulative distribution of work values provided a way to cleanly discriminate between SOD1 variants.
Disulfide reduction destabilizes dimer stability more than the removal of either metal, but not moreso than the removal of both metals.
Intriguingly, we found that disulfide reduction mechanically stabilizes apo-SOD1 monomer, underscoring the differences between native basin mechanical properties and equilibrium thermodynamic stabilities and elucidating the presence of internal stress in the apo state.
All PTMs and ALS-associated mutants studied showed an increased tendency to lose either Cu or Zn and to monomerize-processes known to be critical in the progression of ALS.
The valence of Cu strongly modulates its binding free energy.
As well, several mutants were more susceptible to loss of metals and monomerization than the disulfide-reduced or apo forms of SOD1.
Distance constraints are required to calculate free energies for metal binding and dimer separation, which are validated using thermodynamic cycles.
When distance constraints are removed, the results agree with those obtained from direct application of the Jarzynski equality.
Crown Copyright © 2013.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23337974
Association studies indicate that protein disulfide isomerase is a risk factor in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) plays an important role in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) by facilitating the exchange of disulfide bonds and, together with other ER stress proteins, is induced in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
However, genetic polymorphisms in the P4HB gene, which encodes PDI, have not been thoroughly investigated in ALS cases.
In this study, we determined whether single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the P4HB gene were associated with familial ALS (FALS) and sporadic ALS (SALS).
We report significant genotypic associations for two SNPs in P4HB with FALS, rs876016 (P=0.0198) and rs2070872 (P=0.0046), all values being FDR corrected.
Significant allelic associations were also obtained for rs876016 with FALS (P=0.0155) and ALS (FALS and SALS) (P=0.0148).
Four SNP haplotypes, which included two additional flanking SNPs, rs876017 and rs8324, were examined and rare haplotypes were found to be more common in ALS cases compared to controls.
Seven haplotypes were significantly associated with FALS and one haplotype was significantly associated with SALS.
One rare haplotype, which was present in controls, was overrepresented in a group of SOD1-positive FALS cases.
Reduced survival was observed in FALS cases possessing at least one copy of the minor allele of rs2070872 (P=0.0059) and rs8324 (P=0.0167) and in individuals lacking the homozygous AAAC/AAAC diplotype (P=0.011).
The results suggest that P4HB is a modifier gene in ALS susceptibility and may represent a potential therapeutic target for ALS.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23714777
Expression of ALS-linked TDP-43 mutant in astrocytes causes non-cell-autonomous motor neuron death in rats.
Mutation of Tar DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) is linked to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Although astrocytes have important roles in neuron function and survival, their potential contribution to TDP-43 pathogenesis is unclear.
Here, we created novel lines of transgenic rats that express a mutant form of human TDP-43 (M337V substitution) restricted to astrocytes.
Selective expression of mutant TDP-43 in astrocytes caused a progressive loss of motor neurons and the denervation atrophy of skeletal muscles, resulting in progressive paralysis.
The spinal cord of transgenic rats also exhibited a progressive depletion of the astroglial glutamate transporters GLT-1 and GLAST.
Astrocytic expression of mutant TDP-43 led to activation of astrocytes and microglia, with an induction of the neurotoxic factor Lcn2 in reactive astrocytes that was independent of TDP-43 expression.
These results indicate that mutant TDP-43 in astrocytes is sufficient to cause non-cell-autonomous death of motor neurons.
This motor neuron death likely involves deficiency in neuroprotective genes and induction of neurotoxic genes in astrocytes.
PMID: 23160423
Enhancing clinical trials in neurodegenerative disorders:  lessons from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
This review article is focused on strategies that may enhance clinical trial efficiency in neurodegenerative disorders, as demonstrated within the research field of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Unravelling ALS pathophysiology will result in an increased number of candidate therapeutics.
Recent ALS clinical trials have employed novel study designs that expedite the drug development process and limit sample size, including futility, lead-in, selection, adaptive and sequential designs.
The search for sensitive and specific biomarkers in ALS continues to develop, and they are essential in accelerating the drug discovery process.
Several candidate cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), neuroimaging and electrophysiological biomarkers have been recently described in ALS, and some have been successfully employed as secondary outcome measures in clinical trials.
The advent of web-based technologies has provided a complementary platform to expedite clinical trials, through electronic data capture, teleconferencing and online registries.
In addition, the formation of ALS consortia has enhanced collaborative multicentre studies.
ALS research studies have employed novel strategies to accelerate the efficiency and pace of drug discovery.
The importance of adapting to novel measures that enhance study efficiency is not unique to ALS and can be applied to other neurodegenerative diseases in search of effective treatments.
PMID: 23131553
Neuronal overexpression of IP₃ receptor 2 is detrimental in mutant SOD1 mice.
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating neurodegenerative disease causing progressive paralysis of the patient followed by death on average 3-5 years after diagnosis.
Disease pathology is multi-factorial including the process of excitotoxicity that induces cell death by cytosolic Ca(2+) overload.
In this study, we increased the neuronal expression of an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) Ca(2+) release channel, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor 2 (IP(3)R2), to assess whether increased cytosolic Ca(2+) originating from the ER is detrimental for neurons.
Overexpression of IP(3)R2 in N2a cells using a Thy1.2-IP(3)R2 construct increases cytosolic Ca(2+) concentrations evoked by bradykinin.
In addition, mice generated from this construct have increased expression of IP(3)R2 in the spinal cord and brain.
This overexpression of IP(3)R2 does not affect symptom onset, but decreases disease duration and shortens the lifespan of the ALS mice significantly.
These data suggest that ER Ca(2+) released by IP(3) receptors may be detrimental in ALS and that motor neurons are vulnerable to impaired Ca(2+) metabolism.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21969586
Astrocytes carrying the superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1G93A) mutation induce wild-type motor neuron degeneration in vivo.
Recent studies highlight astrocytes as key drivers of motor neuron (MN) degeneration and disease propagation in mutant human superoxide dismutase 1 (mSOD1)-mediated amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
However, in vivo analysis of specific astrocytic influence in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis has proven difficult because mSOD1 is ubiquitously expressed throughout the CNS of rodent models studied.
Here, we transplanted SOD1(G93A) glial-restricted precursor cells--glial progenitors capable of differentiating into astrocytes--into the cervical spinal cord of WT rats to reveal how mutant astrocytes influence WT MNs and other cells types (microglia and astrocytes) in an in vivo setting.
Transplanted SOD1(G93A) glial-restricted precursor cells survived and differentiated efficiently into astrocytes.
Graft-derived SOD1(G93A) astrocytes induced host MN ubiquitination and death, forelimb motor and respiratory dysfunction, reactive astrocytosis, and reduced GLT-1 transporter expression in WT animals.
The SOD1(G93A) astrocyte-induced MN death seemed in part mediated by host microglial activation.
These findings show that mSOD1 astrocytes alone can induce WT MN death and associated pathological changes in vivo.
PMID: 23232809
FUS stimulates microRNA biogenesis by facilitating co-transcriptional Drosha recruitment.
microRNA abundance has been shown to depend on the amount of the microprocessor components or, in some cases, on specific auxiliary co-factors.
In this paper, we show that the FUS/TLS (fused in sarcoma/translocated in liposarcoma) protein, associated with familial forms of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), contributes to the biogenesis of a specific subset of microRNAs.
Among them, species with roles in neuronal function, differentiation and synaptogenesis were identified.
We also show that FUS/TLS is recruited to chromatin at sites of their transcription and binds the corresponding pri-microRNAs.
Moreover, FUS/TLS depletion leads to decreased Drosha level at the same chromatin loci.
Limited FUS/TLS depletion leads to a reduced microRNA biogenesis and we suggest a possible link between FUS mutations affecting nuclear/cytoplasmic partitioning of the protein and altered neuronal microRNA biogenesis in ALS pathogenesis.
PMID: 22090490
Epigenetic regulation of motor neuron cell death through DNA methylation.
DNA methylation is an epigenetic mechanism for gene silencing engaged by DNA methyltransferase (Dnmt)-catalyzed methyl group transfer to cytosine residues in gene-regulatory regions.
It is unknown whether aberrant DNA methylation can cause neurodegeneration.
We tested the hypothesis that Dnmts can mediate neuronal cell death.
Enforced expression of Dnmt3a induced degeneration of cultured NSC34 cells.
During apoptosis of NSC34 cells induced by camptothecin, levels of Dnmt1 and Dnmt3a increased fivefold and twofold, respectively, and 5-methylcytosine accumulated in nuclei.
Truncation mutation of the Dnmt3a catalytic domain and Dnmt3a RNAi blocked apoptosis of cultured neurons.
Inhibition of Dnmt catalytic activity with RG108 and procainamide protected cultured neurons from excessive DNA methylation and apoptosis.
In vivo, Dnmt1 and Dnmt3a are expressed differentially during mouse brain and spinal cord maturation and in adulthood when Dnmt3a is abundant in synapses and mitochondria.
Dnmt1 and Dnmt3a are expressed in motor neurons of adult mouse spinal cord, and, during their apoptosis induced by sciatic nerve avulsion, nuclear and cytoplasmic 5-methylcytosine immunoreactivity, Dnmt3a protein levels and Dnmt enzyme activity increased preapoptotically.
Inhibition of Dnmts with RG108 blocked completely the increase in 5-methycytosine and the apoptosis of motor neurons in mice.
In human amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), motor neurons showed changes in Dnmt1, Dnmt3a, and 5-methylcytosine similar to experimental models.
Thus, motor neurons can engage epigenetic mechanisms to drive apoptosis, involving Dnmt upregulation and increased DNA methylation.
These cellular mechanisms could be relevant to human ALS pathobiology and disease treatment.
PMID: 22254514
Animal-Assisted Therapy for persons with disabilities based on canine tail language interpretation via fuzzy emotional behavior model.
Animal-Assisted Therapy (AAT) is the science that employs the merit of human-animal interaction to alleviate mental and physical problems of persons with disabilities.
However, to achieve the goal of AAT for persons with severe disabilities (e.g. spinal cord injury and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis), real-time animal language interpretation is needed.
Since canine behaviors can be visually distinguished from its tail, this paper proposes the automatic real-time interpretation of canine tail language for human-canine interaction in the case of persons with severe disabilities.
Canine tail language is captured via two 3-axis accelerometers.
Directions and frequency are selected as our features of interests.
New fuzzy rules and center of gravity (COG)-based defuzzification method are proposed in order to interpret the features into three canine emotional behaviors, i.e., agitate, happy, and scare as well as its blended emotional behaviors.
The emotional behavior model is performed in the simulated dog.
The average recognition rate in real dog is 93.75% accuracy.
PMID: 21864557
Role of paraoxonase 1 (PON1) in organophosphate metabolism: implications in neurodegenerative diseases.
Organophosphate pesticides are a class of compounds that are widely used in agricultural and rural areas.
Paraoxonase 1 (PON1) is a phase-I enzyme that is involved in the hydrolysis of organophosphate esters.
Environmental poisoning by organophosphate compounds has been the main driving force of previous research on PON1 enzymes.
Recent discoveries in animal models have revealed the important role of the enzyme in lipid metabolism.
However although PON1 function is well established in experimental models, the contribution of PON1 in neurodegenerative diseases remains unclear.
In this minireview we summarize the involvement of PON1 genotypes in the occurrence of Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
A brief overview of latest epidemiological studies, regarding the two most important PON1 coding region polymorphisms PON1-L55M and PON1-Q192R is presented.
Positive and negative associations of PON1 with disease occurrence are reported.
Notably the MM and RR alleles contribute a risk enhancing effect for the development of some neurodegenerative diseases, which may be explained by the reduced lipoprotein free radical scavenging activity that may give rise to neuronal damage, through distinct mechanism.
Conflicting findings that fail to support this postulate may represent the human population ethnic heterogeneity, different sample size and environmental parameters affecting PON1 status.
We conclude that further epidemiological studies are required in order to address the exact contribution of PON1 genome in combination with organophosphate exposure in populations with neurodegenerative diseases.
Copyright © 2011.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
PMID: 23415312
Unconventional translation of C9ORF72 GGGGCC expansion generates insoluble polypeptides specific to c9FTD/ALS.
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) are devastating neurodegenerative disorders with clinical, genetic, and neuropathological overlap.
Hexanucleotide (GGGGCC) repeat expansions in a noncoding region of C9ORF72 are the major genetic cause of FTD and ALS (c9FTD/ALS).
The RNA structure of GGGGCC repeats renders these transcripts susceptible to an unconventional mechanism of translation-repeat-associated non-ATG (RAN) translation.
Antibodies generated against putative GGGGCC repeat RAN-translated peptides (anti-C9RANT) detected high molecular weight, insoluble material in brain homogenates, and neuronal inclusions throughout the CNS of c9FTD/ALS cases.
C9RANT immunoreactivity was not found in other neurodegenerative diseases, including CAG repeat disorders, or in peripheral tissues of c9FTD/ALS.
The specificity of C9RANT for c9FTD/ALS is a potential biomarker for this most common cause of FTD and ALS.
These findings have significant implications for treatment strategies directed at RAN-translated peptides and their aggregation and the RNA structures necessary for their production.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22084127
SQSTM1 mutations in familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The SQSTM1 gene encodes p62, a major pathologic protein involved in neurodegeneration.
To examine whether SQSTM1 mutations contribute to familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Case-control study.
Academic research.
Patients  A cohort of 546 patients with familial (n = 340) or sporadic (n = 206) ALS seen at a major academic referral center were screened for SQSTM1 mutations.
We evaluated the distribution of missense, deletion, silent, and intronic variants in SQSTM1 among our cohort of patients with ALS.
In silico analysis of variants was performed to predict alterations in p62 structure and function.
We identified 10 novel SQSTM1 mutations (9 heterozygous missense and 1 deletion) in 15 patients (6 with familial ALS and 9 with sporadic ALS).
Predictive in silico analysis classified 8 of 9 missense variants as pathogenic.
Using candidate gene identification based on prior biological knowledge and the functional prediction of rare variants, we identified several novel SQSTM1 mutations in patients with ALS.
Our findings provide evidence of a direct genetic role for p62 in ALS pathogenesis and suggest that regulation of protein degradation pathways may represent an important therapeutic target in motor neuron degeneration.
PMID: 23424749
Diffusion tensor imaging of the mouse brainstem and cervical spinal cord.
Concurrent and/or progressive degeneration of upper and lower motor neurons (LMNs) causes neurological symptoms and dysfunctions in motor neuron diseases (MNDs) such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Although brain lesions are readily detected, magnetic resonance imaging of the brainstem and cervical spinal cord lesions resulting from damage to LMNs has proven to be difficult.
With the development of mouse models of MNDs, a noninvasive neuroimaging modality capable of detecting lesions resulting from axonal and neuronal injury in mouse brainstem and cervical spinal cord could improve our understanding of the underlying mechanism of MNDs and aid in the development of effective treatments.
Here we present a protocol that allows the concomitant acquisition of high-quality in vivo full-diffusion tensor magnetic resonance images from the mouse brainstem and cervical spinal cord using the actively decoupled, anatomically shaped pair of coils--the surface-receive coil and the minimized volume-transmit coil.
To improve the data quality, we used a custom-made nose cone to monitor respiratory motion for synchronizing data acquisition and assuring physiological stability of mice under examination.
The protocol allows the acquisition of in vivo diffusion tensor imaging of the mouse brainstem and cervical spinal cord at 117 μm × 117 μm in-plane resolution with a 500-μm slice thickness in 1 h on a 4.7-T horizontal small animal imaging scanner equipped with an actively shielded gradient coil capable of pulsed gradient strengths up to 18 G cm(−1) with a gradient rise time of ≤295 μs.
PMID: 22676844
Selective attention and the three-process memory model for the interpretation of verbal free recall in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The present study investigates selective attention and verbal free recall in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and examines the contribution of selective attention, encoding, consolidation, and retrieval memory processes to patients' verbal free recall.
We examined 22 non-demented patients with sporadic ALS and 22 demographically related controls using Stroop Neuropsychological Screening Test (SNST; selective attention) and Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT; immediate &amp; delayed verbal free recall).
The item-specific deficit approach (ISDA) was applied to RAVLT to evaluate encoding, consolidation, and retrieval difficulties.
ALS patients performed worse than controls on SNST (p &lt; .001) and RAVLT immediate and delayed recall (p &lt; .001) and showed deficient encoding (p = .001) and consolidation (p = .002) but not retrieval (p = .405).
Hierarchical regression analysis revealed that SNST and ISDA indices accounted for: (a) 91.1% of the variance in RAVLT immediate recall, with encoding (p = .016), consolidation (p &lt; .001), and retrieval (p = .032) significantly contributing to the overall model and the SNST alone accounting for 41.6%; and (b) 85.2% of the variance in RAVLT delayed recall, with consolidation (p &lt; .001) and retrieval (p = .008) significantly contributing to the overall model and the SNST alone accounting for 39.8%.
Thus, selective attention, encoding, and consolidation, and to a lesser extent of retrieval, influenced both immediate and delayed verbal free recall.
Concluding, selective attention and the memory processes of encoding, consolidation, and retrieval should be considered while interpreting patients' impaired free recall.
(JINS, 2012, 18, 1-10).
PMID: 22881411
The impact of active coping strategies on survival in ALS: the first pilot study.
The aim of this study was to examine the coping strategies of 49 patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and the potential impact of these strategies on survival.
A total of 49 subjects were recruited.
Each subject was asked to complete a questionnaire on coping strategies called the Brief COPE.
The various coping strategies were divided into three factor sets through a factorial analysis: active coping (α 0.84), social support (α 0.71) and avoidance (α 0.71).
Each score was divided into two subgroups in relation to the median (limited use vs. frequent use).
Equality of survival distributions for the different levels of coping strategies was estimated using the Kaplan-Meier (Log Rank (Mantel-Cox)) model, with adjustment for mental health (GHQ-28), disease severity (ALSFRS), clinical form at onset (bulbar vs. spinal), medical assistance (ventilation and gastrostomy), participation in a clinical trial and gender.
Results revealed a significant and positive impact of active coping strategies while taking mental health, ALSFRS scores, clinical form at onset, medical assistance, participation in a clinical trial and gender into account (Log Rank (Mantel-Cox) p &lt; 0.05).
Our study clearly demonstrates the impact of active coping strategies on survival in ALS.
PMID: 22321299
Motor unit number index (MUNIX) versus motor unit number estimation (MUNE): a direct comparison in a longitudinal study of ALS patients.
To evaluate how the motor unit number index (MUNIX) is related to high-density motor unit number estimation (HD-MUNE) in healthy controls and patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Both MUNIX and HD-MUNE were performed on the thenar muscles in 18 ALS patients and 24 healthy controls.
Patients were measured at baseline, within 2 weeks, and after 4 and 8 months.
Clinical evaluation included Medical Research Council (MRC) scale and the ALS functional rating scale (ALSFRS).
There was a significant positive correlation between MUNE and MUNIX values in ALS patients (r=0.49 at baseline; r=0.56 at 4 months; r=0.56 at 8 months, all p&lt;0.05), but not in healthy controls.
After 8 months, both MUNE and MUNIX values of the ALS patients decreased significantly more compared to MRC scale, ALS functional rating scale (ALSFRS) and compound muscle action potential (CMAP) (p&lt;0.05).
There was no significant difference in relative decline of MUNIX and HD-MUNE values.
In ALS patients, MUNIX and HD-MUNE are significantly correlated.
MUNIX has an almost equivalent potential in detecting motor neuron loss compared to HD-MUNE.
MUNIX could serve as a reliable and sensitive marker for monitoring disease progression in ALS.
Copyright © 2012 International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology.
Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21830990
Co-occurrence of progressive anarthria with an S393L TARDBP mutation and ALS within a family.
Progressive anarthria is usually classified as a tau pathology.
We report an 87-year-old female with a family history of ALS and Parkinsonism, presenting with progressive anarthria.
Molecular genetics analyses showed a heterozygous mutation S393L on exon 6 of the TARDBP gene.
It has been previously reported in sporadic and familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
This case strengthens the hypothesis of a continuum between motor neuron disease and frontotemporal lobar degeneration among TDP-43 proteinopathies.
PMID: 21830991
Reduced exercise capacity in early-stage amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: Role of skeletal muscle.
Our objective was to correlate skeletal muscle mass (SM) with cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET) descriptors of exercise capacity in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and compare ALS CPET data with those of patients with mitochondrial myopathy (MM) and normal subjects (N).
Twenty-four early-stage ALS patients (63±11 years) underwent bioelectrical impedance analysis of body composition, resting spirometry, and ramp CPET.
Six MM and six N were used as controls (56 ± 7 and 63 ± 4 years, respectively).
Results showed that ALS SM index was similar to that of N (9.0±2.1 kg/m(2) vs.
10.4±1.9 kg/m(2), respectively; p = n.s.), whereas peak VO(2)/kg SM was significantly lower (41.5 ± 11.6 ml/kg/min vs. 57.8 ± 7.5 ml/kg/min, respectively; p &lt; 0.01).
However, the heart rate/VO(2) slope did not differ between ALS and N, being significantly higher in MM than in both ALS and N (6.1 ± 1.4 beats/ml/kg/min vs. 4.2 ± 1.1 beats/ml/kg/min vs. 3.8 ± 2.0 beats/ml/kg/min, respectively; both p &lt; 0.01), excluding a marked skeletal muscle metabolic impairment in ALS.
Neither cardiovascular nor ventilatory dysfunction was detected in ALS.
Early-stage ALS patients show a SM similar to N, but with a reduced peak VO(2)/kg SM.
Such a reduced peripheral O(2) utilization is consistent with deconditioning as the main cause of impaired exercise capacity in this population.
PMID: 22411250
Oxidative stress in developmental brain disorders.
In order to examine the involvement of oxidative stress in developmental brain disorders, we have performed immunohistochemistry in autopsy brains and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in the cerebrospinal fluid and urines of patients.
Here, we review our data on the hereditary DNA repair disorders, congenital metabolic errors and childhood-onset neurodegenerative disorders.
First, in our studies on hereditary DNA repair disorders, increased oxidative DNA damage and lipid peroxidation were carried out in the degeneration of basal ganglia, intracerebral calcification and cerebellar degeneration in patients with xeroderma pigmentosum, Cockayne syndrome and ataxia-telangiectasia-like disorder, respectively.
Next, congenital metabolic errors, apoptosis due to lipid peroxidation seemed to cause neuronal damage in neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis.
Oxidative stress of DNA combined with reduced expression of antioxidant enzymes occurred in the lesion of the cerebral cortex in mucopolysaccharidoses and mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes.
In childhood-onset neurodegenerative disorders, increased oxidative DNA damage and lipid peroxidation may lead to motor neuron death in spinal muscular atrophy like in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
In patients with dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy, a triplet repeat disease, deposition of oxidative products of nucleosides and reduced expression of antioxidant enzymes were found in the lenticular nucleus.
In contrast, the involvement of oxidative stress is not definite in patients with Lafora disease.
Rett syndrome patients showed changes of oxidative stress markers and antioxidant power in urines, although the changes may be related to systemic complications.
PMID: 23414135
Apparent anticipation in SOD1 familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Although anticipation has been previously reported in the copper/zinc superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1) associated familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS), some have argued that this may represent ascertainment bias.
Consequently, the aim of the present study was to determine whether anticipation was a feature in SOD1 FALS.
From a cohort of 112 individuals, the clinical and genetic history of 34 SOD1 patients was assessed.
Clinical history was collected with the age of death and disease duration determined in successive generations (generation 1, grandparent; generation 2, parents; generation 3, children), from five large SOD1 families.
Results showed that the age of death was significantly less in generation 3 (40.1 ± 2.8 years) compared to generation 2 (46.2 ± 2.0 years, p &lt; 0.05) and generation 1 (56.7 ± 4.5 years, p &lt; 0.01).
Furthermore, disease duration was longer in generation 1 (18.4 ± 3.7 months) compared to the disease duration in generation 2 (12.6 ± 2.6 months) and generation 3 (12.3 ± 1.9 months, p = 0.08).
Positive intergenerational differences were evident in 92% of parent-offspring transmissions in the present SOD1 FALS cohort (c(2) = 70.6, p &lt; 0.001).
In conclusion, the present study supports anticipation as a phenomenon in FALS, possibly due to co-inheritance of modifier genes.
PMID: 22612577
Deficits in concept formation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is associated with impaired executive control.
The aim of the current research was to test the hypothesis that concept formation deficits associated with an extramotor neurocognitive network involving executive and semantic resources can be found in some ALS patients.
Forty-one patients with clinically definite ALS were assessed with Delis Kaplan Executive Function System Sorting Test (D-KEFS), a measure of concept formation requiring patients to manipulate verbal and visual semantic information and neuropsychological tests measuring naming, semantic memory, and executive control.
Using D-KEFS scale scores, a k-mean cluster analysis specifying a 3-group solution was able to classify ALS patients into groups presenting with mildly impaired, average, and above average sorting test performance.
High-resolution T1 structural MRI was used to examine cortical thickness in a subset of 16 ALS patients.
Stepwise regression analyses related free and recognition sorting test performance to measures of action naming, single word semantic knowledge, and mental search/working memory.
MRI studies found widespread cortical thinning involving bilateral frontal, temporal, and parietal regions.
Regression analyses related recognition sorting performance to reduced MRI cortical thickness involving the left prefrontal and left parietal cortex.
An extramotor cognitive network is associated with impaired concept formation in ALS.
PMID: 22443542
Motor neuron apoptosis and neuromuscular junction perturbation are prominent features in a Drosophila model of Fus-mediated ALS.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is progressive neurodegenerative disease characterized by the loss of motor function.
Several ALS genes have been identified as their mutations can lead to familial ALS, including the recently reported RNA-binding protein fused in sarcoma (Fus).
However, it is not clear how mutations of Fus lead to motor neuron degeneration in ALS.
In this study, we present a Drosophila model to examine the toxicity of Fus, its Drosophila orthologue Cabeza (Caz), and the ALS-related Fus mutants.
Our results show that the expression of wild-type Fus/Caz or FusR521G induced progressive toxicity in multiple tissues of the transgenic flies in a dose- and age-dependent manner.
The expression of Fus, Caz, or FusR521G in motor neurons significantly impaired the locomotive ability of fly larvae and adults.
The presynaptic structures in neuromuscular junctions were disrupted and motor neurons in the ventral nerve cord (VNC) were disorganized and underwent apoptosis.
Surprisingly, the interruption of Fus nuclear localization by either deleting its nuclear localization sequence (NLS) or adding a nuclear export signal (NES) blocked Fus toxicity.
Moreover, we discovered that the loss of caz in Drosophila led to severe growth defects in the eyes and VNCs, caused locomotive disability and NMJ disruption, but did not induce apoptotic cell death.
These data demonstrate that the overexpression of Fus/Caz causes in vivo toxicity by disrupting neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) and inducing apoptosis in motor neurons.
In addition, the nuclear localization of Fus is essential for Fus to induce toxicity.
Our findings also suggest that Fus overexpression and gene deletion can cause similar degenerative phenotypes but the underlying mechanisms are likely different.
PMID: 23104122
Mortality, health, social and economic consequences of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a controlled national study.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease that imposes a great burden on the patient, the patient's family and society.
However, we lack information about the total disease burden at a national level, especially regarding costs before and after diagnosis and the consequences for spouses.
We aimed to estimate the factual direct and indirect costs of ALS in a national sample.
Using records from the Danish National Patient Registry (1998-2009), 2,394 patients with ALS were identified and subsequently compared with 9,575 randomly chosen control subjects matched for age, gender and geographic area/civil status.
Direct costs, including frequencies of primary and sector contacts and procedures, and medication from primary and secondary sectors, were obtained from the Danish Ministry of Health, the Danish Medicines Agency, and the National Health Security.
Indirect costs included labour supply and social transfer payments, and were based on income data derived from Coherent Social Statistics.
Patients with a diagnosis of ALS had poor survival.
The average (95 % CI) 5-year survival rate was 0.278 (0.358-0.298) compared with 0.865 (0.858-0.872) among controls.
Patients with ALS had significantly higher rates of health-related contact and medication use and higher socioeconomic costs.
They also had very low employment rates, while those in employment had a lower income level than control subjects.
The annual mean excess health-related cost was &lt;euro&gt;18,918 for each ALS patient.
However, spouses showed no excess health usage; in fact, their employment and income rates were higher, and the net cost was reduced by -&lt;euro&gt;3,420.
We conclude that ALS has serious mortality, health and socioeconomic consequences for patients.
However, the consequences for spouses are complex; they tend to compensate for the social consequences to patients by increasing their net income after ALS diagnosis.
PMID: 21820744
Inflammation in the early stages of neurodegenerative pathology.
Inflammation is secondary to protein accumulation in neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
Emerging evidence indicate sustained inflammatory responses, involving microglia and astrocytes in animal models of neurodegeneration.
It is unknown whether inflammation is beneficial or detrimental to disease progression and how inflammatory responses are induced within the CNS.
Persistence of an inflammatory stimulus or failure to resolve sustained inflammation can result in pathology, thus, mechanisms that counteract inflammation are indispensable.
Here we review studies on inflammation mediated by innate and adaptive immunity in the early stages of neurodegeneration and highlight important areas for future investigation.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22879928
Inhibition of TDP-43 accumulation by bis(thiosemicarbazonato)-copper complexes.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive, fatal, motor neuron disease with no effective long-term treatment options.
Recently, TDP-43 has been identified as a key protein in the pathogenesis of some cases of ALS.
Although the role of TDP-43 in motor neuron degeneration is not yet known, TDP-43 has been shown to accumulate in RNA stress granules (SGs) in cell models and in spinal cord tissue from ALS patients.
The SG association may be an early pathological change to TDP-43 metabolism and as such a potential target for therapeutic intervention.
Accumulation of TDP-43 in SGs induced by inhibition of mitochondrial activity can be inhibited by modulation of cellular kinase activity.
We have also found that treatment of cells and animal models of neurodegeneration, including an ALS model, with bioavailable bis(thiosemicarbazonato)copper(II) complexes (Cu(II)(btsc)s) can modulate kinase activity and induce neuroprotective effects.
In this study we examined the effect of diacetylbis(-methylthiosemicarbazonato)copper(II) (Cu(II)(atsm)) and glyoxalbis(-methylthiosemicarbazonato)copper(II) (Cu(II)(gtsm)) on TDP-43-positive SGs induced in SH-SY5Y cells in culture.
We found that the Cu(II)(btsc)s blocked formation of TDP-43-and human antigen R (HuR)-positive SGs induced by paraquat.
The Cu(II)(btsc)s protected neurons from paraquat-mediated cell death.
These effects were associated with inhibition of ERK phosphorylation.
Co-treatment of cultures with either Cu(II)(atsm) or an ERK inhibitor, PD98059 both prevented ERK activation and blocked formation of TDP-43-and HuR-positive SGs.
Cu(II)(atsm) treatment or ERK inhibition also prevented abnormal ubiquitin accumulation in paraquat-treated cells suggesting a link between prolonged ERK activation and abnormal ubiquitin metabolism in paraquat stress and inhibition by Cu.
Moreover, Cu(II)(atsm) reduced accumulation of C-terminal (219-414) TDP-43 in transfected SH-SY5Y cells.
These results demonstrate that Cu(II)(btsc) complexes could potentially be developed as a neuroprotective agent to modulate neuronal kinase function and inhibit TDP-43 aggregation.
Further studies in TDP-43 animal models are warranted.
PMID: 22575358
Screening of the TARDBP gene in familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients of Chinese origin.
TAR DNA-binding protein (TARDBP) mutations have been reported in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) in different populations.
Only a few studies have screened for TARDBP mutations in Chinese populations.
Here, we sequenced the coding region of all five TARDBP exons for mutations in 13 familial ALS (FALS) pedigrees and 312 sporadic ALS (SALS) patients of Chinese origin, as well as 245 healthy control subjects.
Two heterozygous missense mutations, c.875G&gt;A (p.S292N) and c.1043G&gt;T (p.G348V), were identified in two and one SALS patients, respectively.
One synonymous substitution, c.1098C&gt;G (p.A366A), was identified in two SALS patients.
None of the substitutions were found in healthy control subjects.
In Chinese populations, the estimated frequency of TARDBP mutations in SALS patients (0.73%) is higher than Japanese and lower than White populations, whereas the estimated mutation frequency in superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1)-negative FALS patients (15.2%) is higher than both Japanese and White populations.
Our findings provide an overview of the occurrence of TARDBP mutations in Chinese ALS patients and highlight the importance of TARDBP mutation screening in Chinese ALS patients.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22100394
UG repeats/TDP-43 interactions near 5' splice sites exert unpredictable effects on splicing modulation.
TDP-43 is a nuclear protein implicated in the pathogenesis of several neurodegenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration, with broad involvement in numerous stages of RNA processing ranging from transcription to translation.
In diseased neurons, TDP-43 mostly aggregates in the cytoplasm, suggesting that a loss of protein function in the nucleus may play an important role in neurodegeneration.
A better understanding of TDP-43 general nuclear functions is therefore an essential step to evaluate this possibility.
Presently, the TDP-43 best-characterized functional property is its ability to modulate pre-mRNA splicing when binding in proximity of 3'SS acceptor sequences.
In this work, using a variety of artificial and natural splicing substrates, we have investigated the effects of TDP-43 binding to UG repeats in the vicinity of 5'SS donor sequences.
In general, our results show that UG repeats are not powerful splicing regulatory elements when located near to exonic 5'SS sequences.
However, in cases like the BRCA1, ETF1, and RXRG genes, TDP-43 binding to natural UG-repeated sequences can act as either an activator or a suppressor of 5'SS recognition, depending on splice site strength and on the presence of additional splicing regulatory sequences.
The results of this analysis suggest that a role of UG repeats/TDP-43 in 5'SS recognition may exists and may become critical in the presence of mutations that weaken the 5'SS.
The general rule that can be drawn at the moment is that the importance of UG repeats near 5' splice sites should always be experimentally validated on a case-by-case basis.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23469062
Mitochondrial network genes in the skeletal muscle of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients.
Recent evidence suggested that muscle degeneration might lead and/or contribute to neurodegeneration, thus it possibly play a key role in the etiopathogenesis and progression of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
To test this hypothesis, this study attempted to categorize functionally relevant genes within the genome-wide expression profile of human ALS skeletal muscle, using microarray technology and gene regulatory network analysis.
The correlation network structures significantly change between patients and controls, indicating an increased inter-gene connection in patients compared to controls.
The gene network observed in the ALS group seems to reflect the perturbation of muscle homeostasis and metabolic balance occurring in affected individuals.
In particular, the network observed in the ALS muscles includes genes (PRKR1A, FOXO1, TRIM32, ACTN3, among others), whose functions connect the sarcomere integrity to mitochondrial oxidative metabolism.
Overall, the analytical approach used in this study offer the possibility to observe higher levels of correlation (i.e. common expression trends) among genes, whose function seems to be aberrantly activated during the progression of muscle atrophy.
PMID: 23075044
Small molecules that target protein misfolding.
Protein misfolding is a process in which proteins are unable to attain or maintain their biologically active conformation.
Factors contributing to protein misfolding include missense mutations and intracellular factors such as pH changes, oxidative stress, or metal ions.
Protein misfolding is linked to a large number of diseases such as cystic fibrosis, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and less familiar diseases such as Gaucher's disease, nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
In this Perspective, we report on small molecules that bind to and stabilize the aberrant protein, thereby helping it to attain a native or near-native conformation and restoring its function.
The following targets will be specifically discussed: transthyretin, p53, superoxide dismutase 1, lysozyme, serum amyloid A, prions, vasopressin receptor 2, and α-1-antitrypsin.
PMID: 23304639
Neuroinflammation as the proximate cause of signature pathogenic pattern progression in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, AIDS, and multiple sclerosis.
The realization of injury to large motor neurons is embedded within contextual reference to the parallel pathways of apoptosis and necrosis of system-patterned evolution.
A widespread loss of cell components occurs intracellularly and involves a reactive participation to a neuroinflammation that potentially is immunologically definable.
In such terms, sporadic and hereditary forms of amyotrophic sclerosis are paralleled by the components of a reactive nature that involve the aggregation of proteins and conformational misfolding on the one hand and a powerful oxidative degradation that overwhelms the proteasome clearance mechanisms.
In such terms, global participation is only one aspect of a disorder realization that induces the development of the defining systems of modulation and of injury that involves the systems of consequence as demonstrated by the overwhelming immaturity of the molecular variants of mutated superoxide dismutase.
It is further to such processes of neuroinflammatory consequence that the immune system is integral to the reactive involvement of neurons as patterns of disease recognition and as the system biology of prevalent voluntarily motor character.
It is highly significant to recognize various inflammatory states in the nervous system as prototype variability in phenotype expression and as incremental progression in pathogenesis.
In fact a determining definition of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is an incremental phenotype modulation within the pathways of the consequential loss and depletion of motor cell components in the first instance.
Neuroinflammation proves a pattern of the contextual spread of such pathogenic progression in the realization of end-stage injury states involving neurons and neuronal networks.
PMID: 22088787
SETX gene mutation in a family diagnosed autosomal dominant proximal spinal muscular atrophy.
Autosomal dominant proximal spinal muscular atrophy (ADSMA) is a rare disorder with unknown gene defects in the majority of families.
Here we describe a family where the diagnosis of juvenile and adult onset ADSMA was made in three individuals.
Because of retained tendon reflexes an atypical course of juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS4) was considered.
SETX gene sequencing revealed the previously reported heterozygous missense mutation c.1166T&lt;C, L389S in the patients.
Moreover the index patient and his sister had an earlier age at onset (10 and 15 years) and a more pronounced weakness as compared to their father with an age at onset of 35 years.
Both sibs additionally carried a second SETX missense mutation of unknown function V891A in trans.
Altogether these results expand the phenotype associated with SETX mutations supporting the notion that patients with ADSMA should be investigated for SETX mutations.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22069039
New electric-shock job exposure matrix.
To evaluate a consistent association between jobs in electric occupations and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a comprehensive job exposure matrix (JEM) that includes electric shocks and magnetic fields (MF) is needed.
We used incident electric shocks and electrocutions from two available data sources along with expert judgment to create a JEM that was integrated into an existing MF JEM.
The final JEM contained ordinal electric-shock exposure assignments for 501 job titles.
Main occupational groups experiencing the electric shocks were precision production, craft, and repair occupations.
Specific jobs with the highest proportion of shocks per 100,000 workers were: electrical apprentices (99.7), mechanic and repairer helpers (74.0), hoist and winch operators (63.3), and electrical power installers (52.4).
Examples of job titles with low electric-shock exposures were administrative support occupations, data-key entry operators, and waiters and waitresses.
Combining publicly available data with an expert panel is a viable method to construct an electric-shock MF JEM.
This JEM will allow an evaluation of association between electric shocks and neurodegenerative diseases.
Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 23886956
Differential effects of mutant SOD1 on protein structure of skeletal muscle and spinal cord of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: role of chaperone network.
Protein misfolding is considered to be a potential contributing factor for motor neuron and muscle loss in diseases like Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Several independent studies have demonstrated using over-expressed mutated Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase (mSOD1) transgenic mouse models which mimic familial ALS (f-ALS), that both muscle and motor neurons undergo degeneration during disease progression.
However, it is unknown whether protein conformation of skeletal muscle and spinal cord is equally or differentially affected by mSOD1-induced toxicity.
It is also unclear whether heat shock proteins (Hsp's) differentially modulate skeletal muscle and spinal cord protein structure during ALS disease progression.
We report three intriguing observations utilizing the f-ALS mouse model and cell-free in vitro system; (i) muscle proteins are equally sensitive to misfolding as spinal cord proteins despite the presence of low level of soluble and absence of insoluble G93A protein aggregate, unlike in spinal cord, (ii) Hsp's levels are lower in muscle compared to spinal cord at any stage of the disease, and (iii) G93ASOD1 enzyme-induced toxicity selectively affects muscle protein conformation over spinal cord proteins.
Together, these findings strongly suggest that differential chaperone levels between skeletal muscle and spinal cord may be a critical determinant for G93A-induced protein misfolding in ALS.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
PMID: 23257903
Self-rated anosognosia score may be a sensitive and predictive indicator for progressive brain atrophy in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: an X-ray computed tomographic study.
We investigated whether a self-rated anosognosia score can be an indicator for progression of brain atrophy in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Scores for 16 patients were compared with the ventricular areas of the bilateral anterior and inferior horns measured on x-ray computed tomography.
Longitudinal enlargement was expressed as a monthly increase in size: (ventricular size at the initial scan - ventricular size at the follow-up scan)/scan interval (months).
The anosognosia scores ranged from -4 to 3 and 3-18 in patients with and without frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), respectively (p = 0.0011).
Anosognosia scores were significantly correlated with sizes of anterior (r = 0.704, p = 0.0016) and inferior (r = 0.898, p &lt; 0.0001) horns.
In non-demented patients for whom follow-up CT scans were available (n = 7), the scores were significantly correlated with the longitudinal increase in inferior horn size (r = 0.754, p = 0.0496), but not with that of anterior horn size (r = -0.166, p = 0.7111).
In conclusion, anosognosia in ALS is associated with greater anterior and inferior horn sizes, reflecting frontotemporal lobar atrophy.
Moreover, mild anosognosia in ALS patients without FTLD may predict impending inferior horn enlargement, reflecting medial temporal atrophy.
Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.
PMID: 22980027
Familial ALS with FUS P525L mutation: two Japanese sisters with multiple systems involvement.
We evaluated the clinicopathological features of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) with the fused in sarcoma (FUS) P525L mutation.
Two sisters and their mother had a similar clinical course, which was characterized by the development of limb weakness at a young age with rapid disease progression.
An elder sister, patient 1, progressed into a totally locked-in state requiring mechanical ventilation and died 26 years after the onset of the disease.
In contrast, the younger sister, patient 2, died in the early stages of the disease.
The patients had neuropathological findings that indicated a very active degeneration of motor neurons and multiple system degeneration, which led to marked brain and spinal cord atrophy in the long term clinical outcome.
The multiple system degeneration included the frontal lobe, the basal ganglia and substantia nigra, cerebellum and related area.
Compared with previously reported ALS cases, the severe degeneration of the frontal lobe and the striatum were the characteristic features in the patient 1 in this case study.
The degeneration spread over multiple systems might be caused not only by the appearance of the FUS immunoreactive neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions but also by the degeneration of neuronal connections from the primary motor cortex and related areas.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22231873
Temporal trend of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis incidence in southern Europe: a population study in the health district of Ferrara, Italy.
Data about the temporal trend of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) incidence in southern Europe are scarce.
Incidence studies on ALS have been carried out in the health district of Ferrara, Italy, since 1960s.
We expanded the previous studies from 1964 to 2009.
The study was prospective with a subsequent retrospective intensive survey of multiple sources of case ascertainment.
All patients with a definite and probable ALS according to the original El Escorial criteria were selected.
There were 130 incident cases in the years 1964-2009 giving an average annual crude incidence of 1.82 per 100,000 population (95% CI 1.53-2.17).
An incidence increase during the study period was estimated in women (χ(2) test for trend = 7.19, p &lt; 0.01) and in the elderly (χ(2) test for trend = 7.803, p &lt; 0.01).
The age-adjusted incidence was stable over time in both women (1.19 per 100,000, 95% CI 0.90-1.52) and men (1.45 per 100,000, 95% CI 0.12-1.84).
The annual number of new ALS cases in the study population followed the Poisson distribution in both sexes as well as in the elderly group of the population.
The present findings suggest that ALS incidence is nearly stable over time.
The crude incidence increase we estimated over time among women is mainly explained by population ageing.
The increasing incidence in the elderly population was likely the consequence of an increasing precision in ALS diagnosis in the elderly since the increasing attention and care over time of neurologic elderly patients that likely concern elderly women more than previous time periods rather than better case ascertainment of diagnosed patients.
The present findings do not support the role of specific environmental factors in ALS pathogenesis.
PMID: 22000045
A novel fixed-target task to determine articulatory speed constraints in persons with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The goal of this study was to determine if talkers with ALS are limited in their ability to increase lower lip and jaw speed at an early stage of the disease when their speaking rate and intelligibility are only minimally or not affected.
A novel metronome paced fixed-target task was used to assess movement speed capacities during lower lip and jaw oscillations in seven talkers with ALS and seven age and gender matched controls.
Lower lip peak speeds were significantly lower in talkers with mild ALS than in healthy talkers suggesting a lower lip speed constraint in talkers with mild ALS.
Jaw peak speeds tended to be lower, but jaw displacements tended to be larger in talkers with mild ALS than in healthy talkers.
Because greater speeds are typically expected for larger displacements, outcomes also suggest a jaw speed constraint in talkers with mild ALS.
Lower lip and jaw peak speeds may be sensitive measures to identify bulbar motor performance decline at an early stage of the disease when speaking rate and intelligibility are only minimally affected.
Learning Outcomes: The reader will be able to explain two different articulatory strategies to increase speaking rate and understand why fast speech tasks and diadochokinetic pseudo-speech tasks are not suited to assess articulatory speed capacity in healthy and impaired talkers.
The reader will also be able to explain how orofacial movement speed capacity can be tested using a fixed-target task and how ALS affects lower lip and jaw speed capacities during the early stages of the disease.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22334165
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and palliative care: where we are, and the road ahead.
Patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) have high symptom burdens, including pain, fatigue, dyspnea, and sialorrhea, and they must make difficult decisions about the use of life-prolonging therapies, such as long-term mechanical ventilation.
The impact of ALS is also felt by family caregivers who often struggle to meet the heavy physical, financial, and emotional demands associated with the illness.
Expert multidisciplinary care may improve both quality and length of life of patients with ALS.
However, although advances have been made in the treatment of some symptoms, others, including pain management, remain poorly studied.
Involvement of palliative care specialists as part of the ALS multidisciplinary team is recommended, as we continue to work toward improving the quality of life for patients and their families.
Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22028385
The distal hereditary motor neuropathies.
The distal hereditary motor neuropathies (dHMN) comprise a heterogeneous group of diseases that share the common feature of a length-dependent predominantly motor neuropathy.
Many forms of dHMN have minor sensory abnormalities and/or a significant upper-motor-neuron component, and there is often an overlap with the axonal forms of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2) and with juvenile forms of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and hereditary spastic paraplegia.
Eleven causative genes and four loci have been identified with autosomal dominant, recessive and X-linked patterns of inheritance.
Despite advances in the identification of novel gene mutations, 80% of patients with dHMN have a mutation in an as-yet undiscovered gene.
The causative genes have implicated proteins with diverse functions such as protein misfolding (HSPB1, HSPB8, BSCL2), RNA metabolism (IGHMBP2, SETX, GARS), axonal transport (HSPB1, DYNC1H1, DCTN1) and cation-channel dysfunction (ATP7A and TRPV4) in motor-nerve disease.
This review will summarise the clinical features of the different subtypes of dHMN to help focus genetic testing for the practising clinician.
It will also review the neuroscience that underpins our current understanding of how these mutations lead to a motor-specific neuropathy and highlight potential therapeutic strategies.
An understanding of the functional consequences of gene mutations will become increasingly important with the advent of next-generation sequencing and the need to determine the pathogenicity of large amounts of individual genetic data.
PMID: 22815892
Plasma neurofilament heavy chain levels correlate to markers of late stage disease progression and treatment response in SOD1(G93A) mice that model ALS.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is an incurable neurodegenerative disorder characterised by progressive degeneration of motor neurons leading to death, typically within 3-5 years of symptom onset.
The diagnosis of ALS is largely reliant on clinical assessment and electrophysiological findings.
Neither specific investigative tools nor reliable biomarkers are currently available to enable an early diagnosis or monitoring of disease progression, hindering the design of treatment trials.
In this study, using the well-established SOD1(G93A) mouse model of ALS and a new in-house ELISA method, we have validated that plasma neurofilament heavy chain protein (NfH) levels correlate with both functional markers of late stage disease progression and treatment response.
We detected a significant increase in plasma levels of phosphorylated NfH during disease progression in SOD1(G93A) mice from 105 days onwards.
Moreover, increased plasma NfH levels correlated with the decline in muscle force, motor unit survival and, more significantly, with the loss of spinal motor neurons in SOD1 mice during this critical period of decline.
Importantly, mice treated with the disease modifying compound arimoclomol had lower plasma NfH levels, suggesting plasma NfH levels could be validated as an outcome measure for treatment trials.
These results show that plasma NfH levels closely reflect later stages of disease progression and therapeutic response in the SOD1(G93A) mouse model of ALS and may potentially be a valuable biomarker of later disease progression in ALS.
PMID: 23034677
A microfluidic device to investigate axon targeting by limited numbers of purified cortical projection neuron subtypes.
While much is known about general controls over axon guidance of broad classes of projection neurons (those with long-distance axonal connections), molecular controls over specific axon targeting by distinct neuron subtypes are poorly understood.
Corticospinal motor neurons (CSMN) are prototypical and clinically important cerebral cortex projection neurons; they are the brain neurons that degenerate in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and related motor neuron diseases, and their injury is central to the loss of motor function in spinal cord injury.
Primary culture of purified immature murine CSMN has been recently established, using either fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) or immunopanning, enabling a previously unattainable level of subtype-specific investigation, but the resulting number of CSMN is quite limiting for standard approaches to study axon guidance.
We developed a microfluidic system specifically designed to investigate axon targeting of limited numbers of purified CSMN and other projection neurons in culture.
The system contains two chambers for culturing target tissue explants, allowing for biologically revealing axonal growth choice experiments.
This device will be uniquely enabling for investigation of controls over axon growth and neuronal survival of many types of neurons, particularly those available only in limited numbers.
PMID: 23161174
Bioinformatics aggregation predictors in the study of protein conformational diseases of the human nervous system.
Conformational protein diseases of the human central nervous system represent a subject that has crucial theoretical and medical implications.
They include several important neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, Huntington's and Creutzfeldt-Jacob's diseases, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and the tauopathies.
They occur when soluble proteins undergo conformational rearrangements becoming capable of aggregate into β-sheets conformations leading to the production of insoluble complexes known as amyloid deposits, that accumulate and lead to neurons and glial cells death.
Theoretical and experimental evidence indicates that a key role in the conformational changes leading to amyloid formation is played by short sequence stretches within a given protein.
Thus, the identification of protein regions potentially involved in aggregate formation and the characterization of their properties are relevant questions in the study of conformational proteins diseases.
To address these questions, bioinformatics methods might provide an important contribution, suggesting possible mechanisms of protein aggregation, and focusing and orienting the experimental work.
Thus, in the first part of the present review bioinformatics methods specifically attempting to predict aggregation-prone regions in proteins will be briefly described.
Furthermore, the results provided by the combined use of some of them to analyze a set of particularly important proteins involved in human degenerative diseases will be discussed.
© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH &amp; Co.
KGaA, Weinheim.
PMID: 21827820
Mitochondrial dysfunction in ALS.
In the present article, we review the many facets of mitochondrial dysfunction in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a fatal neurodegenerative disease due to loss of upper motor neurons in cerebral cortex and lower motor neurons in brainstem and spinal cord.
Accumulating evidence from recent studies suggests that the many, interconnected facets of mitochondrial dysfunction may play a more significant role in the etiopathogenesis of this disorder than previously thought.
This notion stems from our expanding knowledge of the complex physiology of mitochondria and of alteration of their properties that might confer an intrinsic susceptibility to long-lived, post-mitotic motor neurons to energy deficit, calcium mishandling and oxidative stress.
The wealth of evidence implicating mitochondrial dysfunction as a major event in the pathology of ALS has prompted new studies aimed to the development of new mitochondria-targeted therapies.
However, it is now clear that drugs targeting more than one aspect of mitochondrial dysfunction are needed to fight this devastating disease.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21476828
Nerve compression syndromes in ALS: a retrospective analysis in 554 patients.
We retrospectively screened a large cohort of 554 ALS patients with regard to documented nerve compression syndromes and identified 23 patients, mostly with carpal tunnel syndrome.
Patients could be subdivided into three groups.
Group A comprised 13 patients in whom nerve compression was apparently confused with early ALS signs.
Group B consisted of six patients diagnosed with carpal tunnel syndrome who had experienced improvement after surgery years before they eventually developed ALS.
Group C consisted of four patients who, after diagnosis of ALS, additionally developed a nerve compression syndrome.
Altogether, the frequency of true nerve compression syndromes in our ALS cohort (1.8%) was no higher than in the general population (0.3-10.8%).
In group A, the initial confusion with a nerve compression syndrome led to a slight though not significant delay (15.2 vs. 12.9 months; p = 0.32) of the diagnosis of ALS.
Survival was no different between group A and the cohort.
It can also be concluded that the misdiagnoses could have been avoided by thorough electrophysiological examination using a standardized protocol.
PMID: 22637471
Characterization of a family with c9FTD/ALS associated with the GGGGCC repeat expansion in C9ORF72.
The hexanucleotide repeat in the chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 (C9ORF72) gene was recently discovered as the underlying genetic cause of many families with frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and/or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) linked to chromosome 9 (c9FTD/ALS).
We report the clinical, neuropsychologic, and neuroimaging findings of a family with the C9ORF72 mutation and clinical diagnoses bridging the FTD, parkinsonism, and ALS spectrum.
To characterize the antemortem characteristics of a family with c9FTD/ALS associated with the GGGGCC repeat expansion in C9ORF72.
Clinical series.
Tertiary care academic medical center.
PATIENTS The members of a family affected by the mutation with features of FTD and/or ALS.
Clinical, neuropsychologic, and neuroimaging assessments.
All 3 examined subjects had the hexanucleotide expansion detected in C9ORF72.
All had personality/behavioral changes early in the course of the disease.
One case had levodopa-unresponsive parkinsonism, and 1 had ALS.
Magnetic resonance imaging showed symmetric bilateral frontal, temporal, insular, and cingulate atrophy.
This report highlights the clinical and neuroimaging characteristics of a family with c9FTD/ALS.
Further studies are needed to better understand the phenotypical variability and the cliniconeuroimaging-neuropathologic correlations.
PMID: 23060854
Behavioral variant frontotemporal lobar degeneration with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with a chromosome 9p21 hexanucleotide repeat.
To determine the genetic basis of familial frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) we performed a clinical and genetic analysis of an affected family.
A 51-year-old man with behavioral variant FTLD with ALS had a family history of the disease suggestive of autosomal dominant inheritance with incomplete penetrance.
Genetic studies in this patient demonstrated the presence of an amplified hexanucleotide repeat (&gt;30) polymorphism in the chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 (C9ORF72) gene which was previously identified as a cause of FTLD.
Five others unaffected from the family were negative (all had less than 11 repeats).
Because of the clinical and pathological overlap between FTLD and AD we performed a larger genome-wide association study and did not find association of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the C9ORF72 gene with Alzheimer's disease (AD) risk.
Bioinformatic analysis of C9ORF72 using the Gene Expression Omnibus database showed expression differences in patients with muscular dystrophy, neural tube defects, and schizophrenia.
We also report analysis of gene expression in brain regions using the Allen Human Brain Atlas.
Defects in this recently reported gene are now believed to be the most common cause of inherited ALS and an important cause of inherited FTLD.
Our work suggests that the gene may also be important in other neurological and psychiatric conditions.
PMID: 23361938
Effects of chronic caffeine intake in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Caffeine is a nonselective adenosine receptor antagonist; chronic consumption has proved protective toward neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases.
The present study was designed to determine whether caffeine intake affected survival and/or motor performance in a transgenic model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
SOD1(G93A) mice received caffeine through drinking water from 70 days of age until death.
Body weight, motor performance and survival were evaluated.
Furthermore, the expression of adenosine A(2A) receptors (A(2A) Rs), glial glutamate transporter (GLT1), and glial fibrillar acidic protein (GFAP) were evaluated by Western blotting.
The results showed that caffeine intake significantly shortened the survival of SOD1(G93A) mice (log rank test, P = 0.01) and induced a nonsignificant advancing of disease onset.
The expression of A(2A) R, GLT1, and GFAP was altered in the spinal cords of ALS mice, but caffeine did not influence their expression in either wild-type or SOD1(G93) mice.
These data indicate that adenosine receptors may play an important role in ALS.
Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22261247
FET proteins in frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Mutations in the fused in sarcoma gene (FUS) cause amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) with TDP-43-negative, FUS-positive pathology.
FUS is also the pathological protein in most tau/TDP-43-negative subtypes of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD-FUS).
FUS, together with Ewing's sarcoma protein (EWS) and TATA-binding protein associated factor 15 (TAF15), make up the FET family of DNA/RNA binding proteins that share functional homology and have the potential to interact.
We recently investigated the role of the other FET proteins in the clinicopathological spectrum of FUS-opathies.
In all FTLD-FUS subtypes, FUS-positive pathology was also labeled for TAF15 and EWS and cells with inclusions showed a reduction in the normal nuclear staining of all FET proteins.
In contrast, in cases of ALS-FUS, TAF15 and EWS remained localized to the nucleus and did not label FUS-positive inclusions.
Cell culture models replicated the human diseases.
These findings indicate that ALS-FUS and FTLD-FUS have different pathomechanisms and add TAF15 and EWS to the growing list of RNA-binding proteins involved in neurodegeneration.
This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: RNA-Binding Proteins.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22205172
Subsequent risks of Parkinson disease in patients with autoimmune and related disorders: a nationwide epidemiological study from Sweden.
To investigate associations between autoimmune disorders and Parkinson disease (PD), and to study whether the risk is associated with follow-up time and age.
Standardized incidence ratios (SIRs) were calculated for PD in patients with autoimmune disorders by comparing them to subjects without autoimmune disorders.
Among 310,522 patients with a total of 33 conditions of autoimmune disorders, 932 patients developed subsequent PD, giving an overall SIR of 1.33 and 1.19 for PD diagnosed later than 1 year after follow-up.
Six types of autoimmune disorders showed an increased risk.
These conditions included: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Graves's disease/hyperthyroidism, Hashimoto's disease/hypothyroidism, multiple sclerosis, pernicious anemia, and polymyalgia rheumatica.
The risks depended on the age at hospitalization for PD.
A 33% overall excess risk of PD was noted among patients with an autoimmune disorder; the risk was increased during the first 10 years of follow-up after hospitalization of autoimmune disorders.
Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.
PMID: 23109145
Loss of ERLIN2 function leads to juvenile primary lateral sclerosis.
Primary lateral sclerosis (PLS) is a motor neuron disorder that exclusively affects upper motor neurons leading to their degeneration.
Mutations in the ALS2 gene encoding the protein Alsin have been described previously in the juvenile form of the disease.
In this study, we identify mutation of the ERLIN2 gene in juvenile PLS patients and describe an in vitro model for loss of ERLIN2 function.
Single nucleotide polymorphism arrays were used for homozygosity mapping.
DNA sequencing of candidate genes was used to detect the underlying mutation.
Level of ERLIN2 mRNA was measured by quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction.
Knocking down ERLIN2 in NSC34 cells was accomplished by short-hairpin RNA interference.
We identified a splice junction mutation in the ERLIN2 gene-a component of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lipid rafts-that resulted in abnormal splicing of ERLIN2 transcript and nonsense-mediated decay of ERLIN2 mRNA.
Knocking down ERLIN2 in NSC34 cells suppressed their growth in culture.
Recently, we found that mutation of SIGMAR1, a component of ER lipid rafts, leads to juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The identification of mutation in another component of the ER lipid rafts in juvenile PLS patients emphasizes their role in motor neuron function.
Furthermore, the discovered effect of ERLIN2 loss on cell growth may advance understanding of the mechanism behind motor neuron degeneration in PLS.
Copyright © 2012 American Neurological Association.
PMID: 23626643
The puzzling case of hyperexcitability in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The development of hyperexcitability in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a well-known phenomenon.
Despite controversy as to the underlying mechanisms, cortical hyperexcitability appears to be closely related to the interplay between excitatory corticomotoneurons and inhibitory interneurons.
Hyperexcitability is not a static phenomenon but rather shows a pattern of progression in a spatiotemporal aspect.
Cortical hyperexcitability may serve as a trigger to the development of anterior horn cell degeneration through a 'dying forward' process.
Hyperexcitability appears to develop during the early disease stages and gradually disappears in the advanced stages of the disease, linked to the destruction of corticomotorneuronal pathways.
As such, a more precise interpretation of these unique processes may provide new insight regarding the pathophysiology of ALS and its clinical features.
Recently developed technologies such as threshold tracking transcranial magnetic stimulation and automated nerve excitability tests have provided some clues about underlying pathophysiological processes linked to hyperexcitability.
Additionally, these novel techniques have enabled clinicians to use the specific finding of hyperexcitability as a useful diagnostic biomarker, enabling clarification of various ALS-mimic syndromes, and the prediction of disease development in pre-symptomatic carriers of familial ALS.
In terms of nerve excitability tests for peripheral nerves, an increase in persistent Na(+) conductances has been identified as a major determinant of peripheral hyperexcitability in ALS, inversely correlated with the survival in ALS.
As such, the present Review will focus primarily on the puzzling theory of hyperexcitability in ALS and summarize clinical and pathophysiological implications for current and future ALS research.
PMID: 21863230
The non-protein amino acid β-N-methylamino-L-alanine in Portuguese cyanobacterial isolates.
The tailor made amino acid β-N-methyl-amino-L-alanine (BMAA) is a neurotoxin produced by cyanobacteria.
It has been associated with certain forms of progressive neurodegenerative disease, including sporadic Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Alzheimer's disease.
Some different reports of BMAA in cyanobacterial blooms from lakes, reservoirs, and other water resources have been made by different investigators.
We here report the detection of BMAA of both free and protein-bound produced by cyanobacteria, belonging to the Chroococcales, Oscillatoriales and Nostocales ordered.
We use a rapid and sensitive HPLC-FD method that utilizes methanol elution and the Waters AQC Tag chemistry.
On other hand, we have used three different assay procedures for BMAA extraction from cyanobacteria: Trichloroacetic acid (TCA), Methanol/Acetone and hydrochloric acid (HCl).
All assays let successfully detect BMAA in all cyanobacteria samples analyzed.
Nevertheless, with TCA and HCl extraction procedures the highest BMAA values, for free as well as protein-bound BMAA were detected.
BMAA content could not be related to the taxonomy of the isolates or to their geographical origin, and no correlation between free and protein-bound BMAA concentrations were observed within or between taxonomic groups.
These data offer confirmation of the taxonomic and geographic ubiquity of BMAA from naturally occurring populations of cyanobacteria, for the first time reported for estuaries.
PMID: 22341232
High-throughput screening in primary neurons.
Despite years of incremental progress in our understanding of diseases such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), Huntington's disease (HD), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), there are still no disease-modifying therapeutics.
The discrepancy between the number of lead compounds and approved drugs may partially be a result of the methods used to generate the leads and highlights the need for new technology to obtain more detailed and physiologically relevant information on cellular processes in normal and diseased states.
Our high-throughput screening (HTS) system in a primary neuron model can help address this unmet need.
HTS allows scientists to assay thousands of conditions in a short period of time which can reveal completely new aspects of biology and identify potential therapeutics in the span of a few months when conventional methods could take years or fail all together.
HTS in primary neurons combines the advantages of HTS with the biological relevance of intact, fully differentiated neurons which can capture the critical cellular events or homeostatic states that make neurons uniquely susceptible to disease-associated proteins.
We detail methodologies of our primary neuron HTS assay workflow from sample preparation to data reporting.
We also discuss the adaptation of our HTS system into high-content screening (HCS), a type of HTS that uses multichannel fluorescence images to capture biological events in situ, and is uniquely suited to study dynamical processes in living cells.
Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23192390
Making the brain glow: in vivo bioluminescence imaging to study neurodegeneration.
Bioluminescence imaging (BLI) takes advantage of the light-emitting properties of luciferase enzymes, which produce light upon oxidizing a substrate (i.e., D-luciferin) in the presence of molecular oxygen and energy.
Photons emitted from living tissues can be detected and quantified by a highly sensitive charge-coupled device camera, enabling the investigator to noninvasively analyze the dynamics of biomolecular reactions in a variety of living model organisms such as transgenic mice.
BLI has been used extensively in cancer research, cell transplantation, and for monitoring of infectious diseases, but only recently experimental models have been designed to study processes and pathways in neurological disorders such as Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
In this review, we highlight recent applications of BLI in neuroscience, including transgene expression in the brain, longitudinal studies of neuroinflammatory responses to neurodegeneration and injury, and in vivo imaging studies of neurogenesis and mitochondrial toxicity.
Finally, we highlight some new developments of BLI compounds and luciferase substrates with promising potential for in vivo studies of neurological dysfunctions.
PMID: 22406228
Frequency of the C9orf72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia: a cross-sectional study.
We aimed to accurately estimate the frequency of a hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9orf72 that has been associated with a large proportion of cases of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD).
We screened 4448 patients diagnosed with ALS (El Escorial criteria) and 1425 patients with FTD (Lund-Manchester criteria) from 17 regions worldwide for the GGGGCC hexanucleotide expansion using a repeat-primed PCR assay.
We assessed familial disease status on the basis of self-reported family history of similar neurodegenerative diseases at the time of sample collection.
We compared haplotype data for 262 patients carrying the expansion with the known Finnish founder risk haplotype across the chromosomal locus.
We calculated age-related penetrance using the Kaplan-Meier method with data for 603 individuals with the expansion.
In patients with sporadic ALS, we identified the repeat expansion in 236 (7·0%) of 3377 white individuals from the USA, Europe, and Australia, two (4·1%) of 49 black individuals from the USA, and six (8·3%) of 72 Hispanic individuals from the USA.
The mutation was present in 217 (39·3%) of 552 white individuals with familial ALS from Europe and the USA.
59 (6·0%) of 981 white Europeans with sporadic FTD had the mutation, as did 99 (24·8%) of 400 white Europeans with familial FTD.
Data for other ethnic groups were sparse, but we identified one Asian patient with familial ALS (from 20 assessed) and two with familial FTD (from three assessed) who carried the mutation.
The mutation was not carried by the three Native Americans or 360 patients from Asia or the Pacific Islands with sporadic ALS who were tested, or by 41 Asian patients with sporadic FTD.
All patients with the repeat expansion had (partly or fully) the founder haplotype, suggesting a one-off expansion occurring about 1500 years ago.
The pathogenic expansion was non-penetrant in individuals younger than 35 years, 50% penetrant by 58 years, and almost fully penetrant by 80 years.
A common Mendelian genetic lesion in C9orf72 is implicated in many cases of sporadic and familial ALS and FTD.
Testing for this pathogenic expansion should be considered in the management and genetic counselling of patients with these fatal neurodegenerative diseases.
Full funding sources listed at end of paper (see Acknowledgments).
Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22751173
TARDBP mutation analysis in TDP-43 proteinopathies and deciphering the toxicity of mutant TDP-43.
The identification of TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) as the major disease protein in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin inclusions has defined a new class of neurodegenerative conditions: the TDP-43 proteinopathies.
This breakthrough was quickly followed by mutation analysis of TARDBP, the gene encoding TDP-43.
Herein, we provide a review of our previously published efforts that led to the identification of 3 TARDBP mutations (p.M337V, p.N345K, and p.I383V) in familial ALS patients, two of which were novel.
With over 40 TARDBP mutations now discovered, there exists conclusive evidence that TDP-43 plays a direct role in neurodegeneration.
The onus is now on researchers to elucidate the mechanisms by which mutant TDP-43 confers toxicity, and to exploit these findings to gain a better understanding of how TDP-43 contributes to the pathogenesis of disease.
Our biochemical analysis of TDP-43 in ALS patient lymphoblastoid cell lines revealed a substantial increase in TDP-43 truncation products, including a ≈ 25 kDa fragment, compared to control lymphoblastoid cell lines.
We discuss the putative harmful consequence of abnormal TDP-43 fragmentation, as well as highlight additional mechanisms of toxicity associated with mutant TDP-43.
PMID: 22560208
Muscling in on PGC-1α for improved quality of life in ALS.
Impaired activity of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-γ coactivator (PGC)-1α has been implicated in the pathophysiology of several neurodegenerative disorders.
In this issue, Da Cruz et al. (2012) show improved muscle function, but not survival, with increased PGC-1α activity in muscle in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22542539
Prolonged survival and milder impairment of motor function in the SOD1 ALS mouse model devoid of fibroblast growth factor 2.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease characterized by selective motoneuron loss in brain and spinal cord.
Mutations in the superoxide dismutase (SOD) 1 gene account for 10-20% of familial ALS patients.
The ALS-mouse model over-expressing a mutant human SOD1 (G93A) gene closely mimics human ALS disease.
The cause for the selective death of motoneurons is still unclear, but among several pathomechanisms discussed, loss of neurotrophic factors is one possibility.
Basic fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF-2) plays a prominent role in the motor system.
In order to evaluate a role of FGF-2 in ALS pathogenesis, double mouse mutants transgenic for the human SOD1 mutation and lacking the endogenous FGF-2 gene were generated.
Both heterozygous and homozygous FGF-2 deficient mutant SOD1 mice showed a significant delay in disease onset and less impaired motor performance in comparison to mutant SOD1 mice with normal FGF-2 levels.
Survival of the double mouse mutants was significantly prolonged for two weeks.
Motoneuron numbers were significantly higher in the double mutants and astrocytosis was diminished at disease endstage.
While one would initially have expected that FGF-2 deficiency deteriorates the phenotype of mutant SOD1 animals, our results revealed a protective effect of FGF-2 reduction.
In search of the underlying mechanisms, we could show up-regulation of other neurotrophic factors with proven protective effects in the ALS mouse model, ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) and glial derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) in muscle and spinal cord tissue of double mutant animals.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23431152
SOD1 exhibits allosteric frustration to facilitate metal binding affinity.
Superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1) is a ubiquitous, Cu and Zn binding, free-radical defense enzyme whose misfolding and aggregation play a potential key role in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, an invariably fatal neurodegenerative disease.
Over 150 mutations in SOD1 have been identified with a familial form of the disease, but it is presently not clear what unifying features, if any, these mutants share to make them pathogenic.
Here, we develop several unique computational assays for probing the thermo-mechanical properties of both ALS-associated and rationally designed SOD1 variants.
Allosteric interaction-free energies between residues and metals are calculated, and a series of atomic force microscopy experiments are simulated with variable tether positions to quantify mechanical rigidity fingerprints for SOD1 variants.
Mechanical fingerprinting studies of a series of C-terminally truncated mutants, along with an analysis of equilibrium dynamic fluctuations while varying native constraints, potential energy change upon mutation, frustratometer analysis, and analysis of the coupling between local frustration and metal binding interactions for a glycine scan of 90 residues together, reveal that the apo protein is internally frustrated, that these internal stresses are partially relieved by mutation but at the expense of metal-binding affinity, and that the frustration of a residue is directly related to its role in binding metals.
This evidence points to apo SOD1 as a strained intermediate with self-allostery for high metal-binding affinity.
Thus, the prerequisites for the function of SOD1 as an antioxidant compete with apo state thermo-mechanical stability, increasing the susceptibility of the protein to misfold in the apo state.
PMID: 22789697
Mutation analysis of VCP in British familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients.
Mutations in the valosin-containing-protein (VCP) gene are associated with the multidisorder disease, inclusion body myopathy with Pagets and associated frontotemporal dementia.
This disease is characterized pathologically by large ubiquitinated, TAR DNA Binding Protein 43 (TDP-43) positive inclusions.
These inclusions are also a common feature in neurological diseases including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTLD).
Mutations in the VCP gene have been identified in ALS patients, therefore we aimed to characterize VCP variations in our own cohort of familial and sporadic ALS patients by sequencing all 17 coding exons of VCP.
This study failed to detect any exonic variations in a subset of British familial and sporadic ALS patients.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22218473
Morphological abnormalities in mitochondria of the skin of patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Mitochondrial dysfunction has been reported in the central nervous system, hepatocytes and peripheral blood lymphocytes from patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (SALS).
However, the status of skin mitochondria has not been reported, in spite of the fact that SALS patients present skin abnormalities.
The objective of the present study was to compare mitochondrial ultrastructural parameters in keratinocytes from patients with SALS and healthy controls.
Our study was based on the analysis of 112 skin mitochondria from 5 SALS patients and 99 organelles from 4 control subjects by electron microscopy.
Computerized image analysis showed that mitochondrial major axis length, area and perimeter of the organelle were significantly smaller in SALS respect of healthy control subjects.
Morphologically, SALS mitochondria presented cristolysis and breakage of the outer membrane.
Mitochondrial dysfunction in the skin may possibly reflect changes occurring in mitochondria of the central nervous system.
The analysis of mitochondrial morphology in this tissue may be of value to follow disease progression and, eventually, the effectiveness of current therapies for SALS.
PMID: 23479740
Mice deficient in Epg5 exhibit selective neuronal vulnerability to degeneration.
The molecular mechanism underlying the selective vulnerability of certain neuronal populations associated with neurodegenerative diseases remains poorly understood.
Basal autophagy is important for maintaining axonal homeostasis and preventing neurodegeneration.
In this paper, we demonstrate that mice deficient in the metazoan-specific autophagy gene Epg5/epg-5 exhibit selective damage of cortical layer 5 pyramidal neurons and spinal cord motor neurons.
Pathologically, Epg5 knockout mice suffered muscle denervation, myofiber atrophy, late-onset progressive hindquarter paralysis, and dramatically reduced survival, recapitulating key features of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Epg5 deficiency impaired autophagic flux by blocking the maturation of autophagosomes into degradative autolysosomes, leading to accumulation of p62 aggregates and ubiquitin-positive inclusions in neurons and glial cells.
Epg5 knockdown also impaired endocytic trafficking.
Our study establishes Epg5-deficient mice as a model for investigating the pathogenesis of ALS and indicates that dysfunction of the autophagic-endolysosomal system causes selective damage of neurons associated with neurodegenerative diseases.
PMID: 22385294
Gender-specific association of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene polymorphisms with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Studies have revealed that elevated homocysteine levels can cause damage to motor neurons through multiple neurotoxic mechanisms, thus leading to the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
One way by which homocysteine levels are increased in the body is the consequence of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene polymorphisms.
Therefore, to address this question, we studied the MTHFR C677T and A1298C polymorphisms in 437 sporadic ALS (SALS) and 439 healthy controls to learn whether they were associated with SALS.
The overall SALS were not associated with MTHFR C677T and A1298C polymorphisms (χ(2)=1.378; p=0.502; χ(2)=1.304; p=0.521, respectively).
However, when we stratified results in terms of gender, we found that the MTHFR C677T polymorphism (χ(2)=6.376; p=0.041), T677T genotype (χ(2)=5.508; p=0.019; odds ratio [OR]=2.561; 95% confidence interval [CI]=1.142-5.744), C677C/A1298A (χ(2)=5.216; p=0.022; OR=0.424, 95% CI=0.199-0.900), and T677T/A1298A (χ(2)=6.639; p=0.010; OR=2.900; 95% CI=1.252-6.717) compound genotypes were associated with SALS in female patients only.
Moreover, stratification of SALS according to the onset of disease indicated that there was no association between MTHFR C677T (χ(2)=1.565; p=0.457; A1298C χ(2)=3.461; p=0.177) polymorphisms and overall spinal onset SALS.
Further stratification analysis according to gender revealed that there was a remarkable association between MTHFR C677T (χ(2)=9.728, p=0.008), T677T genotype (χ(2)=7.820; p=0.005; OR=3.126; 95% CI=1.361-7.178) and T allele (χ(2)=5.000; p=0.025; OR=1.711; 95% CI=1.067-2.745), and T677T/A1298A compound genotype (χ(2)=9.108; p=0.003; OR=3.540; 95% CI=1.494-8.387) and spinal onset female SALS only.
Likewise, there was also association between MTHFR A1298C polymorphism (χ(2)=5.946; p=0.051) and the C1298C genotype (χ(2)=5.282; p=0.022; OR=2.524; 95% CI=1.125-5.658), and the C677T/C1298C compound genotype (χ(2)=7.155; p=0.007; OR=1.045; 95% CI=0.983-1.112) and bulbar onset SALS only in women.
In conclusion, the evidence we provide here clearly shows that MTHFR C677T and A1298C polymorphisms are genetic risk factors for SALS in women in a gender-specific manner whether they are of spinal or bulbar onset.
PMID: 22361376
The electrophysiology of the motor neuron diseases.
The motor neuron diseases are a set of disorders associated with the selective degeneration of motor neurons.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is the most common and confers the gravest prognosis.
Although ALS occurs with known genetic causes in a small minority, other motor neuron disorders have well-defined genetic mutations.
Electrodiagnostic testing is important to distinguish these various disorders.
Electrodiagnostic testing is also crucial for distinguishing potential mimic syndromes, such as multifocal motor neuropathy and inclusion body myositis.
Newer neurophysiology techniques have been developed in the past several years.
What role these techniques will play in clinical practice is currently unknown.
Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22388351
Reduced expression of BTBD10, an Akt activator, leads to motor neuron death.
BTBD10, an Akt interactor, activates Akt by decreasing the protein phosphatase 2A-mediated dephosphorylation and inactivation of Akt.
Overexpression of BTBD10 suppresses motor neuron death that is induced by a familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)-linked superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) mutant, G93A-SOD1 in vitro.
In this study, we further investigated the BTBD10-mediated suppression of motor neuron death.
We found that the small interfering RNA-mediated inhibition of BTBD10 expression led to the death of cultured motor neurons.
In Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans), disruption of the btbd-10 gene caused not only loss of neurons, including both motor and touch-receptor neurons, but also a locomotion defect.
In addition, we found that the expression of BTBD10 was generally decreased in the motor neurons from patients of sporadic ALS and transgenic mice overexpressing G93A-SOD1 (G93A-SOD1-transgenic mice).
Collectively, these results suggest that the reduced expression of BTBD10 leads to motor neuron death both in vitro and in vivo.
PMID: 23620776
The omega-3 fatty acid eicosapentaenoic acid accelerates disease progression in a model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive fatal neurodegenerative disease characterised by loss of motor neurons that currently has no cure.
Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, such as eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), have many health benefits including neuroprotective and myoprotective potential.
We tested the hypothesis that a high level of dietary EPA could exert beneficial effects in ALS.
The dietary exposure to EPA (300 mg/kg/day) in a well-established mouse model of ALS expressing the G93A superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) mutation was initiated at a pre-symptomatic or symptomatic stage, and the disease progression was monitored until the end stage.
Daily dietary EPA exposure initiated at the disease onset did not significantly alter disease presentation and progression.
In contrast, EPA treatment initiated at the pre-symptomatic stage induced a significantly shorter lifespan.
In a separate group of animals sacrificed before the end stage, the tissue analysis showed that the vacuolisation detected in G93A-SOD1 mice was significantly increased by exposure to EPA.
Although EPA did not alter motor neurone loss, EPA reversed the significant increase in activated microglia and the astrocytic activation seen in G93A-SOD1 mice.
The microglia in the spinal cord of G93A-SOD1 mice treated with EPA showed a significant increase in 4-hydroxy-2-hexenal, a highly toxic aldehydic oxidation product of omega-3 fatty acids.
These data show that dietary EPA supplementation in ALS has the potential to worsen the condition and accelerate the disease progression.
This suggests that great caution should be exerted when considering dietary omega-3 fatty acid supplements in ALS patients.
PMID: 22571983
Early onset behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia due to the C9ORF72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion: psychiatric clinical presentations.
A hexanucleotide repeat expansion in the first intron of C9ORF72 has been shown to be responsible for a high number of familial cases of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or frontotemporal lobar degeneration with or without concomitant motor neuron disease phenotype and TDP-43 based pathology.
Here, we report on three cases carrying the hexanucleotide repeat expansion with an atypical presentation consisting in the development of psychiatric symptoms.
Patient #1, a 53 year old man with positive family history for dementia, presented with mood deflection, characterized by apathy, social withdraw, and irritability in the last two years.
He was diagnosed with mild cognitive impairment due to depressive syndrome six months later and subsequently with Alzheimer's disease.
Patient #2, a woman with positive family history for dementia, developed behavioral disturbances, aggressiveness, and swearing at 57 years of age.
Patient #3 presented, in the absence of brain atrophy, with mystical delirium with auditory hallucinations at 44 years of age, and did not present neurological symptoms over a 7-year follow up.
The description of these cases underlines that the hexanucleotide repeat expansion in chromosome 9 could be associated with early onset psychiatric presentations.
PMID: 23382207
ALS-linked TDP-43 mutations produce aberrant RNA splicing and adult-onset motor neuron disease without aggregation or loss of nuclear TDP-43.
Transactivating response region DNA binding protein (TDP-43) is the major protein component of ubiquitinated inclusions found in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) with ubiquitinated inclusions.
Two ALS-causing mutants (TDP-43(Q331K) and TDP-43(M337V)), but not wild-type human TDP-43, are shown here to provoke age-dependent, mutant-dependent, progressive motor axon degeneration and motor neuron death when expressed in mice at levels and in a cell type-selective pattern similar to endogenous TDP-43.
Mutant TDP-43-dependent degeneration of lower motor neurons occurs without: (i) loss of TDP-43 from the corresponding nuclei, (ii) accumulation of TDP-43 aggregates, and (iii) accumulation of insoluble TDP-43.
Computational analysis using splicing-sensitive microarrays demonstrates alterations of endogenous TDP-43-dependent alternative splicing events conferred by both human wild-type and mutant TDP-43(Q331K), but with high levels of mutant TDP-43 preferentially enhancing exon exclusion of some target pre-mRNAs affecting genes involved in neurological transmission and function.
Comparison with splicing alterations following TDP-43 depletion demonstrates that TDP-43(Q331K) enhances normal TDP-43 splicing function for some RNA targets but loss-of-function for others.
Thus, adult-onset motor neuron disease does not require aggregation or loss of nuclear TDP-43, with ALS-linked mutants producing loss and gain of splicing function of selected RNA targets at an early disease stage.
PMID: 21876068
Disease progression in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: the influence of chronic stress and corticosterone.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease characterized by motor neuron cell loss, muscular atrophy, and a shortened life span.
Survival is highly variable, as some patients die within months, while others live for many years.
Exposure to stress or the development of a nonoptimal stress response to disease might account for some of this variability.
We show in the SOD1(G93A) mouse model of ALS that recurrent exposure to restraint stress led to an earlier onset of astrogliosis and microglial activation within the spinal cord, accelerated muscular weakness, and a significant decrease in median survival (105 vs. 122 d) when compared to nonstressed animals.
Moreover, during normal disease course, ALS mice display a cacostatic stress response by developing an aberrant serum corticosterone circadian rhythm.
Interestingly, we also found that higher corticosterone levels were significantly correlated with both an earlier onset of paralysis (males: r(2)=0.746; females: r(2)=0.707) and shorter survival times (males: r(2)=0.680; females: r(2)=0.552) in ALS mice.
These results suggest that stress is capable of accelerating disease progression and that strategies that modulate glucocorticoid metabolism might be a viable treatment approach for ALS.
PMID: 23063643
H63D polymorphism in HFE is not associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The H63D polymorphism in HFE has frequently been associated with susceptibility to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Regarding the role of HFE in iron homeostasis, iron accumulation is considered an important process in ALS.
Furthermore, novel therapeutic strategies are being developed targeting this process.
Evidence for this genetic association is, however, limited to several small studies.
For this reason we studied the H63D polymorphism in a large European cohort including 3962 ALS patients and 5072 control subjects from 7 countries.
After meta-analysis of previous studies and current findings we conclude that the H63D polymorphism in HFE is not associated with susceptibility to ALS, age at disease onset, or survival.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22277530
[Role of axonal transport in ALS].
Proposed hypothesis for pathomechanisms of sporadic ALS include oxidative stress, glutamate toxicity, axonal transport defects, mitochondrial impairment and so on.
Although these mechanisms may be interrelated mutually, the whole picture has not been clarified.
As for axonal transport defect, it is also prominently involved in the pathogenesis of many major human neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease, suggesting a crucial role of axonal transport in maintaining the normal neuronal function.
In mutant SOD1 transgenic mice, the most popular disease model of familial ALS, the mutant SOD1 selectively associates with and damages mitochondria, leading to defect of axonal transport because of diminished ATP fuel supply for the molecular motors such as kinesin family or dynein/dynactin complex.
Furthermore, the finding that mutations in the dynactin subunit p150Glued cause familial ALS demonstrates a direct role of molecular motor dysfunction and axonal transport defects in ALS.
On the other hand, the mechanism of axonal transport impairment in sporadic ALS has been elusive.
We have previously demonstrated that gene expression of dynactin subunit p150Glued (dynactin-1) is down-regulated in motor neurons of sporadic ALS patient from the early stage of neurodegeneration.
In this article we review the role of axonal transport in the pathogenesis of ALS.
PMID: 23245644
Radiation-induced neuropathy in cancer survivors.
Radiation-induced peripheral neuropathy is a chronic handicap, frightening because progressive and usually irreversible, usually appearing several years after radiotherapy.
Its occurrence is rare but increasing with improved long-term cancer survival.
The pathophysiological mechanisms are not yet fully understood.
Nerve compression by indirect extensive radiation-induced fibrosis plays a central role, in addition to direct injury to nerves through axonal damage and demyelination and injury to blood vessels by ischaemia following capillary network failure.
There is great clinical heterogeneity in neurological presentation since various anatomic sites are irradiated.
The well-known frequent form is radiation-induced brachial plexopathy (RIBP) following breast cancer irradiation, while tumour recurrence is easier to discount today with the help of magnetic resonance imaging and positron emission tomography.
RIBP incidence is in accordance with the irradiation technique, and ranges from 66% RIBP with 60Gy in 5Gy fractions in the 1960s to less than 1% with 50Gy in 2Gy fractions today.
Whereas a link with previous radiotherapy is forgotten or difficult to establish, this has recently been facilitated by a posteriori conformal radiotherapy with 3D-dosimetric reconstitution: lumbosacral radiculo-plexopathy following testicular seminoma or Hodgkin's disease misdiagnosed as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Promising treatments via the antioxidant pathway for radiation-induced fibrosis suggest a way to improve the everyday quality of life of these long-term cancer survivors.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22892313
Screening for OPTN mutations in a cohort of British amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients.
Variants within the optineurin gene (OPTN) are recognized as causative mutations for primary open angle glaucoma.
However, 4 different nonsynonymous and 3 different exonic deletion OPTN mutations have recently been identified in Japanese amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients.
We sought to characterize OPTN genetic variation in a British cohort of ALS cases of Northern European origin.
The coding portion of the gene (exons 4-16) was sequenced in a minimum of 75 familial and 120 sporadic ALS patients and an additional 300 sporadic cases in exons previously identified as harboring mutations in Northern European ALS patients.
Ten variants were identified, 8 of which are present in single nucleotide polymorphism databases.
Two novel synonymous changes were detected in exon 6 from 2 familial ALS cases.
These are not predicted to alter splicing and are therefore unlikely to be pathogenic.
We conclude that OPTN mutations associated with ALS are rare in British ALS patients.
Crown Copyright © 2012.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23303844
Mutations in the gene encoding p62 in Japanese patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The purpose of this study was to find mutations in the SQSTM1 gene encoding p62 in Japanese patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), since this gene has been recently identified as a causative gene for familial and sporadic ALS in the United States.
We sequenced this gene in 61 Japanese patients with sporadic and familial ALS.
To our knowledge, we describe for the first time the clinical information of such mutation-positive patients.
We found novel mutations, p.Ala53Thr and p.Pro439Leu, in 2 patients with sporadic ALS.
The clinical picture of the mutation-positive patients was that of typical ALS with varied upper motor neuron signs.
Although this gene is causative for another disease, Paget disease of bone (PDB), none of our patients showed evidence of concomitant PDB.
The presence of mutations in this racial population suggests worldwide, common involvement of the SQSTM1 gene in ALS.
PMID: 23468993
Distinct changes in synaptic protein composition at neuromuscular junctions of extraocular muscles versus limb muscles of ALS donors.
The pathophysiology of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is very complex and still rather elusive but in recent years evidence of early involvement of the neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) has accumulated.
We have recently reported that the human extraocular muscles (EOMs) are far less affected than limb muscles at the end-stage of ALS from the same donor.
The present study aimed to compare the differences in synaptic protein composition at NMJ and in nerve fibers between EOM and limb muscles from ALS donors and controls.
Neurofilament light subunit and synaptophysin decreased significantly at NMJs and in nerve fibers in limb muscles with ALS whereas they were maintained in ALS EOMs.
S100B was significantly decreased at NMJs and in nerve fibers in both EOMs and limb muscles of ALS donors, but other markers confirmed the presence of terminal Schwann cells in these NMJs. p75 neurotrophin receptor was present in nerve fibers but absent at NMJs in ALS limb muscles.
The EOMs were able to maintain the integrity of their NMJs to a very large extent until the end-stage of ALS, in contrast to the limb muscles.
Changes in Ca(2+) homeostasis, reflected by altered S100B distribution, might be involved in the breakdown of nerve-muscle contact at NMJs in ALS.
PMID: 23697999
Functional modulation of the glutamate transporter variant GLT1b by the PDZ domain protein PICK1.
The dominant glutamate transporter isoform in the mammalian brain, GLT1, exists as at least three splice variants, GLT1a, GLT1b, and GLT1c.
GLT1b interacts with the scaffold protein PICK1 (protein interacting with kinase C1), which is implicated in glutamatergic neurotransmission via its regulatory effect on trafficking of AMPA-type glutamate receptors.
The 11 extreme C-terminal residues specific for the GLT1b variant are essential for its specific interaction with the PICK1 PDZ domain, but a functional consequence of this interaction has remained unresolved.
To identify a functional effect of PICK1 on GLT1a or GLT1b separately, we employed the Xenopus laevis expression system.
GLT1a and GLT1b displayed similar electrophysiological properties and EC50 for glutamate.
Co-expressed PICK1 localized efficiently to the plasma membrane and resulted in a 5-fold enhancement of the leak current in GLT1b-expressing oocytes with only a minor effect on [(3)H]glutamate uptake.
Three different GLT1 substrates all caused a slow TBOA-sensitive decay in the membrane current upon prolonged application, which provides support for the leak current being mediated by GLT1b itself.
Leak and glutamate-evoked currents in GLT1a-expressing oocytes were unaffected by PICK1 co-expression.
PKC activation down-regulated GLT1a and GLT1b activity to a similar extent, which was not affected by co-expression of PICK1.
In conclusion, PICK1 may not only affect glutamatergic neurotransmission by its regulatory effect on glutamate receptors but may also affect neuronal excitability via an increased GLT1b-mediated leak current.
This may be particularly relevant in pathological conditions such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and cerebral hypoxia, which are associated with neuronal GLT1b up-regulation.
PMID: 23708095
Loss of vps54 function leads to vesicle traffic impairment, protein mis-sorting and embryonic lethality.
The identification of the mutation causing the phenotype of the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) model mouse, wobbler, has linked motor neuron degeneration with retrograde vesicle traffic.
The wobbler mutation affects protein stability of Vps54, a ubiquitously expressed vesicle-tethering factor and leads to partial loss of Vps54 function.
Moreover, the Vps54 null mutation causes embryonic lethality, which is associated with extensive membrane blebbing in the neural tube and is most likely a consequence of impaired vesicle transport.
Investigation of cells derived from wobbler and Vps54 null mutant embryos demonstrates impaired retrograde transport of the Cholera-toxin B subunit to the trans-Golgi network and mis-sorting of mannose-6-phosphate receptors and cargo proteins dependent on retrograde vesicle transport.
Endocytosis assays demonstrate no difference between wobbler and wild type cells, indicating that the retrograde vesicle traffic to the trans-Golgi network, but not endocytosis, is affected in Vps54 mutant cells.
The results obtained on wobbler cells were extended to test the use of cultured skin fibroblasts from human ALS patients to investigate the retrograde vesicle traffic.
Analysis of skin fibroblasts of ALS patients will support the investigation of the critical role of the retrograde vesicle transport in ALS pathogenesis and might yield a diagnostic prospect.
PMID: 21461685
Quality of life of ALS and LIS patients with and without invasive mechanical ventilation.
There are very few studies where quality of life (QOL) is assessed in patients with complete physical and functional disability and dependence to invasive mechanical ventilation (IV).
We compared QOL of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and locked-in-syndrome (LIS) patients with invasive mechanical ventilation to ALS and LIS patients without mechanical invasive ventilation.
Thirty-four patients, 27 with ALS and seven with LIS (vascular or tumoral aetiology) were included in the study.
Twelve had invasive ventilation, 22 had non-invasive ventilation, and in the non-invasive ventilation group, five of them had ventilation via mask.
The following scales were used for patients: ALS Functional Rating Scale (ALSFRS), McGILL, Short-Form 36 (SF36), Beck Depression Inventory-II, the Toronto Alexithymia Scale and the anxiety inventory of Spielberger.
Mean ALSFRS scores were significantly lower in the invasive ventilation group (IV) than in the non-invasive ventilation group.
McGILL and SF36 were not significantly different between the IV group and the non-invasive ventilation group; there were no significant differences between the two groups for others scales either.
Comparison between IV group and LIS without invasive mechanical ventilation revealed no significant difference for SF36 and McGILL QOL scores.
QOL was not significantly different between the IV and not invasively ventilated patients, but ALSFRS was significantly lower in the IV group, and comparison of QOL scores between non-ventilated LIS patients who had the same score of dependence that invasively ventilated patients did not show any difference.
Invasive mechanical ventilation for patients who accept tracheotomy allows life prolongation and their QOL is not affected; medical teams should be aware of that.
PMID: 21554032
The use of subcutaneous glycopyrrolate in the management of sialorrhoea and facilitating the use of non-invasive ventilation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Sialorrhoea is a recognized complication of bulbar amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) that leads to an increased risk of potentially harmful aspiration and often prevents patients from tolerating non-invasive ventilation (NIV).
A case of treatment-resistant sialorrhoea in bulbar ALS is described where subcutaneous glycopyrrolate was effective without significant side-effects.
The patient went on to markedly increase the length of time she could tolerate NIV each night.
PMID: 21554033
Upper trapezius electromyography aids in the early diagnosis of bulbar involvement in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Electromyography (EMG), particularly measurements of the tongue or sternocleidomastoid, aids in the diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and may be used to identify lower motor neuron lesions in the bulbar region.
Abnormal trapezius EMG recordings were recently shown to be useful in diagnosing ALS.
Here, we investigated the role of upper trapezius EMG in assessing bulbar involvement in ALS.
Standard EMG measurements were recorded from the upper trapezius in ALS, cervical spondylotic myelopathy (CSM), and normal controls (NC).
Forty-three CSM patients were examined pre-operatively and three months post-operatively.
Greater spontaneous activity levels were observed in upper trapezius EMG measurements of ALS patients with a disease duration of ≤8 months (70%), compared with patients with a disease duration of &gt;8 months (40%).
Significant differences in motor unit action potential parameters were also noted between ALS and CSM or NC.
Fewer spontaneous EMG recordings were detected in CSM post-operatively.
Furthermore, no differences in neurogenic EMG measurements were observed in ALS between the trapezius and sternocleidomastoid muscles (p = 0.22).
In conclusion, upper trapezius EMG recordings may provide valuable information for assessing the clinical and subclinical involvement of bulbar lower motor neurons in ALS patients, particularly at early disease stages.
PMID: 23339288
Review: microglia in protein aggregation disorders: friend or foe?
Microglia cells have been implicated, to some extent, in the pathogenesis of all of the common neurodegenerative disorders involving protein aggregation such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
However, the precise role they play in the development of the pathologies remains unclear and it seems that they contribute to the pathological process in different ways depending on the specific disorder.
A better understanding of their varied roles is essential if they are to be the target for novel therapeutic strategies.
© 2013 British Neuropathological Society.
PMID: 21700707
Cutting off functional loops from homodimeric enzyme superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) leaves monomeric β-barrels.
Demetallation of the homodimeric enzyme Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase (SOD1) is known to unleash pronounced dynamic motions in the long active-site loops that comprise almost a third of the folded structure.
The resulting apo species, which shows increased propensity to aggregate, stands out as the prime disease precursor in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Even so, the detailed structural properties of the apoSOD1 framework have remained elusive and controversial.
In this study, we examine the structural interplay between the central apoSOD1 barrel and the active-site loops by simply cutting them off; loops IV and VII were substituted with short Gly-Ala-Gly linkers.
The results show that loop removal breaks the dimer interface and leads to soluble, monomeric β-barrels with high structural integrity.
NMR-detected nuclear Overhauser effects are found between all of the constituent β-strands, confirming ordered interactions across the whole barrel.
Moreover, the breathing motions of the SOD1 barrel are overall insensitive to loop removal and yield hydrogen/deuterium protection factors typical for cooperatively folded proteins (i.e. the active-site loops act as a bolt-on domain with little dynamic influence on its structural foundation).
The sole exceptions are the relatively low protection factors in β-strand 5 and the turn around Gly-93, a hot spot for ALS-provoking mutations, which decrease even further upon loop removal.
Taken together, these data suggest that the cytotoxic function of apoSOD1 does not emerge from its folded ground state but from a high energy intermediate or even from the denatured ensemble.
PMID: 22859739
Manganese in cerebrospinal fluid and blood plasma of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Neurotoxic properties of manganese (Mn) are well documented.
It is less known that Mn contributes to the development of neurodegenerative disorders in the general population.
This study presents Mn data from patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) in a well-defined cohort diagnosed by electrophysiological methods.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and plasma were collected from patients and controls.
Mn concentrations were analyzed by high-resolution inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry.
Concentrations of Mn were significantly higher in ALS CSF (median 5.67 μg/L) than in CSF from controls (median 2.08 μg/L).
Also, ALS CSF Mn concentrations were higher than ALS plasma Mn concentrations (median 0.91 μg/L), suggesting transport of Mn into the central nervous system.
The properties of barrier systems between blood and the brain are discussed and the possibility of Mn accumulation contributing to the relentless course of ALS is introduced.
PMID: 23264687
Transcranial magnetic stimulation and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: pathophysiological insights.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a rapidly progressive neurodegenerative disorder of the motor neurons in the motor cortex, brainstem and spinal cord.
A combination of upper and lower motor neuron dysfunction comprises the clinical ALS phenotype.
Although the ALS phenotype was first observed by Charcot over 100 years ago, the site of ALS onset and the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying the development of motor neuron degeneration remain to be elucidated.
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) enables non-invasive assessment of the functional integrity of the motor cortex and its corticomotoneuronal projections.
To date, TMS studies have established motor cortical and corticospinal dysfunction in ALS, with cortical hyperexcitability being an early feature in sporadic forms of ALS and preceding the clinical onset of familial ALS.
Taken together, a central origin of ALS is supported by TMS studies, with an anterograde transsynaptic mechanism implicated in ALS pathogenesis.
Of further relevance, TMS techniques reliably distinguish ALS from mimic disorders, despite a compatible peripheral disease burden, thereby suggesting a potential diagnostic utility of TMS in ALS.
This review will focus on the mechanisms underlying the generation of TMS measures used in assessment of cortical excitability, the contribution of TMS in enhancing the understanding of ALS pathophysiology and the potential diagnostic utility of TMS techniques in ALS.
PMID: 22916266
Co-occurrence of TDP-43 mislocalization with reduced activity of an RNA editing enzyme, ADAR2, in aged mouse motor neurons.
TDP-43 pathology in spinal motor neurons is a neuropathological hallmark of sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and has recently been shown to be closely associated with the downregulation of an RNA editing enzyme called adenosine deaminase acting on RNA 2 (ADAR2) in the motor neurons of sporadic ALS patients.
Because TDP-43 pathology is found more frequently in the brains of elderly patients, we investigated the age-related changes in the TDP-43 localization and ADAR2 activity in mouse motor neurons.
We found that ADAR2 was developmentally upregulated, and its mRNA expression level was progressively decreased in the spinal cords of aged mice.
Motor neurons normally exhibit nuclear ADAR2 and TDP-43 immunoreactivity, whereas fast fatigable motor neurons in aged mice demonstrated a loss of ADAR2 and abnormal TDP-43 localization.
Importantly, these motor neurons expressed significant amounts of the Q/R site-unedited AMPA receptor subunit 2 (GluA2) mRNA.
Because expression of unedited GluA2 has been demonstrated as a lethality-causing molecular abnormality observed in the motor neurons, these results suggest that age-related decreases in ADAR2 activity play a mechanistic role in aging and serve as one of risk factors for ALS.
PMID: 22899188
Infectious agents and neurodegeneration.
A growing body of epidemiologic and experimental data point to chronic bacterial and viral infections as possible risk factors for neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Infections of the central nervous system, especially those characterized by a chronic progressive course, may produce multiple damage in infected and neighbouring cells.
The activation of inflammatory processes and host immune responses cause chronic damage resulting in alterations of neuronal function and viability, but different pathogens can also directly trigger neurotoxic pathways.
Indeed, viral and microbial agents have been reported to produce molecular hallmarks of neurodegeneration, such as the production and deposit of misfolded protein aggregates, oxidative stress, deficient autophagic processes, synaptopathies and neuronal death.
These effects may act in synergy with other recognized risk factors, such as aging, concomitant metabolic diseases and the host's specific genetic signature.
This review will focus on the contribution given to neurodegeneration by herpes simplex type-1, human immunodeficiency and influenza viruses, and by Chlamydia pneumoniae.
PMID: 23172908
Reduction of polyglutamine toxicity by TDP-43, FUS and progranulin in Huntington's disease models.
The DNA/RNA binding proteins TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) and fused-in-sarcoma (FUS) are genetically linked to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar dementia, while the inappropriate cytoplasmic accumulations of TDP-43 and FUS are observed in a growing number of late-onset pathologies including spinocerebellar ataxia 3, Alzheimer's and Huntington's diseases (HD).
To investigate if TDP-43 and FUS contribute to neurodegenerative phenotypes, we turned to a genetically accessible Caenorhabditis elegans model of polyglutamine toxicity.
In C. elegans, we observe that genetic loss-of-function mutations for nematode orthologs of TDP-43 or FUS reduced behavioral defects and neurodegeneration caused by huntingtin exon-1 with expanded polyglutamines.
Furthermore, using striatal cells from huntingtin knock-in mice we observed that small interfering ribonucleic acid (siRNA) against TDP-43 or FUS reduced cell death caused by mutant huntingtin.
Moreover, we found that TDP-43 and the survival factor progranulin (PGRN) genetically interact to regulate polyglutamine toxicity in C. elegans and mammalian cells.
Altogether our data point towards a conserved function for TDP-43 and FUS in promoting polyglutamine toxicity and that delivery of PGRN may have therapeutic benefits.
PMID: 23172909
Ataxin-2 interacts with FUS and intermediate-length polyglutamine expansions enhance FUS-related pathology in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Fused in sarcoma (FUS) is mutated in both sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and familial ALS patients.
The mechanisms underlying neurodegeneration are not fully understood, but FUS redistributes from the nucleus to the cytoplasm in affected motor neurons, where it triggers endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress.
Ataxin-2 is a polyglutamine protein which normally contains 22 repeats, but expanded repeats (&gt;34) are found in Spinocerebellar Ataxia type 2.
Recently ataxin-2 with intermediate length repeats (27-33) was found to increase the risk of ALS.
Here we show that ataxin-2 with an ALS-linked intermediate length repeat (Q31) is a potent modifier of FUS pathology in cellular disease models.
Translocation of FUS to the cytoplasm and ER stress were significantly enhanced by co-expression of mutant FUS with ataxin-2 Q31.
Ataxin-2 also co-localized with FUS in sporadic and FUS-linked familial ALS patient motor neurons, co-precipitated with FUS in ALS spinal cord lysates, and co-localized with FUS in the ER-Golgi compartments in neuronal cell lines.
Fragmentation of the Golgi apparatus is linked to neurodegeneration in ALS and here we show that Golgi fragmentation is induced in cells expressing mutant FUS.
Moreover, Golgi fragmentation was enhanced, and the early stages of apoptosis were triggered, when ataxin-2 Q31 was co-expressed with mutant FUS.
These findings describe new cellular mechanisms linking ALS with ataxin-2 intermediate length polyQ expansions and provide further evidence linking disruption to ER-Golgi compartments and FUS pathology in ALS.
PMID: 23226006
What influences patient decision-making in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis multidisciplinary care? A study of patient perspectives.
Patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) are required to make decisions concerning quality of life and symptom management over the course of their disease.
Clinicians perceive that patients' ability to engage in timely decision-making is extremely challenging.
However, we lack patient perspectives on this issue.
This study aimed to explore patient experiences of ALS, and to identify factors influencing their decision-making in the specialized multidisciplinary care of ALS.
An exploratory study was conducted.
Fourteen patients from two specialized ALS multidisciplinary clinics participated in semistructured interviews that were audio recorded and transcribed.
Data were analyzed for emergent themes.
Decision-making was influenced by three levels of factors, ie, structural, interactional, and personal.
The structural factor was the decision-making environment of specialized multidisciplinary ALS clinics, which supported decision-making by providing patients with disease-specific information and specialized care planning.
Interactional factors were the patient experiences of ALS, including patients' reaction to the diagnosis, response to deterioration, and engagement with the multidisciplinary ALS team.
Personal factors were patients' personal philosophies, including their outlook on life, perceptions of control, and planning for the future.
Patient approaches to decision-making reflected a focus on the present, rather than anticipating future progression of the disease and potential care needs.
Decision-making for symptom management and quality of life in ALS care is enhanced when the patient's personal philosophy is supported by collaborative relationships between the patient and the multidisciplinary ALS team.
Patients valued the support provided by the multidisciplinary team; however, their focus on living in the present diverged from the efforts of health professionals to prepare patients and their carers for the future.
The challenge facing health professionals is how best to engage each patient in decision-making for their future needs, to bridge this gap.
PMID: 21864053
Intramuscular administration of a VEGF zinc finger transcription factor activator (VEGF-ZFP-TF) improves functional outcomes in SOD1 rats.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is characterized by motor neuron loss leading to paralysis and death.
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) has angiogenic, neurotrophic, and neuroprotective properties, and has preserved neuromuscular function and protected motor neurons in rats engineered to overexpress the human gene coding the mutated G93A form of the superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1).
We assessed the effects of intramuscular administration of a plasmid that encodes a zinc finger protein transcription factor (ZFP-TF) engineered to induce VEGF expression in the SOD1 rat model of ALS.
Weekly injections of the plasmid preserved ipsilateral hindlimb grip strength and markedly improved rotarod performance in SOD1 rats compared to the vehicle-treated group.
The number of motor neurons and the proportion of innervated neuromuscular junctions were similar in both groups.
In conclusion, our data suggest that administration of the VEGF-ZFP-TF may be neuroprotective and has potential as a safe and practical approach for the management of motor disability in ALS.
PMID: 21916798
A panel of macroautophagy markers in lymphomonocytes of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
A potential role for macroautophagy dysfunction in the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) was hypothesized after the demonstration that selected markers are up-regulated in post mortem samples obtained from both patients and animal models of disease.
We hypothesized that a putative dysfunction of this catabolic pathway could be operative also in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) obtained from ALS patients, since these cells represent an accessible model for studying molecular pathogenesis events in neuropsychiatric disorders.
Beclin-1 and LC3II immunoreactivity were assessed in PBMC from 15 ALS patients and 15 controls by Western blot analysis.
The expression of Atg12 mRNA was also assessed by real-time PCR.
No significant difference was observed for all these parameters between patients and controls, although PBMC displayed a clear macroautophagy induction following exposure to rapamycin and lithium.
Finally, we excluded a putative interference of riluzole demonstrating that LC3II immunoreactivity did not change in riluzole-treated SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells.
In conclusion, the results of our pilot study do not support the idea of a systemic macroautophagic dysfunction in ALS, although they confirm that PBMC are a suitable peripheral marker for monitoring the effects of drugs interfering with this catabolic pathway.
PMID: 22210083
Microglial activation and TDP-43 pathology correlate with executive dysfunction in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
While cognitive deficits are increasingly recognized as common symptoms in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), the underlying histopathologic basis for this is not known, nor has the relevance of neuroinflammatory mechanisms and microglial activation to cognitive impairment (CI) in ALS been systematically analyzed.
Staining for neurodegenerative disease pathology, TDP-43, and microglial activation markers (CD68, Iba1) was performed in 102 autopsy cases of ALS, and neuropathology data were related to clinical and neuropsychological measures.
ALS with dementia (ALS-D) and ALS with impaired executive function (ALS-Ex) patients showed significant microglial activation in middle frontal and superior or middle temporal (SMT) gyrus regions, as well as significant neuronal loss and TDP-43 pathology in these regions.
Microglial activation and TDP-43 pathology in middle frontal and superior or middle temporal regions were highly correlated with measures of executive impairment, but not with the MMSE.
In contrast, only one ALS-D patient showed moderate Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology.
Tau and Aβ pathology increased with age.
A lower MMSE score correlated with tau pathology in hippocampus and SMT gyrus, and with Aβ pathology in limbic and most cortical regions.
Tau and Aβ pathology did not correlate with executive measures.
We conclude that microglial activation and TDP-43 pathology in frontotemporal areas are determinants of FTLD spectrum dementia in ALS and correlate with neuropsychological measures of executive dysfunction.
In contrast, AD pathology in ALS is primarily related to increasing age and associated with a poorer performance on the MMSE.
PMID: 22645103
A retrospective study of nurse-assisted propofol sedation in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis undergoing percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy.
Percutaneous endscopic gastrostomy (PEG) placement is standard in the care of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) unable to maintain adequate oral nutrition.
This has been performed using conscious sedation with narcotics/benzodiazepines.
However, recent studies suggest that propofol sedation is superior for other endoscopic procedures.
In addition, endoscopic PEG placement is not recommended for patients with ALS with a forced vital capacity (FVC) &lt;50%.
The authors postulated that nurse-administered propofol sedation (NAPS) with the addition of bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) would be superior to standard sedation with midazolam/fentanyl (M/F) in all patients with ALS regardless of FVC.
Here the authors review their retrospective experience of PEG placements in patients with ALS using propofol ± BiPAP vs traditional sedation ± BiPAP.
Thirty-one patients received M/F, and 29 received NAPS.
BiPAP was used more often in the NAPS group (24/29 NAPS vs 6/31 M/F respectively, P &lt; .0001).
Twenty-nine of 31 PEG placements in the M/F group and 27 of 29 PEG placements in the NAPS group were successful.
Seven desaturation events occurred to &lt;90% in the M/F group compared with 1 desaturation event in the NAPS group (P = .05).
No other complications were noted.
PEG placement can be performed safely in patients with ALS with FVC &lt;50% using NAPS with BiPAP.
PMID: 21450050
Loss of neurofilaments in the neuromuscular junction in a rat model of proximal axonopathy.
Rodents exposed to 3,3'-iminodipropionitrile (IDPN) develop an axonopathy similar to that observed in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis motor neurones, in which neurofilaments accumulate in swollen proximal axon segments.
This study addressed the hypotheses that this proximal axonopathy is associated with loss of neurofilament proteins in the neuromuscular junctions and a progressive loss of neurofilaments advancing in a distal-proximal direction from the distal motor nerve.
Adult male Long-Evans rats were exposed to 0 or 15 mM of IDPN in drinking water for 1, 3 or 5 weeks, and their distal axons and neuromuscular junction organization studied by immunohistochemistry.
Quantitative data were obtained by confocal microscopy on whole mounts of the Levator auris longus.
Muscles showed no change in the distribution of acetylcholine receptor labelling in the neuromuscular junctions after IDPN.
In contrast, the amount of neurofilament labelling in the junctions was significantly reduced by IDPN, assessed with two different anti-neurofilament antibodies.
In preterminal axons and in more proximal axon levels, no statistically significant reductions in neurofilament content were observed.
The proximal neurofilamentous axonopathy induced by IDPN is associated with an abnormally low content of neurofilaments in the motor terminals, with a potential impact in the function or stability of the neuromuscular junction.
In contrast, neurofilaments are significantly maintained in the distal axon.
© 2011 The Authors.
Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology © 2011 British Neuropathological Society.
PMID: 22868885
[Spinocerebellar ataxia type 36 (nicknamed Asidan)].
We report the phenotype of spinocerebellar ataxia type 36 (SCA36), which is a novel type of dominant cerebellar ataxia nicknamed as Asidan, caused by the expansion of a hexanucleotide GGCCTG repeat in intron 1 of the nucleolar protein 56 (NOP56) gene.
Age at the onset of ataxia was 53.1 (3.4) years (mean[SD]).
Truncal ataxia was the most frequent initial symptom (100%), followed by ataxic dysarthria (100%), limb ataxia (93%), and general hyperreflexia (79%).
Tongue fasciculation and subsequent atrophy were observed in 71% of the cases, especially in those of a longer duration.
Skeletal muscle fasciculation and atrophy in the limbs and trunk were also observed in 57% of the cases.
To our knowledge, we describe for the first time a unique clinical feature of Asidan (SCA36)--relatively pure cerebellar ataxia with progressive motor neuron involvement during the course of disease-that puts SCA36 at the crossroad of SCA and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
PMID: 23022481
FUS-SMN protein interactions link the motor neuron diseases ALS and SMA.
Mutations in the RNA binding protein FUS cause amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a fatal adult motor neuron disease.
Decreased expression of SMN causes the fatal childhood motor neuron disorder spinal muscular atrophy (SMA).
The SMN complex localizes in both the cytoplasm and nuclear Gems, and loss of Gems is a cellular hallmark of fibroblasts in patients with SMA.
Here, we report that FUS associates with the SMN complex, mediated by U1 snRNP and by direct interactions between FUS and SMN.
Functionally, we show that FUS is required for Gem formation in HeLa cells, and expression of FUS containing a severe ALS-causing mutation (R495X) also results in Gem loss.
Strikingly, a reduction in Gems is observed in ALS patient fibroblasts expressing either mutant FUS or TDP-43, another ALS-causing protein that interacts with FUS.
The physical and functional interactions among SMN, FUS, TDP-43, and Gems indicate that ALS and SMA share a biochemical pathway, providing strong support for the view that these motor neuron diseases are related.
Copyright © 2012 The Authors.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22193716
Redox signalling directly regulates TDP-43 via cysteine oxidation and disulphide cross-linking.
TDP-43 is the major disease protein in ubiquitin-positive inclusions of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) characterized by TDP-43 pathology (FTLD-TDP).
Accumulation of insoluble TDP-43 aggregates could impair normal TDP-43 functions and initiate disease progression.
Thus, it is critical to define the signalling mechanisms regulating TDP-43 since this could open up new avenues for therapeutic interventions.
Here, we have identified a redox-mediated signalling mechanism directly regulating TDP-43.
Using in vitro and cell-based studies, we demonstrate that oxidative stress promotes TDP-43 cross-linking via cysteine oxidation and disulphide bond formation leading to decreased TDP-43 solubility.
Biochemical analysis identified several cysteine residues located within and adjacent to the second RNA-recognition motif that contribute to both intra- and inter-molecular interactions, supporting TDP-43 as a target of redox signalling.
Moreover, increased levels of cross-linked TDP-43 species are found in FTLD-TDP brains, indicating that aberrant TDP-43 cross-linking is a prominent pathological feature of this disease.
Thus, TDP-43 is dynamically regulated by a redox regulatory switch that links oxidative stress to the modulation of TDP-43 and its downstream targets.
PMID: 23102936
Screening of VCP mutations in Chinese amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients.
Mutations in valosin-containing protein (VCP) gene have been recently found in familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
To define the frequency of VCP mutations in ALS patients in Chinese population, we sequenced all 17 exons of the VCP gene in a cohort of both familial and sporadic ALS patients of Chinese origin.
No nonsynonymous coding variants were identified.
This indicates that VCP mutations are not a common cause of familial or sporadic ALS in Chinese population.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22819354
Balancing between autonomy and support: coping strategies by patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) makes a strong psychological impact, and the study of efforts by patients to cope with the course of the disease could be an important first step in the optimisation of care treatment.
With this aim, in our study we assessed the coping strategies by a population of ALS patients, according to some clinical parameters and the worsening of the disease.
We have administered the MND coping scale to 62 patients, firstly at the admission to our neurorehabilitation unit and secondly after 1year.
Each factor score has been related to age and progression of the disease, and comparisons between males and females have also been made.
The increasing relevance of seeking support from families and technological devices is probably the most interesting finding: such a result stimulates remarkable considerations about the proper balance between such support and patients' autonomy.
As a whole, data confirm the importance of a proper and well-timed psychological intervention for patients and their families.
In detail, improving adaptive coping strategies, together with sustaining those which tend to weaken along the progression of the disease, could be an important goal in psychological counselling for both patients and family members.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23086414
Phosphoinositides in neuroexocytosis and neuronal diseases.
Phosphoinositides (PIs) are a family of phospholipids derived from phosphatidylinositol (PtdIns), whose location, synthesis, and degradation depend on specific PI kinases and phosphatases.
PIs have emerged as fundamental regulators of secretory processes, such as neurotransmitter release, hormone secretion, and histamine release in allergic responses.
In neurons and neuroendocrine cells, regulated secretion requires the calcium-dependent fusion of transmitter-containing vesicles with the plasma membrane.
The role played by PIs in exocytosis is best exemplified by the Ca²⁺-dependent binding of vesicular Synaptotagmin1 to the plasma membrane PtdIns(4,5)P₂, and the recently demonstrated role of PtdIns(4,5)P₂ in the mobilization of secretory vesicles to the plasma membrane.
New evidence has also recently emerged of an alternative PI pathway that can control exocytosis positively (via PtdIn3P) or negatively (via PtdIns(3,5)P₂).
However, the positive or negative effectors for these pathways remain to be established.
Reducing PtdIns(3,5)P₂ potentiates neuroexocytosis but leads to neuronal degeneration and has been linked to certain forms of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The goal of this review is to describe the role of PIs in neuroexocytosis and explore the current hypotheses linking these effects to human diseases.
PMID: 22218657
Adult mortality from leukemia, brain cancer, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and magnetic fields from power lines: a case-control study in Brazil.
Recent publications renewed interest in assessing potential health risks for subjects living close to transmission lines.
This study aimed at evaluating the association of both distance of home address to the nearest overhead transmission line and of the calculated magnetic fields from the power lines and mortality from leukemia, brain cancer, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
We carried out a death certificate based case-control study accessing adult mortality in the Metropolitan Region of São Paulo, in Brazil.
Analysis included 1,857 cases of leukemia, 2,357 of brain cancer, 367 of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and 4,706 as controls.
An increased risk for mortality from leukemia among adults living at closer distances to transmission lines compared to those living further then 400 m was found.
Risk was higher for subjects that lived within 50 m from power lines (OR=1.47; 95% CI=0.99-2.18).
Similarly, a small increase in leukemia mortality was observed among adults living in houses with higher calculated magnetic fields (OR=1.61; 95% CI=0.91-2.86 for those exposed to magnetic fields &gt;0.3 µT).
No increase was seen for brain tumours or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Our findings are suggestive of a higher risk for leukemia among subjects living closer to transmission lines, and for those living at homes with higher calculated magnetic fields, although the risk was limited to lower voltage lines.
PMID: 22178911
Development of a high-throughput screen targeting caspase-8-mediated cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein.
Caspases, effectors of apoptosis, are key mediators of neuronal death in several neurodegenerative diseases.
Caspase-8 and caspase-6 have been implicated in the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, and Alzheimer's disease (AD).
ß-Amyloid precursor protein (APP) is cleaved at Asp664 in its intracellular domain by caspase-8.
We and other laboratories recently showed that obliteration of the caspase cleavage site on APP alleviates functional AD-like deficits in a mouse model.
Therefore, caspase cleavage of APP constitutes a potential novel target for therapeutic intervention.
To identify chemical inhibitors of caspase-8 cleavage, we screened a subset of the chemical library at the Harvard NeuroDiscovery Center's Laboratory for Drug Discovery in Neurodegeneration.
We show that caspase-8, but not caspase-1, -3, or -9, cleaves a biotinylated peptide derived from APP at Asp664, and we report the development of a sensitive high-throughput assay for caspase-8 cleavage of APP and the use of that assay for the identification of specific small molecule hit compounds that potently inhibit Asp664 cleavage of APP.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that one of these compounds (LDN-0021835) inhibits the cleavage of APP at Asp664 in cell-based assays.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23457265
Loss of ALS-associated TDP-43 in zebrafish causes muscle degeneration, vascular dysfunction, and reduced motor neuron axon outgrowth.
Mutations in the Tar DNA binding protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43; TARDBP) are associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration with TDP-43(+) inclusions (FTLD-TDP).
To determine the physiological function of TDP-43, we knocked out zebrafish Tardbp and its paralogue Tardbp (TAR DNA binding protein-like), which lacks the glycine-rich domain where ALS- and FTLD-TDP-associated mutations cluster.
tardbp mutants show no phenotype, a result of compensation by a unique splice variant of tardbpl that additionally contains a C-terminal elongation highly homologous to the glycine-rich domain of tardbp.
Double-homozygous mutants of tardbp and tardbpl show muscle degeneration, strongly reduced blood circulation, mispatterning of vessels, impaired spinal motor neuron axon outgrowth, and early death.
In double mutants the muscle-specific actin binding protein Filamin Ca is up-regulated.
Strikingly, Filamin C is similarly increased in the frontal cortex of FTLD-TDP patients, suggesting aberrant expression in smooth muscle cells and TDP-43 loss-of-function as one underlying disease mechanism.
PMID: 22129991
Heat shock transcription factor 1 as a therapeutic target in neurodegenerative diseases.
Neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and prion-based neurodegeneration are associated with the accumulation of misfolded proteins, resulting in neuronal dysfunction and cell death.
However, current treatments for these diseases predominantly address disease symptoms, rather than the underlying protein misfolding and cell death, and are not able to halt or reverse the degenerative process.
Studies in cell culture, fruitfly, worm and mouse models of protein misfolding-based neurodegenerative diseases indicate that enhancing the protein-folding capacity of cells, via elevated expression of chaperone proteins, has therapeutic potential.
Here, we review advances in strategies to harness the power of the natural cellular protein-folding machinery through pharmacological activation of heat shock transcription factor 1--the master activator of chaperone protein gene expression--to treat neurodegenerative diseases.
PMID: 22072396
Inhibitory synaptic regulation of motoneurons: a new target of disease mechanisms in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is the third most common adult-onset neurodegenerative disease.
It causes the degeneration of motoneurons and is fatal due to paralysis, particularly of respiratory muscles.
ALS can be inherited, and specific disease-causing genes have been identified, but the mechanisms causing motoneuron death in ALS are not understood.
No effective treatments exist for ALS.
One well-studied theory of ALS pathogenesis involves faulty RNA editing and abnormal activation of specific glutamate receptors as well as failure of glutamate transport resulting in glutamate excitotoxicity; however, the excitotoxicity theory is challenged by the inability of anti-glutamate drugs to have major disease-modifying effects clinically.
Nevertheless, hyperexcitability of upper and lower motoneurons is a feature of human ALS and transgenic (tg) mouse models of ALS.
Motoneuron excitability is strongly modulated by synaptic inhibition mediated by presynaptic glycinergic and GABAergic innervations and postsynaptic glycine receptors (GlyR) and GABA(A) receptors; yet, the integrity of inhibitory systems regulating motoneurons has been understudied in experimental models, despite findings in human ALS suggesting that they may be affected.
We have found in tg mice expressing a mutant form of human superoxide dismutase-1 (hSOD1) with a Gly93 → Ala substitution (G93A-hSOD1), causing familial ALS, that subsets of spinal interneurons degenerate.
Inhibitory glycinergic innervation of spinal motoneurons becomes deficient before motoneuron degeneration is evident in G93A-hSOD1 mice.
Motoneurons in these ALS mice also have insufficient synaptic inhibition as reflected by smaller GlyR currents, smaller GlyR clusters on their plasma membrane, and lower expression of GlyR1α mRNA compared to wild-type motoneurons.
In contrast, GABAergic innervation of ALS mouse motoneurons and GABA(A) receptor function appear normal.
Abnormal synaptic inhibition resulting from dysfunction of interneurons and motoneuron GlyRs is a new direction for unveiling mechanisms of ALS pathogenesis that could be relevant to new therapies for ALS.
PMID: 22072391
The BH4 domain of Bcl-X(L) rescues astrocyte degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis by modulating intracellular calcium signals.
Collective evidence indicates that motor neuron degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is non-cell-autonomous and requires the interaction with the neighboring astrocytes.
Recently, we reported that a subpopulation of spinal cord astrocytes degenerates in the microenvironment of motor neurons in the hSOD1(G93A) mouse model of ALS.
Mechanistic studies in vitro identified a role for the excitatory amino acid glutamate in the gliodegenerative process via the activation of its inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP(3))-generating metabotropic receptor 5 (mGluR5).
Since non-physiological formation of IP(3) can prompt IP(3) receptor (IP(3)R)-mediated Ca(2+) release from the intracellular stores and trigger various forms of cell death, here we investigated the intracellular Ca(2+) signaling that occurs downstream of mGluR5 in hSOD1(G93A)-expressing astrocytes.
Contrary to wild-type cells, stimulation of mGluR5 causes aberrant and persistent elevations of intracellular Ca(2+) concentrations ([Ca(2+)](i)) in the absence of spontaneous oscillations.
The interaction of IP(3)Rs with the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-X(L) was previously described to prevent cell death by modulating intracellular Ca(2+) signals.
In mutant SOD1-expressing astrocytes, we found that the sole BH4 domain of Bcl-X(L), fused to the protein transduction domain of the HIV-1 TAT protein (TAT-BH4), is sufficient to restore sustained Ca(2+) oscillations and cell death resistance.
Furthermore, chronic treatment of hSOD1(G93A) mice with the TAT-BH4 peptide reduces focal degeneration of astrocytes, slightly delays the onset of the disease and improves both motor performance and animal lifespan.
Our results point at TAT-BH4 as a novel glioprotective agent with a therapeutic potential for ALS.
PMID: 22214312
Early onset Parkinsonism associated with an intronic SOD1 mutation.
We report on a patient belonging to a large family with autosomal-dominant amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, who developed asymmetrical akineto-rigid symptoms at 33 years of age.
He had no signs of lower motor neuron disease after four years of follow-up.
All seven ALS patients from this family harboured a mutation located in the fourth intron of the SOD1 gene.
The proband also harboured the same mutation, associated with a 40% decrease in SOD1 erythrocyte activity.
This case report suggests that SOD1 mutations might be associated with marked phenotypic variability (ALS or early onset Parkinsonism in this family).
PMID: 23687121
Is SOD1 loss of function involved in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis?
Mutations in the gene superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) are causative for familial forms of the neurodegenerative disease amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
When the first SOD1 mutations were identified they were postulated to give rise to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis through a loss of function mechanism, but experimental data soon showed that the disease arises from a--still unknown--toxic gain of function, and the possibility that loss of function plays a role in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis pathogenesis was abandoned.
Although loss of function is not causative for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, here we re-examine two decades of evidence regarding whether loss of function may play a modifying role in SOD1-amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
From analysing published data from patients with SOD1-amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, we find a marked loss of SOD1 enzyme activity arising from almost all mutations.
We continue to examine functional data from all Sod1 knockout mice and we find obvious detrimental effects within the nervous system with, interestingly, some specificity for the motor system.
Here, we bring together historical and recent experimental findings to conclude that there is a possibility that SOD1 loss of function may play a modifying role in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
This likelihood has implications for some current therapies aimed at knocking down the level of mutant protein in patients with SOD1-amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Finally, the wide-ranging phenotypes that result from loss of function indicate that SOD1 gene sequences should be screened in diseases other than amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
PMID: 22361626
Shoulder pain in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
To determine the frequency of shoulder pain in our amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) population and to explore potential associations with demographic and clinical features.
We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of 193 patients with ALS patients seen at the Lahey Clinic between 2005 and 2009.
Patients were categorized by the predominance of upper and lower motor neuron signs and the body regions initially involved.
The frequency of shoulder pain was identified in each of these subgroups.
Forty-five (23%) of the 193 patients reported shoulder pain at some time during the course of their illness.
Age, gender, manual labor, prior shoulder problems, ALS phenotype, and initial region of involvement were not correlated with shoulder pain.
Patients with shoulder pain were more likely to develop proximal arm weakness during their illness and to report pain elsewhere.
Despite the limitations posed by this retrospective study, it underscores the prevalence of shoulder pain in patients with ALS.
Further studies to identify risk factors, mechanisms of, and treatments for shoulder pain in patients with ALS may benefit this population.
PMID: 21968352
Continuous noninvasive ventilation delivered by a novel total face mask: a case series report.
Noninvasive ventilation (NIV) has been widely used to decrease the complications associated with tracheal intubation in mechanically ventilated patients.
However, nasal ulcerations may occur when conventional masks are used for continuous ventilation.
A total face mask, which has no  contact with the more sensitive areas of the face, is a possible option.
We describe 3 patients with acute respiratory failure due to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, who developed nasal bridge skin necrosis during continuous NIV, and one patient with post-extubation respiratory failure due  to a high spinal cord injury, who had facial trauma with contraindication for conventional mask use.
The total face mask was very well tolerated by all the patients, and permitted safe and efficient continuous NIV for several days until the acute respiratory failure episode resolved.
None  of the patients required endotracheal intubation during the acute episode.
PMID: 22158518
Translational stem cell therapy for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Effective treatments are urgently needed for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a fatal neurodegenerative disease characterized by the loss of motor neurons.
In 2009, the FDA approved the first phase I safety trial of direct intraspinal transplantation of neural stem cells into patients with ALS, which is currently in progress.
Stem cell technologies represent a promising approach for treating ALS, but several issues must be addressed when translating promising experimental ALS therapies to patients.
This article highlights the key research that supports the use of stem cells as a therapy for ALS, and discusses the rationale behind and approach to the phase I trial.
Completion of the trial could pave the way for continued advances in stem cell therapy for ALS and other neurodegenerative diseases.
PMID: 22560997
Selenium induces cholinergic motor neuron degeneration in Caenorhabditis elegans.
Selenium is an essential micronutrient required for cellular antioxidant systems, yet at higher doses it induces oxidative stress.
Additionally, in vertebrates environmental exposures to toxic levels of selenium can cause paralysis and death.
Here we show that selenium-induced oxidative stress leads to decreased cholinergic signaling and degeneration of cholinergic neurons required for movement and egg-laying in Caenorhabditis elegans.
Exposure to high levels of selenium leads to proteolysis of a soluble muscle protein through mechanisms suppressible by two pharmacological agents, levamisole and aldicarb which enhance cholinergic signaling in muscle.
In addition, animals with reduction-of-function mutations in genes encoding post-synaptic levamisole-sensitive acetylcholine receptor subunits or the vesicular acetylcholine transporter developed impaired forward movement faster during selenium-exposure than normal animals, again confirming that selenium reduces cholinergic signaling.
Finally, the antioxidant reduced glutathione, inhibits selenium-induced reductions in egg-laying through a cellular protective mechanism dependent on the C. elegans glutaredoxin, GLRX-21.
These studies provide evidence that the environmental toxicant selenium induces neurodegeneration of cholinergic neurons through depletion of glutathione, a mechanism linked to the neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and Parkinson's disease.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23321002
Dysregulation of intracellular copper homeostasis is common to transgenic mice expressing human mutant superoxide dismutase-1s regardless of their copper-binding abilities.
Over 170 mutations in superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1) have been linked to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
The properties of SOD1 mutants differ considerably including copper-binding abilities.
Nevertheless, they cause the same disease phenotype, suggesting a common neurotoxic pathway.
We have previously reported that copper homeostasis is disturbed in spinal cords of SOD1(G93A) mice.
However, it is unknown whether copper dyshomeostasis is induced by other SOD1 mutants.
Using the additional mouse strains SOD1(G127insTGGG), SOD1(G85R), and SOD1(D90A), which express SOD1 mutants with different copper-binding abilities, we show that copper dyshomeostasis is common to SOD1 mutants.
The SOD1 mutants shifted the copper trafficking systems toward copper accumulation in spinal cords of the mice.
Copper contents bound to the SOD1 active site varied considerably between SOD1 mutants.
Still, copper bound to other ligands in the spinal cord were markedly increased in all.
Zinc was also increased, whereas there were no changes in magnesium, calcium, aluminum, manganese and iron.
Further support for a role of copper dyshomeostasis in ALS was gained from results of pharmacological intervention.
Ammonium tetrathiomolybdate (TTM), a copper chelating agent, prolonged survival and slowed the disease progression of SOD1(G93A) mice, even when the treatment was started after the disease onset.
TTM markedly attenuated pathology, including the loss of motor neurons and axons, and atrophy of skeletal muscles.
Additionally, TTM decreased amounts of SOD1 aggregates.
We propose that pharmacological agents that are capable of modulating copper dyshomeostasis, such as TTM, might be beneficial for the treatment of ALS caused by SOD1 mutations.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23056579
FUS-NLS/Transportin 1 complex structure provides insights into the nuclear targeting mechanism of FUS and the implications in ALS.
The C-terminal nuclear localization sequence of FUsed in Sarcoma (FUS-NLS) is critical for its nuclear import mediated by transportin (Trn1).
Familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) related mutations are clustered in FUS-NLS.
We report here the structural, biochemical and cell biological characterization of the FUS-NLS and its clinical implications.
The crystal structure of the FUS-NLS/Trn1 complex shows extensive contacts between the two proteins and a unique α-helical structure in the FUS-NLS.
The binding affinity between Trn1 and FUS-NLS (wide-type and 12 ALS-associated mutants) was determined.
As compared to the wide-type FUS-NLS (K(D) = 1.7 nM), each ALS-associated mutation caused a decreased affinity and the range of this reduction varied widely from 1.4-fold over 700-fold.
The affinity of the mutants correlated with the extent of impaired nuclear localization, and more importantly, with the duration of disease progression in ALS patients.
This study provides a comprehensive understanding of the nuclear targeting mechanism of FUS and illustrates the significance of FUS-NLS in ALS.
PMID: 22523592
Bim links ER stress and apoptosis in cells expressing mutant SOD1 associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is an important pathway to cell death in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
We previously demonstrated that ER stress is linked to neurotoxicity associated with formation of inclusions of mutant Cu,Zn-superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1).
Cells bearing mutant inclusions undergo mitochondrial apoptotic signalling.
Here, we demonstrate that the BH3-only protein, Bim, is a direct link between ER stress and mitochondrial apoptosis.
In the murine neuroblastoma cell line, Neuro2a, bearing mutant SOD1 inclusions, indicators of both ER stress and apoptosis are expressed.
Bim knockdown by siRNA significantly reduced nuclear apoptotic features in these inclusion-bearing cells (but did not affect the proportion of cells overall that bear inclusions).
Further, both Bax recruitment to mitochondria and cytochrome c redistribution were also decreased under Bim-depletion conditions.
However, upregulation of CHOP, a marker of ER stress, was not reduced by Bim knockdown.
Significantly, knockdown of CHOP by siRNA reduced the extent of apoptosis in cells bearing mutant SOD1 inclusions.
These sequential links between ER stress, CHOP upregulation, and Bim activation of mitochondrial apoptotic signalling indicate a clear pathway to cell death mediated by mutant SOD1.
PMID: 22262909
Reduced activity of AMP-activated protein kinase protects against genetic models of motor neuron disease.
A growing body of research indicates that amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients and mouse models of ALS exhibit metabolic dysfunction.
A subpopulation of ALS patients possesses higher levels of resting energy expenditure and lower fat-free mass compared to healthy controls.
Similarly, two mutant copper zinc superoxide dismutase 1 (mSOD1) mouse models of familial ALS possess a hypermetabolic phenotype.
The pathophysiological relevance of the bioenergetic defects observed in ALS remains largely elusive.
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a key sensor of cellular energy status and thus might be activated in various models of ALS.
Here, we report that AMPK activity is increased in spinal cord cultures expressing mSOD1, as well as in spinal cord lysates from mSOD1 mice.
Reducing AMPK activity either pharmacologically or genetically prevents mSOD1-induced motor neuron death in vitro.
To investigate the role of AMPK in vivo, we used Caenorhabditis elegans models of motor neuron disease.
C. elegans engineered to express human mSOD1 (G85R) in neurons develops locomotor dysfunction and severe fecundity defects when compared to transgenic worms expressing human wild-type SOD1.
Genetic reduction of aak-2, the ortholog of the AMPK α2 catalytic subunit in nematodes, improved locomotor behavior and fecundity in G85R animals.
Similar observations were made with nematodes engineered to express mutant tat-activating regulatory (TAR) DNA-binding protein of 43 kDa molecular weight.
Altogether, these data suggest that bioenergetic abnormalities are likely to be pathophysiologically relevant to motor neuron disease.
PMID: 23147503
Decreased mRNA expression of PGC-1α and PGC-1α-regulated factors in the SOD1G93A ALS mouse model and in human sporadic ALS.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease characterized by selective motoneuron loss.
Although the cause of ALS is unknown, oxidative stress, inflammation, and mitochondrial dysfunction have been identified as important components of its pathogenesis.
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator 1α (PGC-1α) plays a central role in the regulation of mitochondrial metabolism and biogenesis via activation of transcription factors, such as nuclear respiratory factors 1 and 2 and mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam).
Alterations in PGC-1α expression and function have previously been described in models of Huntington and Alzheimer diseases.
Moreover, the protective effects of PGC-1α have been shown in animal models of ALS.
Levels of PGC-1α correlate with the number of acetylcholine receptor clusters in muscle.
This is of particular interest because neurodegeneration in ALS may be a dying-back process.
We investigated mRNA and protein expressions of PGC-1α and PGC-1α-regulated factors in the spinal cord and muscle tissues of SOD1 ALS mice and in ALS patients.
We detected significant alterations in mRNA expression of PGC-1α and downstream factors with their earliest occurrence in muscle tissue.
Our data provide evidence for a role of PGC-1α in mitochondrial dysfunction both in the ALS mouse model and in human sporadic ALS that is probably most relevant in the skeletal muscle.
PMID: 22982304
Are alsin and spartin novel interaction partners?
Mutations in ALS2 gene/alsin are associated with recessive forms of motor neuron disorders including Juvenile Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (JALS), Infantile-onset Ascending Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia (IAHSP) and Juvenile Primary Lateral Sclerosis (JPLS).
In this study, we show that alsin and another MND-linked protein, spartin are related to each other both at mRNA and protein levels in Neuro2a cells.
We observed significant alterations in spartin expression in alsin knock-down conditions.
We further found that both proteins colocalize in N2a cells and spartin isoform-a precipitates with alsin in the same protein complex.
In the light of these results we suggest that alsin and spartin may interact each other physically.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22262900
Cdk5/p25-induced cytosolic PLA2-mediated lysophosphatidylcholine production regulates neuroinflammation and triggers neurodegeneration.
The deregulation of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5) by p25 has been shown to contribute to the pathogenesis in a number of neurodegenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Parkinson's disease (PD) and Alzheimer's disease (AD).
In particular, p25/Cdk5 has been shown to produce hyperphosphorylated tau, neurofibrillary tangles as well as aberrant amyloid precursor protein processing found in AD.
Neuroinflammation has been observed alongside the pathogenic process in these neurodegenerative diseases, however the precise mechanism behind the induction of neuroinflammation and the significance in the AD pathogenesis has not been fully elucidated.
In this report, we uncover a novel pathway for p25-induced neuroinflammation where p25 expression induces an early trigger of neuroinflammation in vivo in mice.
Lipidomic mass spectrometry, in vitro coculture and conditioned media transfer experiments show that the soluble lipid mediator lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC) is released by p25 overexpressing neurons to initiate astrogliosis, neuroinflammation and subsequent neurodegeneration.
Reverse transcriptase PCR and gene silencing experiments show that cytosolic phospholipase 2 (cPLA2) is the key enzyme mediating the p25-induced LPC production and cPLA2 upregulation is critical in triggering the p25-mediated inflammatory and neurodegenerative process.
Together, our findings delineate a potential therapeutic target for the reduction of neuroinflammation in neurodegenerative diseases including AD.
PMID: 21651514
Clinical heterogeneity in Italian patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a rare and devastating neurodegenerative disorder.
The majority of cases are sporadic ALS (SALS), with 5-10% being familial ALS (FALS), and are inherited mostly as autosomal dominant.
Mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) and the TAR DNA-binding protein (TARDBP) gene are the most commonly known cause of ALS.
We analyzed these genes in 61 Italian ALS patients using high-resolution melting analysis to confirm the role of SOD1 and TARDBP in the physiopathology of ALS.
The screenings showed a single mutation in SOD1 (Asp109Tyr) and three in TARBDP (Ala382Thr, Gly295Ser, Gly294Val) in five unrelated ALS patients.
This report enlarges the spectrum of clinical phenotypes associated with genetic mutations in SOD1 and TARDBP genes confirming the variability of phenotypes associated with the same mutation and emphasizes the importance of genetic analysis.
The different genotype-phenotype correlations suggest the implication of other factors possibly influencing clinical manifestation of the disease, such as an epigenetic or epistatic effect with other genes not yet identified.
© 2011 John Wiley &amp; Sons A/S.
PMID: 23567743
Altered cortical communication in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a disorder associated primarily with the degeneration of the motor system.
More recently, functional connectivity studies have demonstrated potentially adaptive changes in ALS brain organization, but disease-related changes in cortical communication remain unknown.
We recruited individuals with ALS and age-matched controls to operate a brain-computer interface while electroencephalography was recorded over three sessions.
Using normalized symbolic transfer entropy, we measured directed functional connectivity from frontal to parietal (feedback connectivity) and parietal to frontal (feedforward connectivity) regions.
Feedback connectivity was not significantly different between groups, but feedforward connectivity was significantly higher in individuals with ALS.
This result was consistent across a broad electroencephalographic spectrum (4-35 Hz), and in theta, alpha and beta frequency bands.
Feedback connectivity has been associated with conscious state and was found to be independent of ALS symptom severity in this study, which may have significant implications for the detection of consciousness in individuals with advanced ALS.
We suggest that increases in feedforward connectivity represent a compensatory response to the ALS-related loss of input such that sensory stimuli have sufficient strength to cross the threshold necessary for conscious processing in the global neuronal workspace.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22762947
Nuclear factor κ B expression in patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and hereditary amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with optineurin mutations.
Nuclear factor κ B (NF-κB) is involved in the pathogenesis of a number of neurodegenerative disorders with neuroinflammation.
In order to clarify the role of NF-κB in ALS, immunohistochemical studies with an antibody that recognizes the p65 subunit of NF-κB were performed on the spinal anterior horn of 4 patients with sporadic ALS (sALS), 1 patient with optineurin-mutated ALS (OPTN-ALS), and 3 normal controls (NC).
In patients with sALS or OPTN-ALS, the expression pattern of NF-κB was altered when compared to that of NC; NF-κB immunoreactivity tended to be absent from neuronal nucleus and was increased in microglia.
The down-regulation of NF-κB in neuronal nucleus might contribute to a loss of neuroprotection, or neurons with nuclear NF-κB might be lost immediately after its activation.
The microglial induction of NF-κB might contribute to neuroinflammation.
In conclusion, NF-κB signaling pathway could have a key role in the pathomechanism of ALS.
PMID: 22721568
Large C9orf72 repeat expansions are not a common cause of Parkinson's disease.
The concept of a pathological overlap between neurodegenerative disorders is gaining momentum.
We sought to determine the contribution of C9orf72 repeat expansions, recently discovered as a cause of frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, in a large number of Parkinson's disease patients.
No large expansions were identified in our cohort.
Copyright © 2012.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
PMID: 23495545
A retrospective review of specialist palliative care involvement in motor neurone disease.
The provision of specialist palliative care to Irish patients suffering from motor neurone disease has not been described in the literature.
The purpose of this study was to characterize the care provided at a Dublin hospice.
Consecutive referrals between 1st January 1999 and 31st December 2008 (n=72) were reviewed.
At the time of data collection, 61 (84.7%) were deceased, 9 (12.5%) were alive and the status of 2 (2.7%) was unknown.
At first assessment, 48 (66%) had bulbar symptoms and 35 (49%) had respiratory symptoms, 50 (70%) were receiving Riluzole, 25 (35%) had a feeding tube and 13 (18%) were using non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV).
Median survival from the point of referral was 7 months (95% CI 4.5-9.4).
Of the 61 deceased patients, 22 (36%) died at home, 22 (36%) died in the inpatient unit, 9 (15%) died in hospital and 8 (13%) died in a nursing home.
PMID: 22018668
Inhibition of superoxide dismutase selectively suppresses growth of rat spinal motor neurons: comparison with phosphorylated neurofilament-containing spinal neurons.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is characterized by selective degeneration of motor neurons.
The reason why only motor neurons are targeted is unknown.
Since ALS has been linked to mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1), oxidative stress is regarded as a major cause of ALS.
We hypothesized that motor neurons are more susceptible to oxidative stress than other neurons.
To test our hypothesis, we investigated differences in neurite growth between motor and non-motor neurons under SOD1 inhibition.
Spinal motor neurons were identified by immunocytochemistry using anti-non-phosphorylated neurofilament (NF) antibody (SMI-32).
Other neurons immunoreactive to an antibody against phosphorylated NF (SMI-31) were used as a control.
Cultured rat spinal neurons were treated with the SOD1 inhibitor diethyldithiocarbamate (DDC).
SMI-32-immunoreactive neurons were more sensitive to the growth inhibitory effects of DDC than SMI-31-immunoreactive neurons.
Such inhibition was blocked by the antioxidants, L-ascorbic acid, L-histidine, astaxanthin, α-tocopherol, and β-carotene.
The results suggested that spinal motor neurons are more vulnerable to oxidative stress than other neurons, which may explain in part the selective degeneration of motor neurons in ALS.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21901496
Making connections: pathology and genetics link amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with frontotemporal lobe dementia.
Over the last couple of decades, there has been a growing body of clinical, genetic, and histopathological evidence that similar pathological processes underlie amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and some types of frontotemporal lobe dementia (FTD).
Even though there is great diversity in the genetic causes of these disorders, there is a high degree of overlap in their histopathology.
Genes linked to rare cases of familial ALS and/or FTD, like FUS, TARDBP, OPTN, and UBQLN2 may converge onto a unifying pathogenic pathway and thereby provide novel therapeutic targets common to a spectrum of etiologically diverse forms of ALS and ALS-FTD.
Additionally, there are major loci for ALS-FTD on chromosomes 9p and 15q.
Identification of causative genetic alterations at those loci will be an important step in understanding the pathogenesis of juvenile- and adult-onset ALS and ALS-FTD.
Interactions between TDP-43, FUS, optineurin, and ubiquilin 2 need to be studied to understand their common molecular pathways.
Future efforts should also be directed towards generation and characterization of in vivo models to dissect the pathogenic mechanisms of these diseases.
Such efforts will rapidly accelerate the discovery of new drugs that regulate accumulation of pathogenic proteins and their downstream consequences.
PMID: 22023190
Anti-superoxide dismutase antibodies are associated with survival in patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Our objective was to test the hypothesis that aberrantly modified forms of superoxide dismutase (SOD1) influence the disease course for sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (SALS).
We probed for anti-SOD1 antibodies (IgM and IgG) against both the normal and aberrantly oxidized-SOD1 (SODox) antigens in sera from patients with SALS, subjects diagnosed with other neurological disorders and healthy individuals, and correlated the levels of these antibodies to disease duration and/or severity.
Anti-SOD1 antibodies were detected in all cohorts; however, a subset of ∼5-10% of SALS cases exhibited elevated levels of anti-SOD1 antibodies.
Those SALS cases with relatively high levels of IgM antibodies against SODox exhibit a longer survival of 6.4 years, compared to subjects lacking these antibodies.
By contrast, SALS subjects expressing higher levels of IgG antibodies reactive for the normal WT-SOD1 antigen exhibit a shorter survival of 4.1 years.
Anti-SOD1 antibody levels did not correlate with disease severity in either the Alzheimer's or Parkinson's disease cohorts.
In conclusion, the association of longer survival with elevated levels of anti-SODox antibodies suggests that these antibodies may be protective.
By extension, these data implicate aberrantly modified forms of WT-SOD1 (e.g. oxidized SOD1) in SALS pathogenesis.
In contrast, an immune response against the normal WT-SOD1 appears to be disadvantageous in SALS, possibly because the anti-oxidizing activity of normal WT-SOD1 is beneficial to SALS individuals.
PMID: 21813273
Understanding the role of TDP-43 and FUS/TLS in ALS and beyond.
Dominant mutations in two DNA/RNA binding proteins, TDP-43 and FUS/TLS, are causes of inherited Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS).
TDP-43 and FUS/TLS have striking structural and functional similarities, implicating alterations in RNA processing as central in ALS.
TDP-43 has binding sites within a third of all mouse and human mRNAs in brain and this binding influences the levels and splicing patterns of at least 20% of those mRNAs.
Disease modeling in rodents of the first known cause of inherited ALS-mutation in the ubiquitously expressed superoxide dismutase (SOD1)-has yielded non-cell autonomous fatal motor neuron disease caused by one or more toxic properties acquired by the mutant proteins.
In contrast, initial disease modeling for TDP-43 and FUS/TLS has produced highly varied phenotypes.
It remains unsettled whether TDP-43 and FUS/TLS mutants provoke disease from a loss of function or gain of toxicity or both.
TDP-43 or FUS/TLS misaccumulation seems central not just to ALS (where it is found in almost all instances of disease), but more broadly in neurodegenerative disease, including frontal temporal lobular dementia (FTLD-U) and many examples of Alzheimer's or Huntington's disease.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22565043
Intraspinal stem cell transplantation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis:  a phase I safety trial, technical note, and lumbar safety outcomes.
No United States-based clinical trials have attempted delivery of biological therapies directly to the spinal cord for treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) because of the lack of a meaningful US Food and Drug Administration-authorized cell candidate and a validated delivery approach.
To assess safety of delivery of a neural stem cell-based treatment into the upper lumbar segments of the ALS spinal cord in the first US Food and Drug Administration-authorized phase I trial.
Each microinjection series comprised 5 injections (10 μL/injection) separated by 4 mm.
Each injection deposited 100,000 neural stem cells derived from a fetal spinal cord.
Twelve patients were treated with either unilateral or bilateral injections.
Group A, nonambulatory patients, underwent unilateral (n = 3) or bilateral (n = 3) lumbar microinjections.
Groups B and C were ambulatory (n = 3 each) and, respectively, received unilateral or bilateral injections.
Patients are followed clinically and radiologically to assess potential toxicity of the procedure.
Twelve patients have received a transplant.
There was one instance of transient intraoperative somatosensory-evoked potentials depression.
In the immediate postoperative period, there was 1 episode of urinary retention requiring Foley catheter reinsertion.
By discharge, none had a documented motor function decrement.
Two patients required readmission and reoperation for cerebrospinal fluid leak or suprafascial wound dehiscence (n = 1 each).
Two deaths occurred at 8 and 13 months postsurgery; neither was related to the surgical transplant.
Our experience in 12 patients supports the procedural safety of unilateral and bilateral intraspinal lumbar microinjection.
Completion of this phase I safety trial is planned by proceeding to cervical and combined cervical + lumbar microinjections in ALS patients.
PMID: 22949820
Metal-Sulfate Induced Generation of ROS in Human Brain Cells: Detection Using an Isomeric Mixture of 5- and 6-Carboxy-2',7'-Dichlorofluorescein Diacetate (Carboxy-DCFDA) as a Cell Permeant Tracer.
Evolution of reactive oxygen species (ROS), generated during the patho-physiological stress of nervous tissue, has been implicated in the etiology of several progressive human neurological disorders including Alzheimer's disease (AD) and amylotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
In this brief communication we used mixed isomers of 5-(and-6)-carboxy-2',7'-dichlorofluorescein diacetate (carboxy-DCFDA; C(25)H(14)C(l2)O(9); MW 529.3), a novel fluorescent indicator, to assess ROS generation within human neuronal-glial (HNG) cells in primary co-culture.
We introduced pathological stress using the sulfates of 12 environmentally-, industrially- and agriculturally-relevant divalent and trivalent metals including Al, Cd, Cu, Fe, Hg, Ga, Mg, Mn, Ni, Pb, Sn and Zn.
In this experimental test system, of all the metal sulfates analyzed, aluminum sulfate showed by far the greatest ability to induce intracellular ROS.
These studies indicate the utility of using isomeric mixtures of carboxy-H(2)DCFDA diacetates as novel and highly sensitive, long-lasting, cell-permeant, fluorescein-based tracers for quantifying ROS generation in intact, metabolizing human brain cells, and in analyzing the potential epigenetic contribution of different metal sulfates to ROS-generation and ROS-mediated neurological dysfunction.
PMID: 23408943
dnc-1/dynactin 1 knockdown disrupts transport of autophagosomes and induces motor neuron degeneration.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease characterized by the progressive loss of motor neurons.
We previously showed that the expression of dynactin 1, an axon motor protein regulating retrograde transport, is markedly reduced in spinal motor neurons of sporadic ALS patients, although the mechanisms by which decreased dynactin 1 levels cause neurodegeneration have yet to be elucidated.
The accumulation of autophagosomes in degenerated motor neurons is another key pathological feature of sporadic ALS.
Since autophagosomes are cargo of dynein/dynactin complexes and play a crucial role in the turnover of several organelles and proteins, we hypothesized that the quantitative loss of dynactin 1 disrupts the transport of autophagosomes and induces the degeneration of motor neuron.
In the present study, we generated a Caenorhabditis elegans model in which the expression of DNC-1, the homolog of dynactin 1, is specifically knocked down in motor neurons.
This model exhibited severe motor defects together with axonal and neuronal degeneration.
We also observed impaired movement and increased number of autophagosomes in the degenerated neurons.
Furthermore, the combination of rapamycin, an activator of autophagy, and trichostatin which facilitates axonal transport dramatically ameliorated the motor phenotype and axonal degeneration of this model.
Thus, our results suggest that decreased expression of dynactin 1 induces motor neuron degeneration and that the transport of autophagosomes is a novel and substantial therapeutic target for motor neuron degeneration.
PMID: 22532172
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration: current knowledge and future challenges.
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is one of the most frequent neurodegenerative disorders with a presenile onset.
It presents with a spectrum of clinical manifestations, ranging from behavioral and executive impairment to language disorders and motor dysfunction.
New diagnostic criteria identified two main cognitive syndromes: behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) and primary progressive aphasia.
Regarding bvFTD, new criteria include the use of biomarkers.
According to them, bvFTD can be classified in possible (clinical features only), probable (inclusion of imaging biomarkers) and definite (in the presence of a known causal mutation or at autopsy).
Familial aggregation is frequently reported in FTLD, and about 10 % of cases have an autosomal dominant transmission.
Microtubule-associated protein tau gene mutations have been the first ones identified, and are generally associated with early onset (40-50 years) and with the bvFTD phenotype.
More recently, progranulin gene mutations were recognized in association with the familial form of FTLD and a hexanucleotide repetition in C9ORF72 has been shown to be responsible for familial FTLD and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
In addition, other genes are linked to rare cases of familiar FTLD.
Lastly, a number of genetic risk factors for sporadic forms have also been identified.
PMID: 21660502
Model organisms reveal insight into human neurodegenerative disease: ataxin-2 intermediate-length polyglutamine expansions are a risk factor for ALS.
Model organisms include yeast Saccromyces cerevisae and fly Drosophila melanogaster.
These systems have powerful genetic approaches, as well as highly conserved pathways, both for normal function and disease.
Here, we review and highlight how we applied these systems to provide mechanistic insight into the toxicity of TDP-43.
TDP-43 accumulates in pathological aggregates in ALS and about half of FTD.
Yeast and fly studies revealed an interaction with the counterparts of human Ataxin-2, a gene whose polyglutamine repeat expansion is associated with spinocerebellar ataxia type 2.
This finding raised the hypothesis that repeat expansions in ataxin-2 may associate with diseases characterized by TDP-43 pathology such as ALS.
DNA analysis of patients revealed that intermediate-length polyglutamine expansions in ataxin-2 are a risk factor for ALS, such that repeat lengths are greater than normal, but lower than that associated with spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2), and are more frequent in ALS patients than in matched controls.
Moreover, repeat expansions associated with ALS are interrupted CAA-CAG sequences as opposed to the pure CAG repeat expansions typically associated with SCA2.
These studies provide an example of how model systems, when extended to human cells and human patient tissue, can reveal new mechanistic insight into disease.
PMID: 23503474
Establishing a novel C. elegans model to investigate the role of autophagy in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
To develop a C. elegans model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and to evaluate the role of autophagy in the disease.
Stable transgenic worms expressing the G93A mutant form of Cu,Zn-superoxide dismutase (SOD1) in GABAergic motor neurons were generated.
Axon guidance and protein aggregation in the motor neurons were observed with fluorescence microscopy.
A paralysis assay was performed to evaluate the motor function of the transgenic worms.
The expression of autophagic genes in daf-2(e1370) mutants was analyzed using real-time PCR.
The reporter GFP::LGG-1 was used to verify whether autophagy was induced in motor neurons.
Expression of G93A SOD1 in motor neurons caused age-dependent motor defects accompanied by significant SOD1 aggregation and axon guidance failure.
After 12 d, over 80% of the G93A worms became paralyzed, whereas less than 10% of the controls showed a paralytic phenotype.
In the daf-2(e1370) mutants of C. elegans, the levels of autophagic genes bec-1, atg-7, lgg-1, and atg-18 were upregulated by approximately 1.5-fold, the level of unc-51 increased by approximately fourfold, and autophagosomes in motor neurons was markedly increased.
Crossing the daf-2(e1370) mutation into the G93A SOD1 mutant worms significantly ameliorated the motor defects, SOD1 aggregation, and axon guidance failure.
G93A SOD1 expression in motor neurons of C. elegans results in characteristic alterations of ALS.
Increased autophagy protects C. elegans motor neurons against the toxicity of mutant SOD1.
PMID: 22572535
The role of central nervous system development in late-onset neurodegenerative disorders.
The human brain is dependent upon successfully maintaining ionic, energetic and redox homeostasis within exceptionally narrow margins for proper function.
The ability of neurons to adapt to genetic and environmental perturbations and evoke a 'new normal' can be most fully appreciated in the context of neurological disorders in which clinical impairments do not manifest until late in life, although dysfunctional proteins are expressed early in development.
We now know that proteins controlling ATP generation, mitochondrial stability, and the redox environment are associated with neurological disorders such as Parkinson's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Generally, focus is placed on the role that early or long-term environmental stress has in altering the survival of cells targeted by genetic dysfunctions; however, the central nervous system undergoes several periods of intense stress during normal maturation.
One of the most profound periods of stress occurs when 50% of neurons are removed via programmed cell death.
Unfortunately, we have virtually no understanding of how these events proceed in individuals who harbor mutations that are lethal later in life.
Moreover, there is a profound lack of information on circuit formation, cell fate during development and neurochemical compensation in either humans or the animals used to model neurodegenerative diseases.
In this review, we consider the current knowledge of how energetic and oxidative stress signaling differs between neurons in early versus late stages of life, the influence of a new group of proteins that can integrate cell stress signals at the mitochondrial level, and the growing body of evidence that suggests early development should be considered a critical period for the genesis of chronic neurodegenerative diseases.
Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.
PMID: 22105541
Molecular pathology and genetic advances in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: an emerging molecular pathway and the significance of glial pathology.
Research into amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) has been stimulated by a series of genetic and molecular pathology discoveries.
The hallmark neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions of sporadic ALS (sALS) predominantly comprise a nuclear RNA processing protein, TDP-43 encoded by the gene TARDBP, a discovery that emerged from high throughput analysis of human brain tissue from patients with frontotemporal dementia (FTD) who share a common molecular pathology with ALS.
The link between RNA processing and ALS was further strengthened by the discovery that another genetic locus linking familial ALS (fALS) and FTD was due to mutation of the fused in sarcoma (FUS) gene.
Of potentially even greater importance it emerges that TDP-43 accumulation and inclusion formation characterises not only most sALS cases but also those that arise from mutations in several genes including TARDBP (predominantly ALS cases) itself, C9ORF72 (ALS and FTD cases), progranulin (predominantly FTD phenotypes), VAPB (predominantly ALS cases) and in some ALS cases with rare genetic variants of uncertain pathogenicity (CHMP2B).
TDP-proteinopathy therefore now represents a final common pathology associated with changes in multiple genes and opens the possibility of research by triangulation towards key common upstream molecular events.
It also delivers final proof of the hypothesis that ALS and most FTD cases are disorders within a common pathology expressed as a clinico-anatomical spectrum.
The emergence of TDP-proteinopathy also confirms the view that glial pathology is a crucial facet in this class of neurodegeneration, adding to the established view of non-nerve cell autonomous degeneration of the motor system from previous research on SOD1 fALS.
Future research into the mechanisms of TDP-43 and FUS-related neurodegeneration, taking into account the major component of glial pathology now revealed in those disorders will significantly accelerate new discoveries in this field, including target identification for new therapy.
PMID: 22471402
Interaction of cisplatin with human superoxide dismutase.
cis-Diamminedichloroplatinum(II) (cisplatin) is able to interact with human superoxide dismutase (hSOD1) in the disulfide oxidized apo form with a dissociation constant of 37 ± 3 μM through binding cysteine 111 (Cys111) located at the edge of the subunit interface.
It also binds to Cu(2)-Zn(2) and Zn(2)-Zn(2) forms of hSOD1.
Cisplatin inhibits aggregation of demetalated oxidized hSOD1, and it is further able to dissolve and monomerize oxidized hSOD1 oligomers in vitro and in cell, thus indicating its potential as a leading compound for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
PMID: 22364875
Cellular and molecular biology of optineurin.
Optineurin is a gene linked to glaucoma, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, other neurodegenerative diseases, and Paget's disease of bone.
This review describes the characteristics of optineurin and summarizes the cellular and molecular biology investigations conducted so far on optineurin.
Data from a number of laboratories indicate that optineurin is a cytosolic protein containing 577 amino acid residues.
Interacting with proteins such as myosin VI, Rab8, huntingtin, transferrin receptor, and TANK-binding kinase 1, optineurin is involved in basic cellular functions including protein trafficking, maintenance of the Golgi apparatus, as well as NF-κB pathway, antiviral, and antibacteria signaling.
Mutation or alteration of homeostasis of optineurin (such as overexpression or knockdown) results in adverse consequences in the cells, leading to the development of neurodegenerative diseases including glaucoma.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22475618
Hereditary motor neuron disease in a large Norwegian family with a H46R substitution in the superoxide dismutase 1 gene.
Mutant genes associated with Charcot Marie Tooth type 2, distal hereditary motor neuropathy and familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis may cause overlapping clinical phenotypes.
We performed whole genome linkage analysis, haplotype analysis, sequencing and detailed clinical and neurophysiological investigations in a large Norwegian kindred with a condition that clinically had been classified as Charcot Marie Tooth type 2.
The mutation c.140A&gt;G, p.His47Arg (alias p.His46Arg or H46R) in the superoxide dismutase 1 gene (SOD1) segregated with the disease.
The patients present a hereditary motor neuropathy-like clinical picture and long survival (mean 29years).
To our knowledge, this is the first extensive report describing a large non-Japanese kindred.
The prognostic implications of the condition seen in this family have little in common with what is normally associated with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and illustrates the complexity of the genetic etiology of lower motor neuron disease.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21556876
Altered patterns of cortical activation in ALS patients during attention and cognitive response inhibition tasks.
Since amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) can be accompanied by executive dysfunction, it is hypothesised that ALS patients will have impaired performance on tests of cognitive inhibition.
We predicted that ALS patients would show patterns of abnormal activation in extramotor regions when performing tests requiring the inhibition of prepotent responses (the Stroop effect) and the inhibition of prior negatively primed responses (the negative priming effect) when compared to healthy controls.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging was used to measure activation during a sparse sequence block design paradigm investigating the Stroop and negative priming effects in 14 ALS patients and 8 healthy age- and IQ-matched controls.
Behavioural measures of performance were collected.
Both groups' reaction times (RTs) reflected the Stroop effect during scanning.
The ALS and control groups did not differ significantly for any of the behavioural measures but did show significant differences in cerebral activation during both tasks.
The ALS group showed increased activation predominantly in the left middle temporal gyrus (BA 20/21), left superior temporal gyrus (BA 22) and left anterior cingulate gyrus (BA 32).
Neither group's RT data showed clear evidence of a negative priming effect.
However the ALS group showed decreased activation, relative to controls, particularly in the left cingulate gyrus (BA 23/24), left precentral gyrus (BA 4/6) and left medial frontal gyrus (BA 6).
Greater cerebral activation in the ALS group accompanying the performance of the Stroop effect and areas of decreased activation during the negative priming comparison suggest altered inhibitory processing in ALS, consistent with other evidence of executive dysfunction in ALS.
The current findings require further exploration in a larger study.
PMID: 23460879
Behavior matters--cognitive predictors of survival in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
It is difficult to longitudinally characterize cognitive impairment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) due to motor deficits, and existing instruments aren't comparable with assessments in other dementias.
The ALS Brief Cognitive Assessment (ALS-BCA) was validated in 70 subjects (37 with ALS) who also underwent detailed neuropsychological analysis.
Cognitive predictors for poor survival were then analyzed in a longitudinal cohort of 171 ALS patients.
The ALS-BCA was highly sensitive (90%) and specific (85%) for ALS-dementia (ALS-D).
ALS-D patients had shorter overall survival, primarily due to the poor survival among ALS-D patients with disinhibited or apathetic behaviors after adjusting for demographic variables, ALS site of onset, medications, and supportive measures.
ALS-D without behavioral changes was not a predictor of poor survival.
ALS-D can present with or without prominent behavioral changes.
Cognitive screening in ALS patients should focus on behavioral changes for prognosis, while non-behavioral cognitive impairments may impact quality of life without impacting survival.
PMID: 23249733
FUS binds the CTD of RNA polymerase II and regulates its phosphorylation at Ser2.
Mutations in the RNA-binding protein FUS (fused in sarcoma)/TLS have been shown to cause the neurodegenerative disease amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), but the normal role of FUS is incompletely understood.
We found that FUS binds the C-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II (RNAP2) and prevents inappropriate hyperphosphorylation of Ser2 in the RNAP2 CTD at thousands of human genes.
The loss of FUS leads to RNAP2 accumulation at the transcription start site and a shift in mRNA isoform expression toward early polyadenylation sites.
Thus, in addition to its role in alternative RNA splicing, FUS has a general function in orchestrating CTD phosphorylation during RNAP2 transcription.
PMID: 22274580
Homozygous SMN2 deletion is a protective factor in the Swedish ALS population.
Abnormal survival motor neuron 1 (SMN1)-copy number has been associated with an increased risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) in French and Dutch population studies.
The aim of this study was to determine whether SMN gene copy number increases the risk of ALS or modulates its phenotype in a cohort of Swedish sporadic ALS (SALS) patients.
In all, 502 Swedes with SALS and 502 Swedish controls matched for gender and age were enrolled.
SMN1 and SMN2 gene copy numbers were studied by a semi-quantitative PCR method.
A genotype-phenotype comparison was performed in order to determine whether SMN genes modulate the phenotype of ALS.
The results were also compared with our previously reported French cohort of ALS patients.
There was no difference between Swedish patients and controls in the frequency of SMN1 and SMN2 copy numbers.
The frequency of SMN1 gene copies differed significantly between the French and Swedish ALS populations.
The duration of the disease was significantly longer in the Swedish cohort with homozygous deletions of SMN2 when compared with the French cohort.
Abnormal SMN1 gene copy number cannot be considered as a universal genetic susceptibility factor for SALS and this result underlines the importance of reproducing association gene studies in groups from different origins.
We also suggest that SMN2 gene copy number might have different effects on ALS progression in disparate human populations.
PMID: 22370146
Marked synergism between mutant SOD1 and glutamate transport inhibition in the induction of motor neuronal degeneration in spinal cord slice cultures.
Loss of astrocytic glutamate transport capacity in ALS spinal cord supports an excitotoxic contribution to motor neuron (MN) damage in the disease, and dominant gain of function mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) cause certain familial forms of ALS.
We have used organotypic slice cultures from wild type and G93A SOD1 mutant rat spinal cords to examine interactions between excitotoxicity and the presence of mutant SOD1 in the induction of MN degeneration.
Slice cultures were prepared from 1 week old pups, and after an additional week in vitro, some were exposed to either a low level (30 μM) of the glutamate uptake inhibitor, trans-pyrrolidine-2,4-dicarboxylic acid (PDC) for 3 weeks, or a higher level (50 μM) for 48 h, followed by histochemical labeling to assess MN injury.
In wild type animals these exposures caused relatively little MN degeneration.
Similarly, little MN degeneration was seen in slices from SOD1 mutant animals that were not exposed to PDC.
However, addition of PDC to SOD1 mutant slices resulted in substantial MN injury, which was markedly attenuated by a Ca2+ permeable AMPA-type (Ca-AMPA) glutamate channel blocker, or by a nitric oxide synthase antagonist.
These observations illustrate the utility of the organotypic culture model for the investigation of intracellular interactions underlying MN degeneration in ALS, and support the hypothesis that activation of Ca-AMPA channels on MNs provides a metabolic burden that synergizes with deleterious effects of mutant SOD1 in the induction of MN injury.
Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22727428
Proteasome and neurodegeneratıve diseases.
Proteasomal degradation of damaged proteins is involved in the pathogenesis of many neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, Huntington's, stroke, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
A malfunction of the proteasomal activity may be the result or the consequence of protein aggregation, which is a key process for most neurodegenerative diseases.
Because of the widespread aspects of the proteasomal involvement in the progression of these diseases, many studies are focused on this research.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22563080
Requirements for stress granule recruitment of fused in sarcoma (FUS) and TAR DNA-binding protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43).
Cytoplasmic inclusions containing TAR DNA-binding protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43) or Fused in sarcoma (FUS) are a hallmark of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and several subtypes of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD).
FUS-positive inclusions in FTLD and ALS patients are consistently co-labeled with stress granule (SG) marker proteins.
Whether TDP-43 inclusions contain SG markers is currently still debated.
We determined the requirements for SG recruitment of FUS and TDP-43 and found that cytoplasmic mislocalization is a common prerequisite for SG recruitment of FUS and TDP-43.
For FUS, the arginine-glycine-glycine zinc finger domain, which is the protein's main RNA binding domain, is most important for SG recruitment, whereas the glycine-rich domain and RNA recognition motif (RRM) domain have a minor contribution and the glutamine-rich domain is dispensable.
For TDP-43, both the RRM1 and the C-terminal glycine-rich domain are required for SG localization.
ALS-associated point mutations located in the glycine-rich domain of TDP-43 do not affect SG recruitment.
Interestingly, a 25-kDa C-terminal fragment of TDP-43, which is enriched in FTLD/ALS cortical inclusions but not spinal cord inclusions, fails to be recruited into SG.
Consistently, inclusions in the cortex of FTLD patients, which are enriched for C-terminal fragments, are not co-labeled with the SG marker poly(A)-binding protein 1 (PABP-1), whereas inclusions in spinal cord, which contain full-length TDP-43, are frequently positive for this marker protein.
PMID: 22416219
Ghrelin protects spinal cord motoneurons against chronic glutamate excitotoxicity by inhibiting microglial activation.
Glutamate excitotoxicity is emerging as a contributor to degeneration of spinal cord motoneurons in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Recently, we have reported that ghrelin protects motoneurons against chronic glutamate excitotoxicity through the activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 and phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase/Akt/glycogen synthase kinase-3β pathways.
Previous studies suggest that activated microglia actively participate in the pathogenesis of ALS motoneuron degeneration.
However, it is still unknown whether ghrelin exerts its protective effect on motoneurons via inhibition of microglial activation.
In this study, we investigate organotypic spinal cord cultures (OSCCs) exposed to threohydroxyaspartate (THA), as a model of excitotoxic motoneuron degeneration, to determine if ghrelin prevents microglial activation.
Exposure of OSCCs to THA for 3 weeks produced typical motoneuron death, and treatment of ghrelin significantly attenuated THA-induced motoneuron loss, as previously reported.
Ghrelin prevented THA-induced microglial activation in the spinal cord and the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor-α and interleukin-1β.
Our data indicate that ghrelin may act as a survival factor for motoneurons by functioning as a microglia-deactivating factor and suggest that ghrelin may have therapeutic potential for the treatment of ALS and other neurodegenerative disorders where inflammatory responses play a critical role.
PMID: 23722162
In vivo detection of free radicals using molecular MRI and immuno-spin trapping in a mouse model for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Free radicals associated with oxidative stress play a major role in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
By combining immuno-spin trapping and molecular magnetic resonance imaging, in vivo trapped radical adducts were detected in the spinal cords of SOD1(G93A)-transgenic (Tg) mice, a model for ALS.
For this study, the nitrone spin trap DMPO (5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline N-oxide) was administered (ip) over 5 days before administration (iv) of an anti-DMPO probe (anti-DMPO antibody covalently bound to an albumin-gadolinium-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid-biotin MRI contrast agent) to trap free radicals.
MRI was used to detect the presence of the anti-DMPO radical adducts by a significant sustained increase in MR signal intensities (p &lt; 0.05) or anti-DMPO probe concentrations measured from T₁ relaxations (p &lt; 0.01).
The biotin moiety of the anti-DMPO probe was targeted with fluorescence-labeled streptavidin to locate the probe in excised tissues.
Negative controls included either Tg ALS mice initially administered saline rather than DMPO followed by the anti-DMPO probe or non-Tg mice initially administered DMPO and then the anti-DMPO probe.
The anti-DMPO probe was found to bind to neurons via colocalization fluorescence microscopy.
DMPO adducts were also confirmed in diseased/nondiseased tissues from animals administered DMPO.
Apparent diffusion coefficients from diffusion-weighted images of spinal cords from Tg mice were significantly elevated (p &lt; 0.001) compared to wild-type controls.
This is the first report regarding the detection of in vivo trapped radical adducts in an ALS model.
This novel, noninvasive, in vivo diagnostic method can be applied to investigate the involvement of free radical mechanisms in ALS rodent models.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22766032
Association of UBQLN1 mutation with Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome but not typical ALS.
Genetic variants in UBQLN1 gene have been linked to neurodegeneration and mutations in UBQLN2 have recently been identified as a rare cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
To test if genetic variants in UBQLN1 are involved in ALS.
102 and 94 unrelated patients with familial and sporadic forms of ALS were screened for UBQLN1 gene mutations.
Single nucleotide variants were further screened in a larger set of sporadic ALS (SALS) patients and unrelated control subjects using high-throughput Taqman genotyping; variants were further assessed for novelty using the 1000Genomes and NHLBI databases.
In vitro studies tested the effect of UBQLN1 variants on the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS).
Only two UBQLN1 coding variants were detected in the familial and sporadic ALS DNA set; one, the missense mutation p.E54D, was identified in a single patient with atypical motor neuron disease consistent with Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome (BVVLS), for whom c20orf54 mutations had been excluded.
Functional studies revealed that UBQLN1E54D protein forms cytosolic aggregates that contain mislocalized TDP-43 and impairs degradation of ubiquitinated proteins through the proteasome.
Genetic variants in UBQLN1 are not commonly associated with ALS.
A novel UBQLN1 mutation (E45D) detected in a patient with BVVLS altered nuclear TDP-43 localization in vitro, suggesting that UPS dysfunction may also underlie the pathogenesis of this condition.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22718532
Asparaginyl endopeptidase cleaves TDP-43 in brain.
TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) is a nuclear protein involved in RNA splicing and a major protein component in ubiquitin-positive, tau-negative inclusions of frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Under disease conditions, TDP-43 redistributes to the cytoplasm where it can be phosphorylated, ubiquitinated, and proteolytically cleaved.
Enzymes responsible for TDP-43 proteolytic processing in brain remain largely unreported.
Using a MS approach, we identified two truncated TDP-43 peptides, terminating C-terminal to asparagines 291 (N291) and 306 (N306).
The only documented mammalian enzyme capable of cleaving C-terminal to asparagine is asparaginyl endopeptidase (AEP).
TDP-43-immunoreactive fragments (~35 and 32 kDa) predicted to be generated by AEP cleavage at N291 and N306 were observed by Western blot analyses of postmortem frontotemporal lobar degeneration brain tissue and cultured human cells over-expressing TDP-43.
Studies in vitro determined that AEP can directly cleave TDP-43 at seven sites, including N291 and N306.
Western blots of brain homogenates isolated from AEP-null mice and wild-type littermate controls revealed that TDP-43 proteolytic fragments were substantially reduced in the absence of AEP in vivo.
Taken together, we conclude that TDP-43 is cleaved by AEP in brain.
Moreover, these data highlight the utility of combining proteomic strategies in vitro and in vivo to provide insight into TDP-43 biology that will fuel the design of more detailed models of disease pathogenesis.
© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH &amp; Co.
KGaA, Weinheim.
PMID: 22334377
Organ donation after cardiac death in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) are often told that solid organ donation is not possible following death, although the reasons for exclusion are not evidence based.
Because ALS patients typically remain sentient until death, organs may be procured under donation after cardiac death protocols.
Anticipating this need, our institution created a process for organ donation in ventilator-dependent ALS patients that was subsequently implemented.
To our knowledge, this is the first report of organ donation in a patient with rapidly progressive ventilator-dependent ALS.
Copyright © 2012 American Neurological Association.
PMID: 21830989
Maladaptation of cortical circuits underlies fatigue and weakness in ALS.
Although fatigue is frequently reported in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), the underlying mechanisms remain to be elucidated.
Cortical excitability studies were utilized to determine the contribution of central mechanisms to development of fatigue and weakness in ALS.
Threshold-tracking transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) studies were undertaken in 16 ALS patients and 22 normal controls using a 90-mm circular coil.
TMS studies were performed at baseline, immediately after a voluntary contraction (VC) period of 120 s duration (three VC periods), and at 5, 10 and 20 min after last VC.
At baseline, there was a significant reduction of short-interval intracortical inhibition (SICI) at interstimulus interval of 1 ms (ALS 2.3 ± 2.3%; controls 9.5 ± 2.5%, p &lt; 0.01) and 3 ms (ALS5.1 ± 3.4%; controls 16.8 ± 1.7%, p &lt; 0.01) in ALS patients.
Although there was a significant reduction of SICI post-VC in controls at ISI 1 ms (p &lt; 0.05) and ISI 3 ms (p &lt; 0.05), there was no significant change in ALS patients at ISI 1 ms (p = 0.15) or 3 ms (p = 0.31).
The changes in cortical excitability correlated with fatigue (R = 0.59, p &lt; 0.05).
In conclusion, maladaptation of cortical processes related to degeneration of inhibitory GABAergic intracortical circuits, is a feature of ALS that significantly correlates with development of fatigue and weakness.
PMID: 22425368
Inspiratory- and finger-flexion-related cortical potentials in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis--an exploratory study.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by degeneration of the upper and lower motor neurons.
Each voluntary movement, including inspiration, is preceded by movement-related cortical potential (MRCP) that can be recorded from the scalp.
MRCPs of ALS patients with severe upper motor neuron involvement are smaller.
Our aim was to explore whether the inspiratory-(sniffing)-related cortical potentials (SRCPs) and index-finger-flexion MRCPs (FFRCPs) can be used as markers of cortical involvement in ALS.
Thirteen ALS patients and 15 healthy volunteers were assessed for their hand dexterity and strength, respiratory function, speech capacity, spasticity, electromyographic parameters and functional rating scales.
EEG was recorded during self-paced sniffing and the right index finger flexion.
The MRCP amplitudes were assessed at the relevant electrode positions.
No statistically significant difference was found between the MRCP amplitudes of the ALS patients and the control subjects.
However, patients with more severely affected upper limb functions generated smaller FFRCPs and those with more affected respiratory functions generated smaller SRCPs.
Excessively high FFRCPs were associated with better while excessively low FFRCPs with worse scores on some of the clinical measures of the upper limb function.
Our preliminary results demonstrate that it is feasible to record SRCP in ALS patients, which combined with FFRCP, may be useful to determine the spectrum of motor control changes in this population.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22245043
Developmental origins of adult diseases and neurotoxicity: epidemiological and experimental studies.
To date, only a small number of commercial chemicals have been tested and documented as developmental neurotoxicants.
Moreover, an increasing number of epidemiological, clinical and experimental studies suggest an association between toxicant or drug exposure during the perinatal period and the development of metabolic-related diseases and neurotoxicity later in life.
The four speakers at this symposium presented their research results on different neurotoxic chemicals relating to the developmental origins of health and adult disease (DOHaD).
Philippe Grandjean presented epidemiological data on children exposed to inorganic mercury and methylmercury, and discussed the behavioral outcome measures as they relate to age and stage of brain development.
Donald A.
Fox presented data that low-dose human equivalent gestational lead exposure produces late-onset obesity only in male mice that is associated with neurodegeneration.
Didima de Groot presented results on prenatal exposure of rats to methylazoxymethanol and discussed the results in light of the etiology of western Pacific amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Parkinson-dementia complex.
Merle G.
Paule addressed the long-term changes in learning, motivation and short-term memory in aged Rhesus monkeys following acute 24 h exposure to ketamine during early development.
Overall, these presentations addressed fundamental issues in the emerging areas of lifetime neurotoxicity testing, differential vulnerable periods of exposure, nonmonotonic dose-response effects and neurotoxic risk assessment.
The results indicate that developmental neurotoxicity results in permanent changes, thus emphasizing the need to prevent such toxicity.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22035589
Ataxin-2 polyQ expansions in FTLD-ALS spectrum disorders in Flanders-Belgian cohorts.
There exists considerable clinical and pathological overlap between frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), which implies that these 2 neurodegenerative conditions share common pathogenic mechanisms.
Recently, intermediate-length (27-33) polyglutamine (polyQ) expansions in ataxin-2 (ATXN2) have been associated with increased risk for ALS, while expansions of &gt; 34 repeats are known to cause spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (Sca-2).
We identified in 72 ALS patients one patient with a 33 polyQ expansion that was absent in 810 control individuals.
This allele was also found in one patient with concomitant ALS-Sca-2.
In contrast, in a Flanders-Belgian series of 270 FTLD and 22 FTLD-ALS patients, we found no association with intermediate-length polyQ expansions nor did we observe patient-specific long expansions in agreement with the recent observation in a screening of a substantial sized cohort of patients with diverse neurodegenerative brain diseases.
Our results provide further support to the notion that ATXN2 associated polyglutamine amplification is specific to the ALS-end of the FTLD-ALS disease spectrum.
Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23679925
A2A adenosine receptors are up-regulated in lymphocytes from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients.
Adenosine, a purine nucleoside interacting with A1, A2A, A2B and A3 adenosine receptors (ARs), is a potent endogenous modulator of inflammatory and neuronal processes involved in the pathophysiology of several neurodegenerative diseases.
In the present study, ARs were investigated in lymphocytes from patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and compared with age-matched healthy subjects.
In ALS patients A2AARs were analysed by using RT-PCR, Western blotting and saturation binding experiments.
The effect of A2AAR stimulation on cyclic AMP levels was evaluated in lymphocytes from ALS patients and healthy subjects.
An up-regulation of A2AARs was observed in ALS patients with respect to healthy subjects while A1, A2B and A3AR affinity and density did not change.
In ALS patients, the A2AAR density values correlated with the Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Functional Rating Scale-Revised (ALSFRS-R) scores.
Furthermore, the stimulation of A2AARs mediated a significant increase in cyclic AMP levels in lymphocytes from ALS patients, with a higher potency than in lymphocytes from healthy subjects.
In conclusion, the positive correlation between A2AAR density and ALSFRS-R scores could indicate a possible protective effect of this receptor subtype, representing an interesting starting point for the study of alternative therapeutic approaches for ALS based on A2AAR modulation.
PMID: 22665549
Pseudo-ischaemic ECG in a patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis surviving for a decade.
A 58-year-old female with no history of heart disease was admitted to our hospital for abnormal ECG mimicking myocardial ischaemia.
The ECG revealed persistent T-wave inversion in almost all leads, especially in precordial leads V2-V6.
The patient had no complaints of chest pain, chest distress, short of breath or other atypical myocardial ischaemia symptoms.
She had a history of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) with a disease course more than 20 years.
Examinations help rule out other diseases causing persistent T-wave inversion.
Importantly, cardiac catheterisation showed nearly normal coronary arteries that could rule out myocardial ischaemia.
Accordingly, the authors presumed that the pseudo-ischaemic ECG was associated with ALS in this patient.
The findings of the present case provide new evidence that autonomic nervous system may involve in the pathophysiological progress of ALS.
PMID: 22647474
[Can prion-like propagation occur in neurodegenerative diseases?: in view of transmissible systemic amyloidosis].
Common neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD), are now considered as protein misfolding diseases, because the misfolding of a small number of proteins is a key event in the pathogenesis and progression of these diseases.
Proteins that are prone to misfolding and thereby associated with neurodegenerative diseases include amyloid β (AD), tau (AD and tauopathy), α-synuclein (PD, dementia with Lewy bodies, etc.), polyglutamine proteins (Huntington's disease, spinocerebellar ataxia, etc.), and superoxide dismutase 1 (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis).
These proteins share certain essential properties with prions.
Similar to abnormal prions, misfolded proteins function as a template to catalyze the misfolding of the native proteins and assemble into insoluble, β-sheet-rich, fibrillar aggregates termed as amyloids.
Furthermore, there is enough evidence supporting the intercellular transfer of misfolded protein aggregates.
The transmission of these aggregates from one cell to another may be in accordance with the concept that neuropathological changes propagate along neuronal circuits in neurodegenerative diseases.
Prion-like propagation mechanisms have been extensively analyzed in connection with systemic amyloidoses such as amyloid A (AA) amyloidosis and amyloid apolipoprotein AII (AApoAII) amyloidosis.
Studies have shown that AA and AApoAII amyloidoses are transmitted from one organism to another through amyloid fibrils.
However, studies have not yet proved that protein misfolding diseases, except for prion diseases, are infectious.
Given the intercellular transfer of misfolded protein aggregates, we cannot ignore the possibility that disease-specific, misfolded proteins can be transmitted between individuals through surgical procedures or tissue transplantation.
Importantly, cell non-autonomous mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases may represent a more readily accessible target for novel disease-modifying therapies.
In the present review, we discuss some aspects of the prion-like propagation of neurodegenerative diseases, taking into consideration the accumulated evidence supporting the transmissibility of systemic amyloidoses.
PMID: 23046583
Expression of Fused in sarcoma mutations in mice recapitulates the neuropathology of FUS proteinopathies and provides insight into disease pathogenesis.
Mutations in the gene encoding the RNA-binding protein fused in sarcoma (FUS) can cause familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and rarely frontotemproal dementia (FTD).
FUS accumulates in neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions (NCIs) in ALS patients with FUS mutations.
FUS is also a major pathologic marker for a group of less common forms of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), which includes atypical FTLD with ubiquitinated inclusions (aFTLD-U), neuronal intermediate filament inclusion disease (NIFID) and basophilic inclusion body disease (BIBD).
These diseases are now called FUS proteinopathies, because they share this disease marker.
It is unknown how FUS mutations cause disease and the role of FUS in FTD-FUS cases, which do not have FUS mutations.
In this paper we report the development of somatic brain transgenic (SBT) mice using recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV) to investigate how FUS mutations lead to neurodegeneration.
We compared SBT mice expressing wild-type human FUS (FUSWT), and two ALS-linked mutations: FUSR521C and FUSΔ14, which lacks the nuclear localization signal.
Both FUS mutants accumulated in the cytoplasm relative to FUSWT.
The degree of this shift correlated with the severity of the FUS mutation as reflected by disease onset in humans.
Mice expressing the most aggressive mutation, FUSΔ14, recapitulated many aspects of FUS proteinopathies, including insoluble FUS, basophilic and eosiniphilic NCIs, and other pathologic markers, including ubiquitin, p62/SQSTM1, α-internexin, and the poly-adenylate(A)-binding protein 1 (PABP-1).
However, TDP-43 did not localize to inclusions.
Our data supports the hypothesis that ALS or FTD-linked FUS mutations cause neurodegeneration by increasing cyotplasmic FUS.
Accumulation of FUS in the cytoplasm may retain RNA targets and recruit additional RNA-binding proteins, such as PABP-1, into stress-granule like aggregates that coalesce into permanent inclusions that could negatively affect RNA metabolism.
Identification of mutations in other genes that cause ALS/FTD, such as C9ORF72, sentaxin, and angiogenin, lends support to the idea that defective RNA metabolism is a critical pathogenic pathway.
The SBT FUS mice described here will provide a valuable platform for dissecting the pathogenic mechanism of FUS mutations, define the relationship between FTD and ALS-FUS, and help identify therapeutic targets that are desperately needed for these devastating neurodegenerative disorders.
PMID: 23664960
Axonal degeneration in the peripheral nervous system: implications for the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Axons are the anatomical link between neuronal cell bodies and their target organs, and thus axonal degeneration is the pathological substrate that underlies neurological dysfunction in a large number of neurological conditions.
Recent advances in the field of axonal biology demonstrate that axons possess programs for survival and degeneration that are distinct from those of the cell body, indicating that therapeutic strategies must consider protection of both the cell body and the axon.
This review discusses axonal degeneration in the peripheral nervous system (PNS) with a focus on amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, examining both the underlying mechanisms, and the cellular and disease models of axonal degeneration that relate to disease pathogenesis.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23455423
Mutations in prion-like domains in hnRNPA2B1 and hnRNPA1 cause multisystem proteinopathy and ALS.
Algorithms designed to identify canonical yeast prions predict that around 250 human proteins, including several RNA-binding proteins associated with neurodegenerative disease, harbour a distinctive prion-like domain (PrLD) enriched in uncharged polar amino acids and glycine.
PrLDs in RNA-binding proteins are essential for the assembly of ribonucleoprotein granules.
However, the interplay between human PrLD function and disease is not understood.
Here we define pathogenic mutations in PrLDs of heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNPs) A2B1 and A1 in families with inherited degeneration affecting muscle, brain, motor neuron and bone, and in one case of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Wild-type hnRNPA2 (the most abundant isoform of hnRNPA2B1) and hnRNPA1 show an intrinsic tendency to assemble into self-seeding fibrils, which is exacerbated by the disease mutations.
Indeed, the pathogenic mutations strengthen a 'steric zipper' motif in the PrLD, which accelerates the formation of self-seeding fibrils that cross-seed polymerization of wild-type hnRNP.
Notably, the disease mutations promote excess incorporation of hnRNPA2 and hnRNPA1 into stress granules and drive the formation of cytoplasmic inclusions in animal models that recapitulate the human pathology.
Thus, dysregulated polymerization caused by a potent mutant steric zipper motif in a PrLD can initiate degenerative disease.
Related proteins with PrLDs should therefore be considered candidates for initiating and perhaps propagating proteinopathies of muscle, brain, motor neuron and bone.
PMID: 22643084
Wnt signaling pathway is involved in the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in adult transgenic mice.
Our aim was to examine the change in expression of molecules involved in Wnt signaling in the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) in adult transgenic mice, and to reveal the relationship between the Wnt signaling pathway and the pathogenesis of ALS.
We determined the expression of Wnt2, Wnt7a, and GSK-3beta in the spinal cord of SOD1(G93A) ALS transgenic mice at different ages using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, western blot, and immunohistochemistry.
Using double labeling, we determined whether Wnt2, Wnt7a,  and GSK-3beta were colocalized with beta-tubulin III, for neurons, or glial fibrillary acidic protein, for mature astrocytes.
Wnt2, Wnt7a mRNA and protein in the spinal cord of ALS mice were upregulated and compared with wild-type mice.
Phospho-GSK-3beta (Ser 9) protein  levels in the spinal cord of ALS mice were upregulated.
Moreover, the immunoreactivity of Wnt2, Wnt7a, and phospho-GSK-3beta (Ser 9) was strong in ALS mice but weak in wild-type mice at the same time points.
Double immunofluorescence labeling showed that Wnt2 and Wnt7a were expressed in both  neurons and astrocytes, whereas GSK-3beta was expressed only in neurons.
Most of the double positive cells were located in the ventral horns of the gray matter, the locus of neurodegeneration.
Neurodegeneration upregulated the expression of Wnt2 and Wnt7a in the spinal  cord of ALS mice, which in turn activated Wnt signaling, and accordingly inhibited GSK-3beta activity in disease progression of ALS in adult transgenic mice; this could regulate the downstream gene of the Wnt signaling pathway and promote cell proliferation.
PMID: 23286752
Detection of a novel frameshift mutation and regions with homozygosis within ARHGEF28 gene in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor (RGNEF) is a novel NFL mRNA destabilizing factor that forms neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions in spinal motor neurons in both sporadic (SALS) and familial (FALS) ALS patients.
Given the observation of genetic mutations in a number of mRNA binding proteins associated with ALS, including TDP-43, FUS/TLS and mtSOD1, we analysed the ARHGEF28 gene (approx.
316 kb) that encodes for RGNEF in FALS cases to determine if mutations were present.
We performed genomic sequencing, copy number variation analysis using TaqMan real-time PCR and spinal motor neuron immunohistochemistry using a novel RGNEF antibody.
In this limited sample of FALS cases (n=7) we identified a heterozygous mutation that is predicted to generate a premature truncated gene product.
We also observed extensive regions of homozygosity in the ARHGEF28 gene in two FALS patients.
In conclusion, our findings of genetic alterations in the ARHGEF28 gene in cases of FALS suggest that a more comprehensive genetic analysis would be warranted.
PMID: 22563797
Molecular signatures of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis disease progression in hind and forelimb muscles of an SOD1(G93A) mouse model.
This study utilized proteomics, biochemical and enzymatic assays, and bioinformatics tools that characterize protein alterations in hindlimb (gastrocnemius) and forelimb (triceps) muscles in an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) (SOD1(G93A)) mouse model.
The aim of this study was to identify the key molecular signatures involved in disease progression.
Both muscle types have in common an early down-regulation of complex I.
In the hindlimb, early increases in oxidative metabolism are associated with uncoupling of the respiratory chain, an imbalance of NADH/NAD(+), and an increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS) production.
The NADH overflow due to complex I inactivation induces TCA flux perturbations, leading to citrate production, triggering fatty acid synthase (FAS), and lipid peroxidation.
These early metabolic changes in the hindlimb followed by sustained and comparatively higher metabolic and cytoskeletal derangements over time precede and may catalyze the progressive muscle wasting in this muscle at the late stage.
By contrast, in the forelimb, there is an early down-regulation of complexes I and II that is associated with the reduction of oxidative metabolism, which promotes metabolic homeostasis that is accompanied by a greater cytoskeletal stabilization response.
However, these early compensatory systems diminish by a later time point.
The identification of potential early- and late-stage disease molecular signatures in an ALS model: muscle albumin, complex I, complex II, citrate synthase, FAS, and phosphoinositide 3-kinase functions as diagnostic markers and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ co-activator 1α (PGC1α), Sema-3A, and Rho-associated protein kinase 1 (ROCK1) play the role of disease progression markers.
The differing pattern of cellular metabolism and cytoskeletal derangements in the hind and forelimb identifies the potential dysmetabolism/hypermetabolism molecular signatures associated with disease progression, which may serve as diagnostic/disease progression markers in ALS patients.
PMID: 22910997
Fractional anisotropy in the posterior limb of the internal capsule and prognosis in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
To explore the value of diffusion tensor imaging applied to those specific cerebral white matter tracts consistently involved pathologically in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis as a source of prognostic biomarkers.
Baseline clinical assessment and 3-T diffusion tensor imaging, repeated after approximately 6 months.Tract-based spatial statistics were used to assess voxel wise correlations of just the baseline diffusion tensor imaging indices with the progression rate (change in disability score/time interval) within the corticospinal tract and corpus callosum.
The study involved 21 patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and 3 patients with primary lateral sclerosis.
Correlation was observed between fractional anisotropy and progression rate for a region of the corticospinal tract spanning the posterior limb of the internal capsule, with a left hemisphere emphasis.
Posterior limb of the internal capsule fractional anisotropy showed potential to distinguish those patients with rapid progression.
Axial diffusivity significantly increased in this region in a paired t test analysis of baseline and follow-up diffusion tensor imaging, in keeping with axonal damage.No correlations were noted for the corpus callosum.
Posterior limb of the internal capsule fractional anisotropy is a candidate prognostic marker in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, with potential to identify incident cases with more rapid progression.
PMID: 21725896
Role of ADARs in mouse development.
RNA editing by deamination of adenosine to inosine (A-to-I editing) is a physiologically important posttranscriptional mechanism that can regulate expression of genes by modifying their transcripts.
A-to-I editing is mediated by adenosine deaminases acting on RNA (ADAR) that can catalytically exchange adenosines to inosines, with varying efficiency, depending on the structure of the RNA substrates.
Significant progress in understanding the biological function of mammalian ADARs has been made in the past decade by the creation and analysis of gene-targeted mice with disrupted or modified ADAR alleles.
These studies have revealed important roles of ADARs in neuronal and hematopoietic tissue during embryonic and postnatal stages of mouse development.
PMID: 21820354
Fasciculations and their F-response revisited: high-density surface EMG in ALS and benign fasciculations.
To compare the prevalence of fasciculation potentials (FPs) with F-responses between patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and patients with benign fasciculations.
In seven patients with ALS and seven patients with benign fasciculations, high-density surface EMG was recorded for 15 min from the gastrocnemius muscle.
Template matching was used to search for pairs of FPs with a repetition within 10-110 ms.
Interspike interval (ISI) histograms were constructed from 282 pairs of benign fasciculations and from 337 FP pairs in ALS.
Peaks attributable to F-waves were found at latencies of 32 ms (benign) and 35 ms (ALS).
Five patients with benign fasciculations and four patients with ALS had FPs with F-waves.
F-waves of FPs occur in both conditions - therefore they are not diagnostically helpful.
F-waves confirm the distal origin of FPs for an individual axon.
The occurrence of these FPs in a benign condition suggests that the generation of ectopic discharges in the distal axons is not specific to progressive neurodegeneration.
Copyright © 2011 International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology.
Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22563406
TDP-43 identified from a genome wide RNAi screen for SOD1 regulators.
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is a late-onset, progressive neurodegenerative disease affecting motor neurons in the brain stem and spinal cord leading to loss of voluntary muscular function and ultimately, death due to respiratory failure.
A subset of ALS cases are familial and associated with mutations in superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) that destabilize the protein and predispose it to aggregation.
In spite of the fact that sporadic and familial forms of ALS share many common patho-physiological features, the mechanistic relationship between SOD1-associated and sporadic forms of the disease if any, is not well understood.
To better understand any molecular connections, a cell-based protein folding assay was employed to screen a whole genome RNAi library for genes that regulate levels of soluble SOD1.
Statistically significant hits that modulate SOD1 levels, when analyzed by pathway analysis revealed a highly ranked network containing TAR DNA binging protein (TDP-43), a major component of aggregates characteristic of sporadic ALS.
Biochemical experiments confirmed the action of TDP-43 on SOD1.
These results highlight an unexpected relationship between TDP-43 and SOD1 which may have implications in disease pathogenesis.
PMID: 23114367
Degeneration of serotonergic neurons in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a link to spasticity.
Spasticity is a common and disabling symptom observed in patients with central nervous system diseases, including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, a disease affecting both upper and lower motor neurons.
In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, spasticity is traditionally thought to be the result of degeneration of the upper motor neurons in the cerebral cortex, although degeneration of other neuronal types, in particular serotonergic neurons, might also represent a cause of spasticity.
We performed a pathology study in seven patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and six control subjects and observed that central serotonergic neurons suffer from a degenerative process with prominent neuritic degeneration, and sometimes loss of cell bodies in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Moreover, distal serotonergic projections to spinal cord motor neurons and hippocampus systematically degenerated in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
In SOD1 (G86R) mice, a transgenic model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, serotonin levels were decreased in brainstem and spinal cord before onset of motor symptoms.
Furthermore, there was noticeable atrophy of serotonin neuronal cell bodies along with neuritic degeneration at disease onset.
We hypothesized that degeneration of serotonergic neurons could underlie spasticity in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and investigated this hypothesis in vivo using tail muscle spastic-like contractions in response to mechanical stimulation as a measure of spasticity.
In SOD1 (G86R) mice, tail muscle spastic-like contractions were observed at end-stage.
Importantly, they were abolished by 5-hydroxytryptamine-2b/c receptors inverse agonists.
In line with this, 5-hydroxytryptamine-2b receptor expression was strongly increased at disease onset.
In all, we show that serotonergic neurons degenerate during amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and that this might underlie spasticity in mice.
Further research is needed to determine whether inverse agonists of 5-hydroxytryptamine-2b/c receptors could be of interest in treating spasticity in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
PMID: 22488161
Nitric oxide-mediated oxidative damage and the progressive demise of motor neurons in ALS.
Oxidative damage is a common and early feature of Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and other neurodegenerative disorders.
Dr.
Mark Smith and his colleagues have built the case for oxidative stress being a primary progenitor rather than a secondary end-stage epiphenomenon of neurodegeneration.
They proposed that reactive oxygen species contribute to the age-related cascade of neurodegeneration, whereby accumulative oxidative damage with age promotes other characteristic pathological changes in afflicted brain regions, including protein aggregation, metabolic deficiencies, and inflammation.
Nitric oxide (NO) likely plays a critical role in this age-related cascade.
NO is a major signaling molecule produced in the central nervous system to modulate neurological activity through stimulating cyclic GMP synthesis.
However, the same physiological concentrations of NO, relevant in cellular signaling, may also initiate and amplify oxidative damage by diffusion-limited reactions with superoxide (O(2)(•-)) to produce peroxynitrite (ONOO(-)).
This is perhaps best illustrated in ALS where physiological levels of NO promote survival of motor neurons, but the same concentrations can stimulate motor neuron apoptosis and glial cell activation under pathological conditions.
While these changes represent a complex mechanism involving multiple cell types in the pathogenesis of ALS, they also reveal general processes underlying neurodegeneration.
PMID: 22283698
Neuroprotection for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: role of stem cells, growth factors, and gene therapy.
Various molecular mechanisms including apoptosis, inflammation, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction and excitotoxicity have been implicated in the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), though the exact mechanisms have yet to be specified.
Furthermore, the underlying restorative molecular mechanisms resulting in neuronal and/or non-neuronal regeneration have to be yet elucidated.
Therapeutic agents targeting one or more of these mechanisms to combat either initiation or progression of the disease are under research.
Novel treatments including stem cell therapy, growth factors, and gene therapy might prolong survival and delay progression of symptoms.
Harnessing the regenerative potential of the central nervous system would be a novel approach for the treatment of motor neuron death resulting from ALS.
Endogenous neural replacement, if augmented with administration of exogenous growth factors or with pharmaceuticals that increase the rate of neural progenitor formation, neural migration, and neural maturation could slow the rate of cell loss enough to result in clinical improvement.
In this review, we discuss the impact of therapeutic treatment involving stem cell therapy, growth factors, gene therapy, and combination therapy on disease onset and progression of ALS.
In addition, we summarize human clinical trials of stem cell therapy, growth factor therapy, and gene therapy in individuals with ALS.
PMID: 21819217
Robotic Roux-en-Y duodenojejunostomy for superior mesenteric artery syndrome: operative technique.
Superior mesenteric artery (SMA) syndrome, also known as Wilkie's syndrome, is a rare condition characterized by vascular compression of the duodenum that leads to intestinal obstruction.
While there have been a few recent case reports of laparoscopic duodenojejunostomy performed as an option for surgical treatment, the role of the da Vinci(®) robot in superior mesenteric syndrome has been underestimated.
The authors report a robotic Roux-en-Y duodenojejunostomy for the treatment of SMA syndrome.
A 39-year-old man with a history of Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis presented with an upper gastrointestinal obstruction with distended abdomen.
A computed tomography scan showed a transition in the third portion of the duodenum where the SMA vessels crossed over, with a decompressed jejunum.
He was identified as a candidate for a duodenojejunostomy.
The da Vinci Surgical System was used to mobilize the colon and duodenum, and a Roux-en-Y duodenojejunostomy was performed with hand-sewn anastomosis.
There were no intraoperative complications.
The blood loss was minimal and operative time was 120 minutes.
The postoperative course was uneventful with resolution of intestinal obstruction.
Robotic Roux-en-Y duodenojejunostomy as a surgical option for treatment of SMA syndrome is safe, feasible, and a valid alternative to open surgery with the added benefits of a minimally invasive approach.
PMID: 22956189
D-NAP prophylactic treatment in the SOD mutant mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: review of discovery and treatment of tauopathy.
Davunetide (NAP) is a leading drug candidate being tested against tauopathy.
Davunetide is an eight-amino-acid peptide fragment derived by structure-activity studies from activity-dependent neuroprotective protein, activity-dependent neuroprotective protein (ADNP).
ADNP is essential for brain formation.
ADNP haploinsufficiency in mice results in tauopathy and cognitive deficits ameliorated by davunetide treatment.
This article summarizes in brief recent reviews about NAP protection against tauopathy including the all D-amino acid analogue-D-NAP (AL-408).
D-NAP was discovered to have similar neuroprotective functions to NAP in vitro.
Here, D-NAP was tested as prophylactic as well as therapeutic treatment for amytrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) in the widely used TgN(SOD1-G93A)1Gur transgenic mouse model.
Results showed D-NAP-associated prophylactic protection, thus daily treatment starting from day 2 of age resulted in a prolonged life course in the D-NAP-treated mice, which was coupled to a significant decrease in tau hyperphosphorylation.
These studies correlate protection against tau hyperphosphorylation and longevity in a severe model of ALS-like motor impairment and early mortality.
NAP is a first-in-class drug candidate/investigation compound providing neuroprotection coupled to inhibition of tau pathology.
D-NAP (AL-408) is a pipeline product.
PMID: 22517106
Decreased motor cortex γ-aminobutyric acid in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
To determine if there are in vivo differences in γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) in the motor cortex and subcortical white matter of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) compared with healthy controls using proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-MRS).
In this cross-sectional study, 10 patients with ALS and 9 age- and sex-matched healthy controls (HCs) underwent 3T edited 1H-MRS to quantify GABA centered on the motor cortex and the subcortical white matter.
Compared with healthy controls, patients with ALS had significantly lower levels of GABA in the left motor cortex (1.42 ± 0.27 arbitrary institutional units vs. 1.70 ± 0.24 arbitrary institutional units, p = 0.038).
There was no significant difference in GABA levels between groups in the subcortical white matter (p &gt; 0.05).
Decreased levels of GABA are present in the motor cortex of patients with ALS compared to HCs.
Findings are consistent with prior reports of alterations in GABA receptors in the motor cortex as well as increased cortical excitability in the context of ALS.
Larger, longitudinal studies are needed to confirm these findings and to further our understanding of the role of GABA in the pathogenesis of ALS.
PMID: 23886855
The cyanobacterial amino acid β-N-methylamino-l-alanine perturbs the intermediary metabolism in neonatal rats.
The neurotoxic amino acid β-N-methylamino-l-alanine (BMAA) is produced by most cyanobacteria.
BMAA is considered as a potential health threat because of its putative role in neurodegenerative diseases.
We have previously observed cognitive disturbances and morphological brain changes in adult rodents exposed to BMAA during the development.
The aim of this study was to characterize changes of major intermediary metabolites in serum following neonatal exposure to BMAA using a non-targeted metabolomic approach.
NMR spectroscopy was used to obtain serum metabolic profiles from neonatal rats exposed to BMAA (40, 150, 460mg/kg) or vehicle on postnatal days 9-10.
Multivariate data analysis of binned NMR data indicated metabolic pattern differences between the different treatment groups.
In particular five metabolites, d-glucose, lactate, 3-hydroxybutyrate, creatine and acetate, were changed in serum of BMAA-treated neonatal rats.
These metabolites are associated with changes in energy metabolism and amino acid metabolism.
Further statistical analysis disclosed that all the identified serum metabolites in the lowest dose group were significantly (p&lt;0.05) decreased.
The neonatal rat model used in this study is so far the only animal model that displays significant biochemical and behavioral effects after a low short-term dose of BMAA.
The demonstrated perturbation of intermediary metabolism may contribute to BMAA-induced developmental changes that result in long-term effects on adult brain function.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23345638
ALS dysphagia pathophysiology: differential botulinum toxin response.
This study looked at the effect of botulinum toxin type A (BoTox-A) in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) with dysphagia due to isolated upper motor neuron (UMN) involvement or combined UMN/lower motor neuron (LMN) impairment associated with oral phase or oropharyngeal muscles involvement.
Establishing whether different pathophysiologic mechanisms underlie different responses to BoTox-A treatment may have important implications for patient management.
We screened 35 patients with sporadic ALS with dysphagia and included in the study 20 out of 35 with upper esophageal sphincter (UES) hyperactivity.
We divided these 20 patients into 2 groups, based on the presence or absence of LMN impairment.
Irrespective of the groups, we treated all 20 patients with BoTox-A injected into the UES.
The study outcome was dysphagia severity scored using the Penetration/Aspiration Scale (PAS), measured before and 2, 4, and 20 weeks after injection.
Significant mean PAS reduction was noted at weeks 2 and 4.
The botulinum-dependent PAS reduction was entirely associated with the variability shown by the group of patients with no sign of LMN impairment (group 2) and was not observed in group 1.
The significant improvement observed in patients with isolated UES dysfunction suggests that a different pathophysiology of ALS dysphagia predisposes patients to a different response to treatment with BoTox-A.
This treatment may represent an alternative treatment to percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) or prolong PEG-free time.
This study provides Class III evidence that botulinum is more effective at 2 and 4 weeks in improving dysphagia in patients with ALS with UES hyperactivity without LMN involvement (vs those with LMN involvement).
PMID: 23076148
S100A6 amyloid fibril formation is calcium-modulated and enhances superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1) aggregation.
S100A6 is a small EF-hand calcium- and zinc-binding protein involved in the regulation of cell proliferation and cytoskeletal dynamics.
It is overexpressed in neurodegenerative disorders and a proposed marker for Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS).
Following recent reports of amyloid formation by S100 proteins, we investigated the aggregation properties of S100A6.
Computational analysis using aggregation predictors Waltz and Zyggregator revealed increased propensity within S100A6 helices H(I) and H(IV).
Subsequent analysis of Thioflavin-T binding kinetics under acidic conditions elicited a very fast process with no lag phase and extensive formation of aggregates and stacked fibrils as observed by electron microscopy.
Ca(2+) exerted an inhibitory effect on the aggregation kinetics, which could be reverted upon chelation.
An FT-IR investigation of the early conformational changes occurring under these conditions showed that Ca(2+) promotes anti-parallel β-sheet conformations that repress fibrillation.
At pH 7, Ca(2+) rendered the fibril formation kinetics slower: time-resolved imaging showed that fibril formation is highly suppressed, with aggregates forming instead.
In the absence of metals an extensive network of fibrils is formed.
S100A6 oligomers, but not fibrils, were found to be cytotoxic, decreasing cell viability by up to 40%.
This effect was not observed when the aggregates were formed in the presence of Ca(2+).
Interestingly, native S1006 seeds SOD1 aggregation, shortening its nucleation process.
This suggests a cross-talk between these two proteins involved in ALS.
Overall, these results put forward novel roles for S100 proteins, whose metal-modulated aggregation propensity may be a key aspect in their physiology and function.
PMID: 22830014
Progress in therapy development for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease that cannot be slowed substantially using any currently-available clinical tools.
Through decades of studying sporadic and familial ALS (SALS and FALS), researchers are coming to understand ALS as a complex syndrome with diverse genetic and environmental etiologies.
It is know appreciated that motor neuron degeneration in ALS requires active (gain of function) and passive (loss of function) events to occur in non-neuronal cells, especially astrocytes and microglia.
These neuroinflammatory processes produce paracrine factors that detrimentally affect motor neurons, precipitating protein aggregation and compromising cytoskeletal integrity.
The result is a loss of neuronal homeostasis and progressive die-back of motor axons culminating in death of the afflicted motor neurons.
This review will discuss experimental therapeutics that have been tested in murine ALS models, with an emphasis on those that have progressed to human clinical trials.
Reasons will be considered for the frequent failure of preclinical successes to translate into positive clinical outcomes.
Finally, this review will explore current trends in experimental therapeutics for ALS with emphasis on the emerging interest in axon guidance signaling pathways as novel targets for pharmacological support of neural cytoskeletal structure and function in order to slow ALS.
PMID: 22830015
Pathological roles of wild-type cu, zn-superoxide dismutase in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Dominant mutations in a Cu, Zn-superoxide dismutase (SOD1) gene cause a familial form of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
While it remains controversial how SOD1 mutations lead to onset and progression of the disease, many in vitro and in vivo studies have supported a gain-of-toxicity mechanism where pathogenic mutations contribute to destabilizing a native structure of SOD1 and thus facilitate misfolding and aggregation.
Indeed, abnormal accumulation of SOD1-positive inclusions in spinal motor neurons is a pathological hallmark in SOD1-related familial ALS.
Furthermore, similarities in clinical phenotypes and neuropathology of ALS cases with and without mutations in sod1 gene have implied a disease mechanism involving SOD1 common to all ALS cases.
Although pathogenic roles of wild-type SOD1 in sporadic ALS remain controversial, recent developments of novel SOD1 antibodies have made it possible to characterize wild-type SOD1 under pathological conditions of ALS.
Here, I have briefly reviewed recent progress on biochemical and immunohistochemical characterization of wild-type SOD1 in sporadic ALS cases and discussed possible involvement of wild-type SOD1 in a pathomechanism of ALS.
PMID: 23696493
Single-fiber electromyography in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and cervical spondylosis.
Cervical spondylosis (CS) is a common disease in adults and may coexist with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
It is important to detect ALS coexisting with CS (ALS-cs) at an early stage, especially when surgical treatment of CS is planned.
Single-fiber electromyography was performed in 26 patients with ALS, 19 with ALS-cs, and 22 with CS.
Mean jitter, percentage of jitter &gt;55 μs, and percentage of impulse blocking were not statistically different between ALS and ALS-cs cases, but they were significantly lower in CS.
Mean fiber density was not statistically different among the 3 groups.
The percentage of pairs with jitter &gt;55 μs exceeding 40% and mean jitter exceeding 55 μs had high sensitivity and specificity in the diagnosis of ALS.
Single-fiber electromyography can supply valuable information in helping to differentiate ALS from CS.
Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22208117
Accuracy of a P300 speller for people with motor impairments: a comparison.
A Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) provides a completely new output pathway that can provide an additional option for a person to express himself/herself if he/she suffers a disorder like amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), brainstem stroke, brain or spinal cord injury or other diseases which impair the function of the common output pathways which are responsible for the control of muscles.
For a P300 based BCI a matrix of randomly flashing characters is presented to the participant.
To spell a character the person has to attend to it and to count how many times the character flashes.
Although most BCIs are designed to help people with disabilities, they are mainly tested on healthy, young subjects who may achieve better results than people with impairments.
In this study we compare measurements, performed on people suffering motor impairments, such as stroke or ALS, to measurements performed on healthy people.
The overall accuracy of the persons with motor impairments reached 70.1% in comparison to 91% obtained for the group of healthy subjects.
When looking at single subjects, one interesting example shows that under certain circumstances, when it is difficult for a patient to concentrate on one character for a longer period of time, the accuracy is higher when fewer flashes (i.e., stimuli) are presented.
Furthermore, the influence of several tuning parameters is discussed as it shows that for some participants adaptations for achieving valuable spelling results are required.
Finally, exclusion criteria for people who are not able to use the device are defined.
PMID: 22208118
Asynchronous P300-based brain-computer interface to control a virtual environment: initial tests on end users.
Motor disability and/or ageing can prevent individuals from fully enjoying home facilities, thus worsening their quality of life.
Advances in the field of accessible user interfaces for domotic appliances can represent a valuable way to improve the independence of these persons.
An asynchronous P300-based Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) system was recently validated with the participation of healthy young volunteers for environmental control.
In this study, the asynchronous P300-based BCI for the interaction with a virtual home environment was tested with the participation of potential end-users (clients of a Frisian home care organization) with limited autonomy due to ageing and/or motor disabilities.
System testing revealed that the minimum number of stimulation sequences needed to achieve correct classification had a higher intra-subject variability in potential end-users with respect to what was previously observed in young controls.
Here we show that the asynchronous modality performed significantly better as compared to the synchronous mode in continuously adapting its speed to the users' state.
Furthermore, the asynchronous system modality confirmed its reliability in avoiding misclassifications and false positives, as previously shown in young healthy subjects.
The asynchronous modality may contribute to filling the usability gap between BCI systems and traditional input devices, representing an important step towards their use in the activities of daily living.
PMID: 23333338
Glutathione and thioredoxin dependent systems in neurodegenerative disease: what can be learned from reverse genetics in mice.
Oxidative stress is a major common hallmark of many neurodegenerative disease such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and stroke.
Novel concepts in our understanding of oxidative stress indicate that a perturbed redox circuitry could be strongly linked with the onset of such diseases.
In this respect, glutathione and thioredoxin dependent antioxidant enzymes play a central role as key regulators due to the fact that a slight dysfunction of any of these enzymes leads to sustained reactive oxygen species (ROS) production.
Apart from their classical role as ROS scavengers, some of these enzymes are also able to control post-translational modifications.
Therefore, efficient control of ROS production and reversibility of post-translational modifications are critical as improper control of such events may lead to the activation of pathological redox circuits that eventually culminate in neuronal cell death.
To dissect the apparently opposing functions of ROS in cell physiology and pathophysiology, a proper working toolkit is mandatory.
In vivo modeling is an absolute requirement due to the complexity of redox signaling systems that often contradict data obtained from in vitro approaches.
Hence, inducible/conditional knockout mouse models for key redox enzymes are emerging as powerful tools to perturb redox circuitries in a temporal and spatial manner.
In this review we address the basics of ROS generation, chemistry and detoxification as well as examples in where applications of mouse models of important enzymes have been successfully applied in the study of neurodegenerative processes.
We also highlight the importance of new models to overcome present technical limitations in order to advance in the study of redox processes in the role of neurodegeneration.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23084342
Analysis of the C9orf72 repeat in Parkinson's disease, essential tremor and restless legs syndrome.
The hexanucleotide expanded repeat (GGGGCC) in intron 1 of the C9orf72 gene is recognized as the most common genetic form of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD).
However, as part of the clinical phenotype, some patients present with parkinsonism.
The present study investigated the potential expansion or association of the C9orf72 repeat length with susceptibility to Parkinson's disease and related disorders, essential tremor and restless legs syndrome.
One restless legs syndrome patient was shown to harbor a repeat expansion, however on clinical follow-up this patient was observed to have developed frontotemporal dementia.
There was no evidence of association of repeat length on disease risk or age-at-onset for any of the three disorders.
Therefore the C9orf72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion appears to be specific to TDP-43 driven amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and dementia.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22349416
Provision and financing of assistive technology devices in Germany: a bureaucratic odyssey? The case of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
The regulations for financing assistive technology devices (ATDs) are complex and fragmented and, thus, might influence adequate provision of these devices to people who need multiple ATDs.
This study aims to explore and analyze patients' problems with the provision and financing of ATDs for the following two rare diseases: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD).
A survey was conducted by means of semi-standardized questionnaires addressing the issues of coverage decisions for ATDs and problems with provision of ATDs.
Information was retrieved from ALS (n=19) and DMD (n=14) patients.
Conducted interviews were transcribed verbatim and analyzed using qualitative content analysis.
Respondents experienced difficulties with the provision and financing of ATDs.
They underlined problems such as long approval processes and a serious bureaucratic burden, which induced inadequate provision of ATDs.
Experiences of ALS and DMD respondents frequently were similar, especially regarding financing decisions and the process of decision making by sickness funds.
The results suggest that difficulties in receiving and financing ATDs are common problems among ALS and DMD patients.
There is a need for an interdisciplinary approach in the provision of ATDs and their financing, which should be coordinated by case managers.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23145119
Caprylic triglyceride as a novel therapeutic approach to effectively improve the performance and attenuate the symptoms due to the motor neuron loss in ALS disease.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disorder of motor neurons causing progressive muscle weakness, paralysis, and finally death.
ALS patients suffer from asthenia and their progressive weakness negatively impacts quality of life, limiting their daily activities.
They have impaired energy balance linked to lower activity of mitochondrial electron transport chain enzymes in ALS spinal cord, suggesting that improving mitochondrial function may present a therapeutic approach for ALS.
When fed a ketogenic diet, the G93A ALS mouse shows a significant increase in serum ketones as well as a significantly slower progression of weakness and lower mortality rate.
In this study, we treated SOD1-G93A mice with caprylic triglyceride, a medium chain triglyceride that is metabolized into ketone bodies and can serve as an alternate energy substrate for neuronal metabolism.
Treatment with caprylic triglyceride attenuated progression of weakness and protected spinal cord motor neuron loss in SOD1-G93A transgenic animals, significantly improving their performance even though there was no significant benefit regarding the survival of the ALS transgenic animals.
We found that caprylic triglyceride significantly promoted the mitochondrial oxygen consumption rate in vivo.
Our results demonstrated that caprylic triglyceride alleviates ALS-type motor impairment through restoration of energy metabolism in SOD1-G93A ALS mice, especially during the overt stage of the disease.
These data indicate the feasibility of using caprylic acid as an easily administered treatment with a high impact on the quality of life of ALS patients.
PMID: 23383387
Retinoid signaling alterations in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neuromuscular disease for which effective therapeutic interventions and an understanding of underlying disease mechanism are lacking.
A variety of biochemical pathways are believed to contribute to the pathophysiology of ALS that are common to both sporadic and familial forms of the disease.
Evidence from both human and animal studies indicates that expression of retinoid signaling genes is altered in ALS and may contribute to motor neuron loss.
Our goals were to examine the expression and distribution of proteins of the retinoid signaling pathway in spinal cord samples from patients with sporadic and familial ALS and to evaluate the role of these proteins in motor neuron cell survival.
In sporadic ALS, the cytoplasmic binding protein that facilitates nuclear translocation of retinoic acid, cellular retinoic acid binding protein-II (CRABP-II), was localized to the nucleus and retinoic acid receptor β (RARβ) was significantly increased in motor neuron nuclei when compared to either familial ALS patients or non-neurologic disease controls.
Motor neurons with increased nuclear RARβ were negative for markers of apoptosis.
Pre-treatment of primary motor neuron-enriched cultures with a pan-RAR or RARβ-specific agonist decreased motor neuron cell death associated with oxidative injury/stress while a RARβ-specific antagonist enhanced cell death.
Our data suggest retinoid signaling is altered in ALS and increased nuclear RARβ occurs in motor neurons of sporadic ALS patients.
Activation of RARβ protects motor neurons from oxidative-induced cell death.
PMID: 22244934
Screening of the SOD1, FUS, TARDBP, ANG, and OPTN mutations in Korean patients with familial and sporadic ALS.
About 5% of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) cases are known to be familial (fALS) and mutations in SOD1 and other genes are found in more than 20% of fALS patients and in 2%-4% of apparently sporadic ALS (sALS) cases.
However, there are few reports on the proportion of fALS and the frequency of mutations in Korean patients with ALS.
We screened mutations in the SOD1, FUS, TARDBP, ANG, and OPTN genes in 258 consecutively enrolled Korean patients with ALS from October 2006 to November 2010.
The frequency of fALS was estimated to be 3.5% (9/258), and mutations were identified in 88.9% (8/9) of fALS patients but only in 2.8% (7/249) of sALS patients.
Seven fALS and 3 sALS patients had mutations in SOD1 gene while all the others had FUS gene.
The proportion of fALS was lower than that reported in Caucasian populations but the frequency of SOD1 gene mutations in Korean fALS patients (77.8%, 7/9) was much higher than that reported in other ethnic groups.
These findings might suggest that there is an ethnic difference in the proportion of fALS and the genetic background of ALS.
Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22953735
Specific numerical processing impairment in ALS patients.
The present study investigated for the first time numerical processing in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients.
Twenty-four non-demented patients affected by probable or definite ALS and 27 healthy controls underwent cognitive assessment.
Numerical abilities (Number Comprehension, Number Transcoding, Arithmetic Fact retrieval, Calculation Skills and Arithmetic Principles) and neuropsychological functions were evaluated in accordance with Strong's consensus criteria.
Clear group differences between the patients and controls were found in Multiplication Facts (Tables), Multiplication Approximation, and Multiplication Principles.
These deficits were not statistically related to impairments of more general cognitive functioning.
In conclusion, specific, previously unreported arithmetical deficits have been found in ALS patients.
This particular impairment pattern could be indicative of damage to the cortico-subcortical circuits involved in some specific aspects of multiplication.
Our findings could contribute to further delineate the profile of cognitive impairment in ALS.
PMID: 22156608
Curcumins promote monocytic gene expression related to β-amyloid and superoxide dismutase clearance.
Neurodegenerative diseases are associated with accumulation of modified proteins or peptides including amyloid-β (Aβ) in Alzheimer's disease (AD), and misfolded superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD-1) in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Clearance of Aβ or SOD-1 by the innate immune system may be important for controlling or preventing disease onset.
Curcumins restore Aβ phagocytosis by peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from AD patients and Aβ clearance with upregulation of key genes including MGAT3, vitamin D receptor (VDR) and Toll-like receptors (TLRs).
Certain curcumins inhibit inflammatory processes of PBMCs from ALS patients.
We developed an in vitro system using human monocytes from patients and monocytic cell lines (i.e. U-937, THP-1) for evaluating curcuminoid potency of innate immune cell stimulation.
Bisdemethoxycurcumin and certain analogs potentiated MGAT3,VDR and TLR gene expression 3- to 300-fold in U-937 cells.
The effect of curcumins on inflammation in monocytes from patients with ALS was examined.
Recursive medicinal chemistry was applied to identify compounds that stimulate the innate immune system for use in the clearance of Aβ in AD and the reversal of neuroinflammation and defective SOD-1 accumulation in ALS.
Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.
PMID: 22353756
Impaired antioxydative Keap1/Nrf2 system and the downstream stress protein responses in the motor neuron of ALS model mice.
The Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (Keap1)/Nuclear erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) system is the major cellular defense mechanism under oxidative stress, but the role in motor neuron degeneration under amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) pathology has not yet been fully elucidated.
Here we examined temporal and spatial changes of Keap1, Nrf2, and their downstream stress response proteins heme oxgenase-1 (HO-1), glutathione, thioredoxin (TRX), and heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) throughout the course of motor neuron (MN) degeneration in the spinal cord of ALS model mice.
Keap1 protein levels progressively decreased in the MN and anterior lumbar cord of ALS mice to 63% at early symptomatic 14 weeks and 58% at end symptomatic 18 weeks, while Nrf2 dramatically increased in the anterior lumbar cord with accumulation in the MN nucleus to 229% at 14 weeks and 471% at 18 weeks when glial like cells became also positive.
In contrast, downstream stress response proteins such as HO-1, glutathione, TRX, and HSP70 showed only a small increase in MN with a significant increase to 149% to 280% in the number of glial-like cells after symptomatic 14 weeks.
Our present observation suggests that MN selectively lost inductions of these important downstream protective proteins without regard to the Keap1/Nrf2 system activation, which could be a pivotal mechanism of neurodegenerative processes of ALS.
Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22106714
Familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, a historical perspective.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a fatal neurodegenerative disease of the upper and lower motor neuron of unknown etiology.
Although a familial cause for this disease has been suspected early one, it is only in the past two decades that advances in modern genetics led to the identification of more than 10 genes linked to familial ALS and helped us understand some of the complex genetic and environmental interactions that may contribute to sporadic ALS.
In this article, we chronologically summarize the genetic breakthroughs in familial and sporadic ALS and depict how it shaped our understanding of disease pathogenesis and our quest for rational therapies.
PMID: 23439112
RANTing about C9orf72.
A noncoding repeat expansion in the C9orf72 gene is the most common genetic cause of frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
In this issue of Neuron, Ash et al.
(2013) show that despite being noncoding the repeats are translated, leading to widespread neuronal aggregates of the translated proteins.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22216152
Direct observation of defects and increased ion permeability of a membrane induced by structurally disordered Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase aggregates.
Interactions between protein aggregates and a cellular membrane have been strongly implicated in many protein conformational diseases.
However, such interactions for the case of Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) protein, which is related to fatal neurodegenerative disorder amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), have not been explored yet.
For the first time, we report the direct observation of defect formation and increased ion permeability of a membrane induced by SOD1 aggregates using a supported lipid bilayer and membrane patches of human embryonic kidney cells as model membranes.
We observed that aggregated SOD1 significantly induced the formation of defects within lipid membranes and caused the perturbation of membrane permeability, based on surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy and electrophysiology.
In the case of apo SOD1 with an unfolded structure, we found that it bound to the lipid membrane surface and slightly perturbed membrane permeability, compared to other folded proteins (holo SOD1 and bovine serum albumin).
The changes in membrane integrity and permeability were found to be strongly dependent on the type of proteins and the amount of aggregates present.
We expect that the findings presented herein will advance our understanding of the pathway by which structurally disordered SOD1 aggregates exert toxicity in vivo.
© 2011 Choi et al.
PMID: 23791177
Eukaryotic stress granules are cleared by autophagy and Cdc48/VCP function.
Stress granules and P bodies are conserved cytoplasmic aggregates of nontranslating messenger ribonucleoprotein complexes (mRNPs) implicated in the regulation of mRNA translation and decay and are related to RNP granules in embryos, neurons, and pathological inclusions in some degenerative diseases.
Using baker's yeast, 125 genes were identified in a genetic screen that affected the dynamics of P bodies and/or stress granules.
Analyses of such mutants, including CDC48 alleles, provide evidence that stress granules can be targeted to the vacuole by autophagy, in a process termed granulophagy.
Moreover, stress granule clearance in mammalian cells is reduced by inhibition of autophagy or by depletion or pathogenic mutations in valosin-containing protein (VCP), the human ortholog of CDC48.
Because mutations in VCP predispose humans to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, frontotemporal lobar degeneration, inclusion body myopathy, and multisystem proteinopathy, this work suggests that autophagic clearance of stress granule related and pathogenic RNP granules that arise in degenerative diseases may be important in reducing their pathology.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22731673
Psychological wellbeing and quality of life in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a review.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a fatal neurodegenerative disease with a progressive and rapid course that, so far, cannot be stopped or reversed.
The psychological impact of the disease is huge, on both patients and caregivers.
This review summarizes studies that have investigated quality of life, depression, anxiety, pain, spiritual and existential issues, hope, and hopelessness in the ALS field, with attention to both patients and their caregivers.
Psychological support and the possible role of psychologists in the ALS field are also discussed.
PMID: 22419278
Riluzole for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)/motor neuron disease (MND).
Riluzole is approved for the treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in most countries.
Questions persist about its clinical utility because of high cost and modest efficacy.
To examine the efficacy of riluzole in prolonging survival and in delaying the use of surrogates (tracheostomy and mechanical ventilation) to sustain survival, and to assess the effect of riluzole upon functional health.
We searched the Cochrane Neuromuscular Disease Group Specialized Register (20 April 2011), the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) (2011, Issue 2), MEDLINE (1966 to April 2011), EMBASE (1980 to May 2011) and made enquiries of authors of trials, Aventis (manufacturer of riluzole) and other experts in the field.
Types of studies: randomized controlled trials Types of participants: adults with a diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Types of interventions: treatment with riluzole or placebo Types of outcome measures: Primary: pooled hazard ratio of tracheostomy-free survival over all time points with riluzole 100 mg.
Secondary: per cent mortality with riluzole 50 mg, 100 mg and 200 mg; neurologic function, muscle strength and adverse events.
One author performed data extraction and two other authors checked them.
One author checked the data and entered them into the computer.
The other authors verified the data entry.
We obtained missing data from the trial authors whenever possible.
The four trials examining tracheostomy-free survival included a total of 974 riluzole-treated patients and 503 placebo-treated patients.
No new randomized controlled trials were found when we updated the searches for this update in 2011.
The methodological quality was acceptable and three trials were easily comparable, although one trial (169 participants) included older patients in more advanced stages of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and one (195 participants) had multiple primary endpoints.
Riluzole 100 mg per day provided a benefit for the homogeneous group of patients in the first two trials (hazard ratio (HR) 0.80, 95% confidence internal (CI) 0.64 to 0.99, P= 0.042) and there was no evidence of heterogeneity (P = 0.33).
When the third trial (which included older and more seriously affected patients) was added, there was evidence of heterogeneity (P &lt; 0.0001) and the overall treatment effect was reduced but still significant (HR 0.84, 95% CI 0.698 to 0.997, P= 0.046).
This represented a 9% gain in the probability of surviving one year (49% in the placebo and 58% in the riluzole group), and increased median survival from 11.8 to 14.8 months.
There was a small beneficial effect on both bulbar and limb function, but not on muscle strength.
A three-fold increase in serum alanine transferase was more frequent in riluzole-treated patients than controls (mean difference 2.62, 95% CI 1.59 to 4.31).
Riluzole 100 mg daily is reasonably safe and probably prolongs median survival by about two to three months in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
PMID: 22890612
The role of D-amino acids in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis pathogenesis: a review.
A potential role for D-amino acids in motor neuron disease/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is emerging.
D-Serine, which is an activator/co-agonist at the N-methyl-D-aspartate glutamate receptor subtype, is elevated both in spinal cord from sporadic cases of ALS and in an animal model of ALS.
Furthermore, we have shown that a mutation in D-amino acid oxidase (DAO), an enzyme strongly localized to spinal cord motor neurons and brain stem motor nuclei, is associated with familial ALS.
DAO plays an important role in regulating levels of D-serine, and its function is impaired by the presence of this mutation and this may contribute to the pathogenic process in ALS.
In sporadic ALS cases, elevated D-serine may arise from induction of serine racemase, its synthetic enzyme, caused by cell stress and inflammatory processes thought to contribute to disease progression.
Both these abnormalities in D-serine metabolism lead to an increase in synaptic D-serine which may contribute to disease pathogenesis.
PMID: 23467416
Split hand syndrome in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: different excitability changes in the thenar and hypothenar motor axons.
In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), muscle wasting preferentially affects the abductor pollicis brevis (APB) and first dorsal interosseous over the abductor digit minimi (ADM), and this is termed 'split hand'.
Previous axonal excitability studies have suggested increased nodal persistent sodium current and reduced potassium current in motor axons in ALS, but the extent of excitability changes in APB and ADM axons in ALS has never been compared.
To elucidate the peripheral axonal pathophysiology of split hand.
In both APB and ADM motor axons of 21 patients with ALS and 17 age-matched normal controls, threshold tracking was used to measure excitability indices such as strength-duration time constant (SDTC; a measure of persistent sodium current) and threshold electrotonus.
In normal controls, SDTC was significantly longer for APB than ADM axons, suggesting that axonal excitability is physiologically higher in APB axons.
Compared with normal controls, patients with ALS had longer SDTC and greater threshold changes in depolarising threshold electrotonus in both APB and ADM axons.
Furthermore, the difference in extent of SDTC prolongation between normal subjects and patients with ALS was greater in APB than ADM axons.
APB axons have physiologically higher excitability than ADM axons, and, in ALS, the hyperexcitability is more prominent in APB axons.
Although cortical mechanisms would also be involved, more prominent hyperexcitability of APB axons may contribute to development of split hand, and the altered axonal properties are possibly associated with motor neuronal death in ALS.
PMID: 21838886
Identification of a novel biomarker candidate, a 4.8-kDa peptide fragment from a neurosecretory protein VGF precursor, by proteomic analysis of cerebrospinal fluid from children with acute encephalopathy using SELDI-TOF-MS.
Acute encephalopathy includes rapid deterioration and has a poor prognosis.
Early intervention is essential to prevent progression of the disease and subsequent neurologic complications.
However, in the acute period, true encephalopathy cannot easily be differentiated from febrile seizures, especially febrile seizures of the complex type.
Thus, an early diagnostic marker has been sought in order to enable early intervention.
The purpose of this study was to identify a novel marker candidate protein differentially expressed in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of children with encephalopathy using proteomic analysis.
For detection of biomarkers, CSF samples were obtained from 13 children with acute encephalopathy and 42 children with febrile seizure.
Mass spectral data were generated by surface-enhanced laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (SELDI-TOF MS) technology, which is currently applied in many fields of biological and medical sciences.
Diagnosis was made by at least two pediatric neurologists based on the clinical findings and routine examinations.
All specimens were collected for diagnostic tests and the remaining portion of the specimens were used for the SELDI-TOF MS investigations.
In experiment 1, CSF from patients with febrile seizures (n = 28), patients with encephalopathy (n = 8) (including influenza encephalopathy (n = 3), encephalopathy due to rotavirus (n = 1), human herpes virus 6 (n = 1)) were used for the SELDI analysis.
In experiment 2, SELDI analysis was performed on CSF from a second set of febrile seizure patients (n = 14) and encephalopathy patients (n = 5).
We found that the peak with an m/z of 4810 contributed the most to the separation of the two groups.
After purification and identification of the 4.8-kDa protein, a 4.8-kDa proteolytic peptide fragment from the neurosecretory protein VGF precursor (VGF4.8) was identified as a novel biomarker for encephalopathy.
Expression of VGF4.8 has been reported to be decreased in pathologically degenerative changes such as Alzheimer's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), frontotemporal dementia, and encephalopathy.
Thus, the VGF4.8 peptide might be a novel marker for degenerative brain conditions.
PMID: 23855710
The carbonylation and covalent dimerization of human superoxide dismutase 1 caused by its bicarbonate-dependent peroxidase activity is inhibited by the radical scavenger tempol.
Tempol (4-hydroxy-2,2,6,6-tetramethyl piperidine-1-oxyl) reduces tissue injury in animal models of various diseases via mechanisms that are not completely understood.
Recently, we reported that high doses of tempol moderately increased survival in a rat model of ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) while decreasing the levels of oxidized hSOD1 (human Cu,Zn-superoxide dismutase) in spinal cord tissues.
To better understand such a protective effect in vivo, we studied the effects of tempol on hSOD1 oxidation in vitro.
The chosen oxidizing system was the bicarbonate-dependent peroxidase activity of hSOD1 that consumes H2O2 to produce carbonate radical, which oxidizes the enzyme.
Most of the experiments were performed with 30 μM hSOD1, 25 mM bicarbonate, 1 mM H2O2, 0.1 mM DTPA (diethylenetriaminepenta-acetic acid) and 50 mM phosphate buffer at a final pH of 7.4.
The results showed that tempol (5-75 μM) does not inhibit hSOD1 turnover, but decreases its resulting oxidation to carbonylated and covalently dimerized forms.
Tempol acted by scavenging the carbonate radical produced and by recombining with hSOD1-derived radicals.
As a result, tempol was consumed nearly stoichiometrically with hSOD1 monomers.
MS analyses of turned-over hSOD1 and of a related peptide oxidized by the carbonate radical indicated the formation of a relatively unstable adduct between tempol and hSOD1-Trp32•.
Tempol consumption by the bicarbonate-dependent peroxidase activity of hSOD1 may be one of the reasons why high doses of tempol were required to afford protection in an ALS rat model.
Overall, the results of the present study confirm that tempol can protect against protein oxidation and the ensuing consequences.
PMID: 22445326
High frequency of the expanded C9ORF72 hexanucleotide repeat in familial and sporadic Greek ALS patients.
An intronic expansion of a hexanucleotide GGGGCC repeat in the C9ORF72 gene has recently been shown to be an important cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) in familial and sporadic cases.
The frequency has only been defined in a small number of populations where the highest sporadic rate was identified in Finland (21.1%) and the lowest in mainland Italy (4.1%).
We examined the C9ORF72 expansion in a series of 146 Greek ALS cases, 10.95% (n = 16) of cases carried the pathological expansion defined as greater than 30 repeats.
In the 10 familial ALS probands, 50% (n = 5) of them carried a pathologically large expansion.
In the remaining 136 sporadic ALS cases, 11 were carriers (8.2%).
None of the 228 Greek controls carried an expanded repeat.
The phenotype of our cases was spinal (13/16) or bulbar (3/16) ALS, the familial cases were all spinal ALS and none of our cases had behavioral frontotemporal dementia.
Expansions in the C9ORF72 gene therefore represent a common cause of ALS in Greece and this test will be diagnostically very important to implement in the Greek population.
The frequency is higher than other populations with the exception of Finland and this may be due to Greece being a relatively isolated population.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22956874
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and the clinical potential of dexpramipexole.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disorder that leads to progressive weakness from loss of motor neurons and death on average in less than 3 years after symptom onset.
No clear causes have been found and just one medication, riluzole, extends survival.
Researchers have identified some of the cellular processes that occur after disease onset, including mitochondrial dysfunction, protein aggregation, oxidative stress, excitotoxicity, inflammation, and apoptosis.
Mitochondrial disease may be a primary event in neurodegeneration or occur secondary to other cellular processes, and may itself contribute to oxidative stress, excitotoxicity, and apoptosis.
Clinical trials currently aim to slow disease progression by testing drugs that impact one or more of these pathways.
While every agent tested in the 18 years after the approval of riluzole has been ineffective, basic and clinical research methods in ALS have become dramatically more sophisticated.
Dexpramipexole (RPPX), the R(+) enantiomer of pramiprexole, which is approved for symptomatic treatment of Parkinson disease, carries perhaps the currently largest body of pre-and early clinical data that support testing in ALS.
The neuroprotective properties of RPPX in various models of neurodegeneration, including the ALS murine model, may be produced through protective actions on mitochondria.
Early phase trials in human ALS suggest that the drug can be taken safely by patients in doses that provide neuroprotection in preclinical models.
A Phase III trial to test the efficacy of RPPX in ALS is underway.
PMID: 22688111
[Living situation of the in-home patients suffering from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in Aichi prefecture, Japan].
It is essential that we know the real situation of at-home patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) in order to improve their medical support system.
We indirectly investigated the daily living status of ALS patients and their families at home by conducting on individual questionnaires survey for nurses working at public health centers in Aichi prefecture, Japan.
Detailed information about 136 cases was obtained, and we could clarify the need for variety of communication methods, plasticity of medical interrelations and care between neurologists and home doctors, incomplete utilization of social resources including various official support, overwork among single caregivers, and underdeveloped immature individual medical care support programs for them.
Thus it might be important that we should promote the sure utilization of social resources and programming the individual medical care support in their earlier stages.
And moreover, we should also consider constructing a general support system for at-home patients with ALS, in which each professional would owe the dividing responsibility, without role duplications.
These strategies would lead to overall the better quality of life among ALS patients, and their families.
PMID: 22496549
Motoneurons secrete angiogenin to induce RNA cleavage in astroglia.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is an incurable neurodegenerative disorder affecting motoneurons.
Mutations in angiogenin, encoding a member of the pancreatic RNase A superfamily, segregate with ALS.
We previously demonstrated that angiogenin administration shows promise as a neuroprotective therapeutic in studies using transgenic ALS mice and primary motoneuron cultures.
Its mechanism of action and target cells in the spinal cord, however, are largely unknown.
Using mixed motoneuron cultures, motoneuron-like NSC34 cells, and primary astroglia cultures as model systems, we here demonstrate that angiogenin is a neuronally secreted factor that is endocytosed by astroglia and mediates neuroprotection in paracrine.
We show that wild-type angiogenin acts unidirectionally to induce RNA cleavage in astroglia, while the ALS-associated K40I mutant is also secreted and endocytosed, but fails to induce RNA cleavage.
Angiogenin uptake into astroglia requires heparan sulfate proteoglycans, and engages clathrin-mediated endocytosis.
We show that this uptake mechanism exists for mouse and human angiogenin, and delivers a functional RNase output.
Moreover, we identify syndecan 4 as the angiogenin receptor mediating the selective uptake of angiogenin into astroglia.
Our data provide new insights into the paracrine activities of angiogenin in the nervous system, and further highlight the critical role of non-neuronal cells in the pathogenesis of ALS.
PMID: 22410787
Converted neural cells: induced to a cure?
Many neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson's disease (PD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and others often occur as a result of progressive loss of structure or function of neurons.
Recently, many groups were able to generate neural cells, either differentiated from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) or converted from somatic cells.
Advances in converted neural cells have opened a new era to ease applications for modeling diseases and screening drugs.
In addition, the converted neural cells also hold the promise for cell replacement therapy (Kikuchi et al., 2011; Krencik et al., 2011; Kriks et al., 2011; Nori et al., 2011; Rhee et al., 2011; Schwartz et al., 2012).
Here we will mainly discuss most recent progress on using converted functional neural cells to treat neurological diseases and highlight potential clinical challenges and future perspectives.
PMID: 23287963
A system mathematical model of a cell-cell communication network in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating and chronic neurodegenerative disease without any known cure.
In the brain and spinal cord of both patients and animal models with ALS, neuroinflammation is a prominent pathological hallmark which is characterized by infiltrating T cells at sites of motor neuron injury.
Their presence in mutant Cu(2+)/Zn(2+) superoxide dismutase (mSOD1) induced ALS plays an important role in shifting the response of microglia from neuroprotective to neurotoxic.
In order to better understand how these cells and their communication network collectively modulate the disease progression, we have established a mathematical model integrating diverse cells and cytokines.
According to the experimental data sets, we first refined this model by identifying a link between TGFβ and M1 microglia which can produce an optimized model to fit data sets better.
Then based on this model, parameters were estimated using genetic algorithm.
Sensitivity analysis of these parameters identified several factors such as the release rate of IFNγ by T helper 1 (Th1) cells, which may be related to the heterogeneity between the patients with different survival times.
Furthermore, the tests on T cell based therapeutic strategies indicated that elimination of Th1 cells is the most effective approach extending survival time.
This confirmed the dominant role of Th1 cells in leading the rapid disorder in the later stage of ALS.
For the therapies targeting cytokines, injection of IL6 can essentially augment the neuroprotective response and extend the life effectively by elevating the level of IL4, a neuroprotective cytokine, while directly injected IL4 will decay rapidly in the ALS microenvironment and cannot provide a persistent protective effect.
On the other hand, in spite of the attractive effect of direct elimination of mSOD1 or self-antigen, it is difficult to implement in CNS.
As an alternative, elimination of IFNγ can be chosen as another effective therapy.
In the future, if we combine the side effects of different therapies, this model can be used to optimize the therapeutic strategies so that they can effectively improve survival rates and quality of life for patients with ALS.
PMID: 23259505
Modeling delay to diagnosis for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: under reporting and incidence estimates.
This paper provides a strategy to obtain a reliable estimate of the incidence rate for Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis based on data from the National Registry of Rare Diseases (NRRD).
In fact, unobserved cases may be due to the fact that a long time may intercour between the suspect of having the disease (onset) and the date the disease is diagnosed.
Potential factors that may influence the probability of experiencing the event (diagnosis) conditionally on the onset (suspected) are investigated.
Since we are treating rare diseases, the role of social and economic factors is not that obvious; latent as well as observed factors may influence the delay to diagnosis.
We use a semiparametric estimator based on the distribution of delay to diagnosis to account for potential underreporting.
In particular, we propose to adopt an Horvitz-Thompson based estimator to correct the incidence figure that can be derived for the period 2007-2009 from the NRRD, Italy.
The incidence estimates obtained by adopting the proposed approach are about 1 case per 100000 inhabitants and despite they let recovering a good part of underreporting, they are still far from ALS incidence international ranges between 1.5 and 2.5.
However, by looking only at northern Italy, the incidence estimates we can derive are coherent with those known internationally.
These results confirm the existence of substantial differences in reporting accuracy, and point out where the system of data collection must be improved.
In particular, when reliable individual characteristics will be available, they could be employed to refine the proposed estimator.
PMID: 22775117
First assessment at home of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients by a nutrition network in the French region of Limousin.
Malnutrition is associated with poor survival among patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
This study aimed to evaluate nutritional assessment by a network during first consultations in patients' homes.
Patients identified by the regional ALS centre gave their informed consent.
Assessment included functional, nutritional issues, evaluation of the need for help, whether personal or the use of aids, and noted any dietary supplementation and modification of the texture of food.
Forty patients were seen a mean of 7.4 months after diagnosis; 52.5% had bulbar disease, 7.5% were malnourished; 29.4 ± 10.1 kcal/kg/day were consumed and protein intake was 1.3 ± 0.5 g/kg/day.
Thirty-five percent of patients were anorexic, 43.8% reported taste disorders, and 70% had dysphagia, significantly associated with salivary stasis.
Only 30% of dysphagic patients ate texture-modified food, and 90% of patients with problems drinking liquids did not use a thickener.
In conclusion, assessment at home by a nutritional network can be conducted promptly.
Malnutrition is rare in early disease, despite the fact that patients' diets are often low in energy and dysphagia is common.
Unexpected taste disorders are detected.
Dysphagia is very common but inadequately addressed.
Consequently, home assessment by the network led several beneficial interventions.
PMID: 22873722
Biomarkers in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: is there a neurovascular pathway?
The establishment of a link between VEGF, hypoxia and ALS pathogenesis placed angiogenic factors and oxidative stress at the focal point for further studies.
Recreation of a phenotype strikingly similar to that of mutant SOD1 mouse and human ALS, like muscle weakness and atrophy owing to lower motor neuron degeneration was observed following the targeted deletion of the hypoxia response element (HRE) from promoter of mouse vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).
The crucial link between vasculature, angiogenic molecules and motor neuron degeneration has thus been constantly scrutinized.
In this review, we have proposed to correlate human, in vitro and cadaveric studies so as to find out whether molecules like VEGF and various others, at the interface of neurovascular network and oxidative stress, have a prognostic, diagnostic and therapeutic potential for treatment of a fatal neurodegenerative disorder namely ALS.
PMID: 22863194
Exome sequencing identifies FUS mutations as a cause of essential tremor.
Essential tremor (ET) is a common neurodegenerative disorder that is characterized by a postural or motion tremor.
Despite a strong genetic basis, a gene with rare pathogenic mutations that cause ET has not yet been reported.
We used exome sequencing to implement a simple approach to control for misdiagnosis of ET, as well as phenocopies involving sporadic and senile ET cases.
We studied a large ET-affected family and identified a FUS p.Gln290(∗) mutation as the cause of ET in this family.
Further screening of 270 ET cases identified two additional rare missense FUS variants.
Functional considerations suggest that the pathogenic effects of ET-specific FUS mutations are different from the effects observed when FUS is mutated in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis cases; we have shown that the ET FUS nonsense mutation is degraded by the nonsense-mediated-decay pathway, whereas amyotrophic lateral sclerosis FUS mutant transcripts are not.
Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22454397
Evaluating the role of the FUS/TLS-related gene EWSR1 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease affecting motor neurons.
Mutations in related RNA-binding proteins TDP-43, FUS/TLS and TAF15 have been connected to ALS.
These three proteins share several features, including the presence of a bioinformatics-predicted prion domain, aggregation-prone nature in vitro and in vivo and toxic effects when expressed in multiple model systems.
Given these commonalities, we hypothesized that a related protein, EWSR1 (Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1), might also exhibit similar properties and therefore could contribute to disease.
Here, we report an analysis of EWSR1 in multiple functional assays, including mutational screening in ALS patients and controls.
We identified three missense variants in EWSR1 in ALS patients, which were absent in a large number of healthy control individuals.
We show that disease-specific variants affect EWSR1 localization in motor neurons.
We also provide multiple independent lines of in vitro and in vivo evidence that EWSR1 has similar properties as TDP-43, FUS and TAF15, including aggregation-prone behavior in vitro and ability to confer neurodegeneration in Drosophila.
Postmortem analysis of sporadic ALS cases also revealed cytoplasmic mislocalization of EWSR1.
Together, our studies highlight a potential role for EWSR1 in ALS, provide a collection of functional assays to be used to assess roles of additional RNA-binding proteins in disease and support an emerging concept that a class of aggregation-prone RNA-binding proteins might contribute broadly to ALS and related neurodegenerative diseases.
PMID: 23506861
The SLC1 high-affinity glutamate and neutral amino acid transporter family.
Glutamate transporters play important roles in the termination of excitatory neurotransmission and in providing cells throughout the body with glutamate for metabolic purposes.
The high-affinity glutamate transporters EAAC1 (SLC1A1), GLT1 (SLC1A2), GLAST (SLC1A3), EAAT4 (SLC1A6), and EAAT5 (SLC1A7) mediate the cellular uptake of glutamate by the co-transport of three sodium ions (Na(+)) and one proton (H(+)), with the counter-transport of one potassium ion (K(+)).
Thereby, they protect the CNS from glutamate-induced neurotoxicity.
Loss of function of glutamate transporters has been implicated in the pathogenesis of several diseases, including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Alzheimer's disease.
In addition, glutamate transporters play a role in glutamate excitotoxicity following an ischemic stroke, due to reversed glutamate transport.
Besides glutamate transporters, the SLC1 family encompasses two transporters of neutral amino acids, ASCT1 (SLC1A4) and ASCT2 (SLC1A5).
Both transporters facilitate electroneutral exchange of amino acids in neurons and/or cells of the peripheral tissues.
Some years ago, a high resolution structure of an archaeal homologue of the SLC1 family was determined, followed by the elucidation of its structure in the presence of the substrate aspartate and the inhibitor d,l-threo-benzyloxy aspartate (d,l-TBOA).
Historically, the first few known inhibitors of SLC1 transporters were based on constrained glutamate analogs which were active in the high micromolar range but often also showed off-target activity at glutamate receptors.
Further development led to the discovery of l-threo-β-hydroxyaspartate derivatives, some of which effectively inhibited SLC1 transporters at nanomolar concentrations.
More recently, small molecule inhibitors have been identified whose structures are not based on amino acids.
Activators of SLC1 family members have also been discovered but there are only a few examples known.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22944662
TDP-43 in central nervous system development and function: clues to TDP-43-associated neurodegeneration.
From the earliest stages of embryogenesis and throughout life, transcriptional regulation is carefully orchestrated in order to generate, shape, and reshape the central nervous system (CNS).
TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) is identified as a regulator of essential transcriptional events in the CNS.
Evidence for its importance comes from the identification of TDP-43 protein aggregates and genetic mutations in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration.
Efforts are being made to learn more about the biological function of TDP-43 and gain a better understanding of its role in neurodegeneration.
TDP-43 RNA targets and protein interactions have now been identified, and in vivo evidence shows that TDP-43 is essential in CNS development and function.
This review will highlight aspects of these findings.
PMID: 22918236
TLS/FUS: a protein in cancer and ALS.
Comment on: Tan AY, et al.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2012; 109:6030-5.
PMID: 23453347
Lithium in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (LiCALS): a phase 3 multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
Lithium has neuroprotective effects in cell and animal models of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and a small pilot study in patients with ALS showed a significant effect of lithium on survival.
We aimed to assess whether lithium improves survival in patients with ALS.
The lithium carbonate in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (LiCALS) trial is a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of oral lithium taken daily for 18 months in patients with ALS.
Patients aged at least 18 years who had ALS according to the revised El Escorial criteria, had disease duration between 6 and 36 months, and were taking riluzole were recruited from ten centres in the UK.
Patients were randomly assigned (1:1) to receive either lithium or matched placebo tablets.
Randomisation was via an online system done at the level of the individual by block randomisation with randomly varying block sizes, stratified by study centre and site of disease onset (limb or bulbar).
All patients and assessing study personnel were masked to treatment assignment.
The primary endpoint was the rate of survival at 18 months and was analysed by intention to treat.
This study is registered with Eudract, number 2008-006891-31.
Between May 26, 2009, and Nov 10, 2011, 243 patients were screened, 214 of whom were randomly assigned to receive lithium (107 patients) or placebo (107 patients).
Two patients discontinued treatment and one died before the target therapeutic lithium concentration could be achieved.
63 (59%) of 107 patients in the placebo group and 54 (50%) of 107 patients in the lithium group were alive at 18 months.
The survival functions did not differ significantly between groups (Mantel-Cox log-rank χ(2) on 1 df=1·64; p=0·20).
After adjusting for study centre and site of onset using logistic regression, the relative odds of survival at 18 months (lithium vs placebo) was 0·71 (95% CI 0·40-1·24).
56 patients in the placebo group and 61 in the lithium group had at least one serious adverse event.
We found no evidence of benefit of lithium on survival in patients with ALS, but nor were there safety concerns, which had been identified in previous studies with less conventional designs.
This finding emphasises the importance of pursuing adequately powered trials with clear endpoints when testing new treatments.
The Motor Neurone Disease Association of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23281025
Early interneuron dysfunction in ALS: insights from a mutant sod1 zebrafish model.
To determine, when, how, and which neurons initiate the onset of pathophysiology in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) using a transgenic mutant sod1 zebrafish model and identify neuroprotective drugs.
Proteinopathies such as ALS involve mutant proteins that misfold and activate the heat shock stress response (HSR).
The HSR is indicative of neuronal stress, and we used a fluorescent hsp70-DsRed reporter in our transgenic zebrafish to track neuronal stress and to measure functional changes in neurons and muscle over the course of the disease.
We show that mutant sod1 fish first exhibited the HSR in glycinergic interneurons at 24 hours postfertilization (hpf).
By 96 hpf, we observed a significant reduction in spontaneous glycinergic currents induced in spinal motor neurons.
The loss of inhibition was followed by increased stress in the motor neurons of symptomatic adults and concurrent morphological changes at the neuromuscular junction (NMJ) indicative of denervation.
Riluzole, the only approved ALS drug and apomorphine, an NRF2 activator, reduced the observed early neuronal stress response.
The earliest event in the pathophysiology of ALS in the mutant sod1 zebrafish model involves neuronal stress in inhibitory interneurons, resulting from mutant Sod1 expression.
This is followed by a reduction in inhibitory input to motor neurons.
The loss of inhibitory input may contribute to the later development of neuronal stress in motor neurons and concurrent inability to maintain the NMJ.
Riluzole, the approved drug for use in ALS, modulates neuronal stress in interneurons, indicating a novel mechanism of riluzole action.
Copyright © 2012 American Neurological Association.
PMID: 22703530
Selected statins produce rapid spinal motor neuron loss in vitro.
Hmg-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) are widely used to prevent disease associated with vascular disease and hyperlipidemia.
Although side effects are uncommon, clinical observations suggest statin exposure may exacerbate neuromuscular diseases, including peripheral neuropathy and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Although some have postulated class-effects, prior studies of hepatocytes and myocytes indicate that the statins may exhibit differential effects.
Studies of neuronal cells have been limited.
We examined the effects of statins on cultured neurons and Schwann cells.
Cultured spinal motor neurons were grown on transwell inserts and assessed for viability using immunochemical staining for SMI-32.
Cultured cortical neurons and Schwann cells were assessed using dynamic viability markers.
7 days of exposure to fluvastatin depleted spinal motor neurons in a dose-dependent manner with a KD of &lt; 2 μM.
Profound neurite loss was observed after 4 days exposure in culture.
Other statins were found to produce toxic effects at much higher concentrations.
In contrast, no such toxicity was observed for cultured Schwann cells or cortical neurons.
It is known from pharmacokinetic studies that daily treatment of young adults with fluvastatin can produce serum levels in the single micromolar range.
We conclude that specific mechanisms may explain neuromuscular disease worsening with statins and further study is needed.
PMID: 21764635
Awaji ALS criteria increase the diagnostic sensitivity in patients with bulbar onset.
To assess whether Awaji criteria improve the sensitivity of diagnosis for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
In Awaji ALS criteria, fasciculation potentials are regarded as evidence of acute denervation in the presence of chronic neurogenic changes on needle electromyography.
We reviewed clinical and neurophysiological data of 113 consecutive patients who were suspected as suffering ALS.
The six muscles (trapezius, biceps, first dorsal interosseous, T10-paraspinalis, vastus lateralis, and tibialis anterior muscles) were examined by EMG, focusing on the presence of fasciculation potentials.
The sensitivity of revised El Escorial (R-EEC) and Awaji criteria was compared.
Probable or definite ALS was diagnosed in 61% of the patients by R-EEC and 71% by Awaji criteria.
By applying Awaji criteria; (1) 17 of the 44 patients categorized as possible ALS by R-EEC reached to probable/definite ALS, 11 of whom had bulbar onset, (2) in 48 patients with bulbar onset, the proportion of probable/definite ALS increased from 59% to 82%, (3) in 62 patients with limb onset, the proportion of probable/definite ALS was 61% (63% by R-EEC).
Awaji criteria improve the sensitivity of ALS diagnosis in patients with bulbar onset, but not in those with limb onset.
Accepting fasciculation potentials as evidence of acute denervation increases the diagnostic sensitivity of ALS, particularly in patients with bulbar onset, and contributes to early diagnosis.
Copyright © 2011 International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology.
Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21937428
Alsin and SOD1(G93A) proteins regulate endosomal reactive oxygen species production by glial cells and proinflammatory pathways responsible for neurotoxicity.
Recent studies have implicated enhanced Nox2-mediated reactive oxygen species (ROS) by microglia in the pathogenesis of motor neuron death observed in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
In this context, ALS mutant forms of SOD1 enhance Rac1 activation, leading to increased Nox2-dependent microglial ROS production and neuron cell death in mice.
It remains unclear if other genetic mutations that cause ALS also function through similar Nox-dependent pathways to enhance ROS-mediate motor neuron death.
In the present study, we sought to understand whether alsin, which is mutated in an inherited juvenile form of ALS, functionally converges on Rac1-dependent pathways acted upon by SOD1(G93A) to regulate Nox-dependent ROS production.
Our studies demonstrate that glial cell expression of SOD1(G93A) or wild type alsin induces ROS production, Rac1 activation, secretion of TNFα, and activation of NFκB, leading to decreased motor neuron survival in co-culture.
Interestingly, coexpression of alsin, or shRNA against Nox2, with SOD1(G93A) in glial cells attenuated these proinflammatory indicators and protected motor neurons in co-culture, although shRNAs against Nox1 and Nox4 had little effect.
SOD1(G93A) expression dramatically enhanced TNFα-mediated endosomal ROS in glial cells in a Rac1-dependent manner and alsin overexpression inhibited SOD1(G93A)-induced endosomal ROS and Rac1 activation.
SOD1(G93A) expression enhanced recruitment of alsin to the endomembrane compartment in glial cells, suggesting that these two proteins act to modulate Nox2-dependent endosomal ROS and proinflammatory signals that modulate NFκB.
These studies suggest that glial proinflammatory signals regulated by endosomal ROS are influenced by two gene products known to cause ALS.
PMID: 23616585
Riluzole exerts central and peripheral modulating effects in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Riluzole, a benzothiazole derivative, has been shown to be effective in prolonging survival in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The mechanisms by which riluzole exerts neuroprotective effects in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis remains to be fully elucidated, although inhibition of glutamatergic transmission and modulation of Na+ channel function have been proposed.
In an attempt to determine the mechanisms by which riluzole exerts neuroprotective effects, in particular to dissect the relative contributions of inhibition of glutamatergic transmission and Na+ channel modulation, the present study utilized a combination of cortical and peripheral axonal excitability approaches to monitor changes in excitability and function in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Cortical assessment was undertaken by utilising the threshold tracking transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) technique and combined with peripheral axonal excitability studies in 25 patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Studies were performed at baseline and repeated when patients were receiving riluzole 100 mg/day.
At the time of second testing all patients were tolerating the medication well.
Motor evoked potential and compound muscle action potential responses were recorded over the abductor pollicis brevis muscle.
At baseline, features of cortical hyperexcitability were evident in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, indicated by marked reduction in short interval intracortical inhibition (P &lt; 0.001) and cortical silent period duration (P &lt; 0.001), as well as an increase in the motor evoked potential amplitude (P &lt; 0.01).
Riluzole therapy partially normalized cortical excitability by significantly increasing short interval intracortical inhibition (short interval intracortical inhibitionbaseline 0.5 ± 1.8%; short interval intracortical inhibitionON riluzole 7.9 ± 1.7%, P &lt; 0.01).
In contrast, riluzole did not exert any modulating effect on cortical silent period duration (P = 0.45) or motor evoked potential amplitude (P = 0.31).
In terms of peripheral nerve function, axonal excitability studies established that, relative to control subjects, patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis had significant increases in depolarizing threshold electrotonus [amyotrophic lateral sclerosisbaseline TEd (90-100 ms) 49.1 ± 1.8%; controlsTEd (90-100 ms) 45.2 ± 0.6%, P &lt; 0.01] and superexcitability (amyotrophic lateral sclerosisbaseline 30.1 ± 2.3%; control subjects 23.4 ± 1.0%, P &lt; 0.01) at baseline.
Following institution of riluzole therapy there was a significant reduction in superexcitability (amyotrophic lateral sclerosisbaseline 30.1 ± 2.3%; amyotrophic lateral sclerosisON riluzole 27.3 ± 2.3%, P &lt; 0.05) and refractoriness at 2 ms (amyotrophic lateral sclerosisbaseline 98.7 ± 10.7%; amyotrophic lateral sclerosisON riluzole 67.8 ± 9.3%, P &lt; 0.001).
In conclusion, the present study has established that riluzole exerts effects on both central and peripheral nerve function, interpreted as partial normalization of cortical hyperexcitability and reduction of transient Na+ conductances.
Taken together, these findings suggest that the neuroprotective effects of riluzole in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis are complex, with evidence of independent effects across both compartments of the nervous system.
PMID: 22190368
Angiogenin variants in Parkinson disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Several studies have suggested an increased frequency of variants in the gene encoding angiogenin (ANG) in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Interestingly, a few ALS patients carrying ANG variants also showed signs of Parkinson disease (PD).
Furthermore, relatives of ALS patients have an increased risk to develop PD, and the prevalence of concomitant motor neuron disease in PD is higher than expected based on chance occurrence.
We therefore investigated whether ANG variants could predispose to both ALS and PD.
We reviewed all previous studies on ANG in ALS and performed sequence experiments on additional samples, which allowed us to analyze data from 6,471 ALS patients and 7,668 controls from 15 centers (13 from Europe and 2 from the USA).
We sequenced DNA samples from 3,146 PD patients from 6 centers (5 from Europe and 1 from the USA).
Statistical analysis was performed using the variable threshold test, and the Mantel-Haenszel procedure was used to estimate odds ratios.
Analysis of sequence data from 17,258 individuals demonstrated a significantly higher frequency of ANG variants in both ALS and PD patients compared to control subjects (p = 9.3 × 10(-6) for ALS and p = 4.3 × 10(-5) for PD).
The odds ratio for any ANG variant in patients versus controls was 9.2 for ALS and 6.7 for PD.
The data from this multicenter study demonstrate that there is a strong association between PD, ALS, and ANG variants.
ANG is a genetic link between ALS and PD.
Copyright © 2011 American Neurological Association.
PMID: 22903028
A miRNA signature in leukocytes from sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive and seriously disabling adult-onset neurological disease.
Accumulating evidence indicates that various miRNAs, expressed in a spatially and temporally controlled manner in the brain, play a key role in neuronal development.
In addition, misregulation of microRNAs contributes to some mental disorders and neurodegeneration diseases.
Here, we analyzed the expression profiles of 911 human miRNAs using microarray technology in leukocytes, the most readily available human tissue cells, obtained from 8 patients affected by sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (sALS) and 12 healthy controls.
An independent group of 14 sALS patients and 14 controls was used for validation by TaqMan real-time polymerase chain reaction assay.
We identified 8 miRNAs that were significantly up- or downregulated in sALS patients as compared to healthy controls.
The significant variations in miRNAs profiles detected in leukocytes have been related to miRNAs predominantly expressed in the nervous system.
One of these miRNAs, miR-338-3p, has previously been shown to be de-regulated in ALS brains.
This study, for the first time, detected specific microRNAs disease-related changes at an earlier stage of sALS.
We suggest that miRNAs profiles found in the peripheral blood leukocytes from sALS patients can be relevant to understand the pathogenesis of sALS and/or used as biomarkers of the disease.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22220157
An Autopsy Case of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis with Waldenström Macroglobulinemia and Anti-MAG Gammopathy.
We report the case of a 71-year-old woman with typical signs of bulbar amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) associated with immunoglobulin M (IgM) monoclonal gammopathy and anti-MAG (myelin-associated glycoprotein) antibodies.
This unusual association between ALS and anti-MAG antibodies has previously been reported in a single case.
Our present case, at neuropathological examination, demonstrated no causative link between anti-MAG antibodies and ALS.
PMID: 23567123
Perivascular, but not parenchymal, cerebral engraftment of donor cells after non-myeloablative bone marrow transplantation.
Myeloablative (MyA) bone marrow transplantation (BMT) results in robust engraftment of BMT-derived cells in the central nervous system (CNS) and is neuroprotective in diverse experimental models of neurodegenerative diseases of the brain and retina.
However, MyA irradiation is associated with significant morbidity and mortality and does not represent a viable therapeutic option for the elderly.
Non-myeloablative (NMyA) BMT is less toxic, but it is not known if the therapeutic efficacy observed with MyA BMT is preserved.
As a first step to address this important gap in knowledge, we evaluated and compared engraftment characteristics of BMT-derived monocytes/microglia using several clinically relevant NMyA pretransplant conditioning regimens in C57BL/6 mice.
These included chemotherapy (fludarabine and cyclophosphamide) with or without 2 Gy irradiation, and 5.5 Gy irradiation alone.
Each regimen was followed by transplantation of whole bone marrow from green fluorescent protein-expressing wild type (wt) mice.
While stable hematopoietic engraftment occurred, to varying degrees, in all NMyA regimens, only 5.5 Gy irradiation resulted in significant engraftment of BMT-derived cells in the brain, where these cells were exclusively localized to perivascular, leptomeningeal, and related anatomic regions.
Engraftment in retina under 5.5 Gy NMyA conditions was significantly reduced compared to MyA, but robust engraftment was identified in the optic nerve.
Advancing the therapeutic applications of BMT to neurodegenerative diseases will require identification of the barrier mechanisms that MyA, but not NMyA, BMT is able to overcome.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23644307
Protein aggregates and regional disease spread in ALS is reminiscent of prion-like pathogenesis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) typically commences in a discrete location in a limb or bulbar territory muscles and then spreads to the adjacent anatomical regions.
This pattern is consistent with a contiguous spread of the disease process in motor neuron network resulting in progressive motor weakness.
The etiology of ALS onset and the mechanism of the regional ALS spread remain elusive.
Over the past 5 years, identification of mutations in two RNA binding proteins, trans active response (TAR) DNA-binding protein (TDP-43) and fused in sarcoma (FUS), in patients with familial ALS has led to a major shift in our understanding of the ALS disease mechanism.
In addition to their role in RNA metabolism, TDP-43 and FUS form protein aggregates in the affected neurons.
More recent findings demonstrating that both TDP-43 and FUS contain glutamine/asparagine (Q/N) residue-rich prion-like domains have spurred intense research interest.
This brief review discusses the prion-related domains in TDP-43 and FUS and their implication in protein aggregate formation and disease spread in ALS.
PMID: 22234492
Association of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Behcet's disease: is there a relationship? A multi-national case series.
Neurological involvement may be seen in 5-30% of the patients with Behcet's disease (BD).
Occasionally, parenchymal neurological involvement in BD can present as a spinal cord syndrome.
However, motor neuron disease-like presentation is extremely uncommon.
Here we are reporting five patients (all male; median age, 38) fulfilling both International Study Group criteria for BD and El Escorial criteria for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
These patients were identified by a questionnaire sent to the members of the Neuro-Behcet Study Group of the International Study Group for BD.
Three out of five patients had only motor presentations.
In two patients, sensory and urinary manifestations were present as well.
Spinal cord MRIs were normal in all, and brain MRIs were normal in four patients; one patient had nonspecific white matter changes.
Two patients passed away 1-3 years after diagnosis of ALS, and two patients were lost to follow-up 3 and 11 years after admission; one patient is still alive 3 years after onset.
The patients that are presented here might represent a rare form of neurological involvement in BD as well as sole coincidence.
Larger prospective series are needed to further answer this issue.
PMID: 23330590
Movement-related cortical potentials in ALS increase at lower and decrease at higher upper motor neuron burden scores.
Our aim was to investigate changes in movement-related cortical potentials (MRCPs) in ALS patients with different degrees of upper motor neuron (UMN) involvement.
Since respiratory failure is the main cause of death in ALS, changes in inspiratory-related (sniffing) potentials were studied in addition to finger-flexion-related potentials.
Subjects (21 ALS, 19 controls) performed two self-paced motor tasks while their EEGs were recorded.
The first task required flexions of the right index finger and the second, brisk nasal inspirations.
The early (BP1), late (BP2) and motor potential (MP) components of MRCPs were evaluated.
Results showed that patients generated higher MRCPs than controls.
However, this effect was most significant in the subgroup of patients with low UMN burden (LUB).
The high UMN burden (HUB) subgroup did not differ from controls, but had significantly lower MP amplitudes than the LUB subgroup.
Progressive UMN deterioration was associated with an initial increase, followed by a later decrease, in MP amplitudes in ALS.
In conclusion, the increased MRCPs in LUB compared to HUB patients indicate different processes of ALS pathophysiology that force opposing changes in MRCP amplitudes.
PMID: 22152722
Severe brain atrophy after long-term survival seen in siblings with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and a mutation in the optineurin gene: a case series.
Previous studies have shown widespread multisystem degeneration in patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis who develop a total locked-in state and survive under mechanical ventilation for a prolonged period of time.
However, the disease progressions reported in these studies were several years after disease onset.
There have been no reports of long-term follow-up with brain imaging of patients with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis at an advanced stage of the disease.
We report the cases of siblings with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with homozygous deletions of the exon 5 mutation of the gene encoding optineurin, in whom brain computed tomography scans were followed up for more than 20 years.
The patients were a Japanese brother and sister.
The elder sister was 33 years of age at the onset of disease, which began with muscle weakness of her left lower limb.
Two years later she required mechanical ventilation.
She became bedridden at the age of 34, and died at the age of 57.
A computed tomography scan of her brain at the age of 36 revealed no abnormality.
Atrophy of her brain gradually progressed.
Ten years after the onset of mechanical ventilation, atrophy of her whole brain, including the cerebral cortex, brain stem and cerebellum, markedly progressed.
Her younger brother was 36 years of age at the onset of disease, which presented as muscle weakness of his left upper limb.
One year later, he showed dysphagia and dysarthria, and tracheostomy ventilation was performed.
He became bedridden at the age of 37 and died at the age of 55.
There were no abnormal intracranial findings on brain computed tomography scans obtained at the age of 37 years.
At the age of 48 years, computed tomography scans showed marked brain atrophy with ventricular dilatation.
Subsequently, atrophy of the whole brain rapidly progressed as in his elder sister.
We conclude that a homozygous deletion-type mutation in the optineurin gene may be associated with widespread multisystem degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
PMID: 21678031
Molecular dissection of TDP-43 proteinopathies.
TDP-43 has been identified as a major component of ubiquitin-positive tau-negative cytoplasmic inclusions in frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive inclusions (FTLD-U) and in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
We raised antibodies to phosphopeptides representing 36 out of 64 candidate phosphorylation sites of human TDP-43 and showed that the antibodies to pS379, pS403/404, pS409, pS410 and pS409/410 labeled the inclusions, but not the nuclei.
Immunoblot analyses demonstrated that the antibodies recognized TDP-43 at ~45 kDa, smearing substances and 18-26 kDa C-terminal fragments.
Furthermore, the band patterns of the C-terminal fragments differed between neuropathological subtypes, but were indistinguishable between brain regions and spinal cord in each individual patient.
Protease treatment of Sarkosyl-insoluble TDP-43 suggests that the different band patterns of the C-terminal fragments reflect different conformations of abnormal TDP-43 molecules between the diseases.
These results suggest that molecular species of abnormal TDP-43 are different between the diseases and that they propagate from affected cells to other cells during disease progression and determine the clinicopathological phenotypes of the diseases.
PMID: 21678037
Defective neuromuscular transmission in the SOD1 G93A transgenic mouse improves after administration of human umbilical cord blood cells.
To assess the effect of human umbilical cord blood (hUCB) transplantation on neuromuscular transmission in SOD1(G93A) transgenic mice, we studied the probability of neuromuscular transmission (PNMT), a relevant physiological indicator of motor nerve function, in 3 SOD1(G93A) mice transplanted with hUCB and compared to PNMT in 4 SOD1(G93A) mice without cell transplantation and 3 non-mutant SOD1 transgenic mice.
For preparations isolated from non-mutant SOD1 transgenic mice, PNMT was 0.93 and 0.84 during the first 5 s of 70 and 90 Hz trains, respectively.
PNMT gradually declined to 0.77 and 0.42 at the end of the trains.
In striking contrast, PNMT for preparations from non-treated mutant SOD1(G93A) mice was 0.52 and 0.36 in the first 5 s of 70 and 90 Hz trains, respectively (p&lt;0.05).
Treatment with hUCB significantly (p&lt;0.05) improved PNMT in SOD1(G93A) preparations.
That is, the initial 5 s PNMT was 0.88 and 0.68 for the 70 and 90 Hz stimuli, respectively.
We concluded that hUCB transplantation significantly improved PNMT for muscles removed from SOD1(G93A) mice.
Testing PNMT in the SOD1(G93A) mouse model could be used as a simple in vitro protocol to detect a positive cellular response to therapeutic interventions in ALS.
PMID: 21836033
The syndrome of cognitive impairment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a population-based study.
Despite considerable interest, the population-based frequency, clinical characteristics and natural history of cognitive impairment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) are not known.
The authors undertook a prospective population-based study of cognitive function in 160 incident Irish ALS patients and 110 matched controls.
Home-based visits were conducted to collect demographic and neuropsychological data.
Patients were classified using the recently published consensus criteria and by a domain-based classification of both executive and non-executive cognitive processes.
13.8% of patients fulfilled the Neary criteria for frontotemporal dementia.
In addition, 34.1% of ALS patients without evidence of dementia fulfilled the recently published consensus criteria for cognitive impairment.
Non-demented ALS patients had a significantly higher frequency of impairment in language and memory domains compared to healthy controls.
These deficits occurred primarily in patients with executive dysfunction.
14% of ALS patients had evidence of cognitive impairment without executive dysfunction, and no cognitive abnormality was detected in almost half the cohort (46.9%).
Co-morbid dementia occurs in approximately 14% of patients with a new diagnosis of ALS.
Cognitive impairment, predominantly but not exclusively in the form executive dysfunction, is present in more than 40% of ALS patients who have no evidence of dementia.
Cognitive impairment in ALS is not a universal feature, and its manifestations may be more heterogeneous than previously recognised.
PMID: 22849988
[Diagnosis and management of cervical spondylosis].
Cervical spondylosis, which can present as radiculopathy and myelopathy, is common in people over the age of 50.
Since evidence of radiological spondylotic change is frequently found in many asymptomatic adults, it is necessary to assess whether neurological symptoms result from cervical spondylosis or other neurological disorders.
In order to avoid misdiagnosis, it is important to compare the levels of the lesions shown on imaging with the clinical findings.
Differential diagnosis between amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and cervical spondylotic myelopathy is an issue of major clinical importance.
Though the course of disease development and the ultimate prognosis for patients with cervical spondylosis is highly variable and extremely difficult to predict, many patients experience a relatively benign form of the disease.
PMID: 23921753
The role of autophagy in neurodegenerative disease.
Autophagy is a lysosomal degradative process used to recycle obsolete cellular constituents and eliminate damaged organelles and protein aggregates.
These substrates reach lysosomes by several distinct mechanisms, including delivery within endosomes as well as autophagosomes.
Completion of digestion involves dynamic interactions among compartments of the autophagic and endocytic pathways.
Neurons are particularly vulnerable to disruptions of these interactions, especially as the brain ages.
Not surprisingly, mutations of genes regulating autophagy cause neurodegenerative diseases across the age spectrum with exceptional frequency.
In late-onset disorders such as Alzheimer's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and familial Parkinson's disease, defects arise at different stages of the autophagy pathway and have different implications for pathogenesis and therapy.
This Review provides an overview of the role of autophagy in neurodegenerative disease, focusing particularly on less frequently considered lysosomal clearance mechanisms and their considerable impact on disease.
Various therapeutic strategies for modulating specific stages of autophagy and the current state of drug development for this purpose are also evaluated.
PMID: 21383059
Social services homecare for people with motor neurone disease/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: why are such services used or refused?
Many patients with the terminal condition motor neurone disease/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (MND/ALS) do not access social service homecare, which may have implications for the location of end-of-life care.
We aimed to identify factors related to uptake of such care in MND/ALS.
A case note review of patients at a UK MND/ALS clinic (N = 97) provided data concerning disease onset and severity, demographic variables and care received.
Narrative interviews with people with MND/ALS (N = 24) and family carers (N = 18) explored their perspectives on social services homecare.
Quantitative analyses highlighted the role of increasing disease severity and age for social services homecare uptake.
However, qualitative findings revealed a number of barriers delaying the uptake of such care.
'Internal' issues focused on retaining control and normality within the home.
'External' issues arose from limited understanding of the disease amongst service providers and lack of awareness of service entitlement amongst patients and carers.
Multiple factors are implicated in the uptake of social services homecare.
Uncertainties surrounding service entitlement must be addressed, including the simplification of bureaucratic procedures and clarification of the roles of health and social care professionals.
Service providers need a greater awareness of the nature of the disease and their role in its management.
PMID: 22951705
Botulinum toxin use in neuro-rehabilitation to treat obstetrical plexus palsy and sialorrhea following neurological diseases: a review.
In neuro-rehabilitation, botulinum toxin (BTX) as adjunct to other interventions can result in a useful therapeutic tool treating disabled people.
Other than spasticity, numerous motor and non motor disorders can complicate clinical course and hamper rehabilitative process of neurological impaired patients.
A review of BTX use in treating muscular imbalance of children with obstetrical brachial plexus palsy and in reducing sialorrhea following neurological diseases including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ASL), Parkinson disease and cerebral palsy (CP) is provided.
Clinicians have to face unique and difficult to treat clinical conditions such as ulcers, sores and abnormal posture and movement disorders due to neurological affections.
BTX effectiveness in treating some of these conditions is also provided.
Since, neurologically disabled subjects can show complex dysfunction, prior to initiating BTX therapy, specific functional limitations, goals and expected outcomes of treatment should be evaluated and discussed with family and caregivers.
PMID: 23418589
Absence of Nrf2 or its selective overexpression in neurons and muscle does not affect survival in ALS-linked mutant hSOD1 mouse models.
The nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) governs the expression of antioxidant and phase II detoxifying enzymes.
Nrf2 activation can prevent or reduce cellular damage associated with several types of injury in many different tissues and organs.
Dominant mutations in Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase (SOD1) cause familial forms of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a fatal disorder characterized by the progressive loss of motor neurons and subsequent muscular atrophy.
We have previously shown that Nrf2 activation in astrocytes delays neurodegeneration in ALS mouse models.
To further investigate the role of Nrf2 in ALS we determined the effect of absence of Nrf2 or its restricted overexpression in neurons or type II skeletal muscle fibers on symptoms onset and survival in mutant hSOD1 expressing mice.
We did not observe any detrimental effect associated with the lack of Nrf2 in two different mutant hSOD1 animal models of ALS.
However, restricted Nrf2 overexpression in neurons or type II skeletal muscle fibers delayed disease onset but failed to extend survival in hSOD1(G93A) mice.
These results highlight the concept that not only the pharmacological target but also the cell type targeted may be relevant when considering a Nrf2-mediated therapeutic approach for ALS.
PMID: 22972143
Magnesium for skeletal muscle cramps.
Skeletal muscle cramps are common and often presented to physicians in association with pregnancy, advanced age, exercise or disorders of the motor neuron (such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis).
Magnesium supplements are marketed for the prophylaxis of cramps but the efficacy of magnesium for this indication has never been evaluated by systematic review.
To assess the effects of magnesium supplementation compared to no treatment, placebo control or other cramp therapies in people with skeletal muscle cramps.
  We searched the Cochrane Neuromuscular Disease Group Specialized Register (11 October 2011), the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) (2011, Issue 3), MEDLINE (January 1966 to September 2011), EMBASE (January 1980 to September 2011), LILACS (January 1982 to September 2011), CINAHL Plus (January 1937 to September 2011), AMED (January 1985 to October 2011) and SPORTDiscus (January 1975 to September 2011).
Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of magnesium supplementation (in any form) to prevent skeletal muscle cramps in any patient group (i.e. all clinical presentations of cramp).
We considered comparisons of magnesium with no treatment, placebo control, or other therapy.
Two authors independently selected trials for inclusion and extracted data.
Two authors assessed risk of bias.
We attempted to contact all study authors and obtained patient level data for three of the included trials, one of which was unpublished.
All data on adverse effects were collected from the included RCTs.
We identified seven trials (five parallel, two cross-over) enrolling a total of 406 individuals amongst whom 118 cross-over participants additionally served as their own controls.
Three trials enrolled women with pregnancy-associated leg cramps (N = 202) and four trials enrolled idiopathic cramp sufferers (N = 322 including cross-over controls).
Magnesium was compared to placebo in six trials and to no treatment in one trial.For idiopathic cramps (largely older adults presumed to have nocturnal leg cramps), differences in measures of cramp frequency, magnesium versus placebo, were small, not statistically significant, and without heterogeneity (I(2) = 0%).
This includes the primary endpoint, percentage change from baseline in the number of cramps per week at four weeks (-3.93%, 95% confidence interval (CI) -21.12% to 13.26%, moderate quality evidence) and the difference in the number of cramps per week at four weeks (0.01 cramps/week, 95% CI -0.52 to 0.55, moderate quality evidence).
The percentage of individuals experiencing a 25% or better reduction in cramp rate from baseline was also no different, being 8% lower in the magnesium group (95% CI -28% to 12%, moderate quality evidence).
Similarly, no statistically significant difference was found at four weeks in measures of cramp intensity (moderate quality evidence) or cramp duration (low quality evidence).Meta-analysis was not possible for trials of pregnancy-associated leg cramps.
The single study comparing magnesium to no treatment failed to find statistically significant benefit on a three-point ordinal scale of overall treatment efficacy.
The two trials comparing magnesium to placebo differed in that one trial found no benefit on frequency or intensity measures while the other found benefit for both.Withdrawals due to adverse events were not significantly different than placebo.
While we could not determine the number of subjects with minor adverse events, studies of oral magnesium generally described potential side effects as similar in frequency to placebo.
It is unlikely that magnesium supplementation provides clinically meaningful cramp prophylaxis to older adults experiencing skeletal muscle cramps.
In contrast, for those experiencing pregnancy-associated rest cramps the literature is conflicting and further research in this patient population is needed.
We found no randomized controlled trials evaluating magnesium for exercise-associated muscle cramps or disease state-associated muscle cramps (for example amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/motor neuron disease).
PMID: 22354563
Effect of mitochondrial transcription factor a overexpression on motor neurons in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis model mice.
Increasing evidence indicates that oxidative stress is an important mechanism underlying motor neuron (MN) degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is highly susceptible to oxidative damage and has little potential for repair, although mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) plays essential roles in maintaining mitochondrial DNA by reducing oxidative stress, promoting mtDNA transcription, and regulating mtDNA copy number.
To analyze a possible therapeutic effect of TFAM on ALS pathology, double transgenic mice overexpressing G93A mutant SOD1 (G93ASOD1) and human TFAM (hTFAM) were newly generated in the present study.
Rotarod scores were better in G93ASOD1/hTFAM double-Tg mice than G93ASOD1 single-Tg mice at an early symptomatic stage, 15 and 16 weeks of age, with a 10% extension of the onset age in double-Tg mice.
The number of surviving MNs was 30% greater in double-Tg mice with end-stage disease, at 19 weeks, with remarkable reductions in the amount of the oxidative stress marker 8-OHdG and the apoptotic marker cleaved caspase 3 and with preserved COX1 expression.
Double-immunofluorescence study showed that hTFAM was expressed specifically in MNs and microglia in the spinal cords of double-Tg mice.
The present study suggests that overexpression of TFAM has a potential to reduce oxidative stress in MN and delay onset of the disease in ALS model mice.
© 2012 Wiley Priodicals, Inc.
Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22017410
Novel thyrotropin-releasing hormone analogs: a patent review.
The potential therapeutic applications of thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) have attracted attention, based on its broad-spectrum neuropharmacological action rather than its endocrine properties.
These central nervous system (CNS)-mediated effects provide the rationale for use of TRH and its analogs in the treatment of brain and spinal injury, and CNS disorders like schizophrenia, Alzheimer's disease, epilepsy, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, depression, shock and ischemia.
This review summarizes the patent literature and advances in the discovery and development of novel TRH analogs over the past 20 years.
It provides a comprehensive overview of the development of new TRH analogs, giving emphasis to their pharmaceutical profile.
The use of TRH in the treatment of various CNS disorders has been proven clinically.
However, TRH itself is a poor drug candidate due to its short plasma half-life (5 min), poor biopharmaceutical properties (low intestinal and CNS permeability) and endocrine side effect.
Nevertheless, researchers have come up with metabolically stable, more potent and selective TRH analogs and prodrugs.
Taltirelin, one of the TRH analogs, has been approved under the trade name of Ceredist(®) in Japan for the treatment of spinocerebellar degeneration.
Several other TRH analogs are in various stages of preclinical or clinical development.
PMID: 23316181
Self perceived emotional functioning of spanish patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a longitudinal study.
Background: ALS is a neurodegenerative disease of the entire motor system that most frequently ends with respiratory arrest in few years.
Its diagnosis and the rapid progression of the motor dysfunctions produce a continued emotional impact.
Studies on this impact are helpful to plan adequate psychotherapeutic strategies.
Objective: To assess and analyze: First: How the patients with ALS perceive their emotional health.
Second: The emotional impact of their physical disabilities.
Third: The physical disabilities with highest emotional impact.
Fourth: The feelings with highest emotional impact.
Methods: Up to 110 Spanish patients with ALS were assessed less than 1 year from diagnosis, then twice more at 6 month intervals, using the ALS Quality of Life Assessment Questionnaire (ALSAQ-40) validated for use in Spanish.
Descriptive analysis and correlation between variables were obtained.
Results: Worries about the future, of lack of freedom, and of being a burden were prevalent feelings.
On average depression was felt only sometimes.
Only 25% of the variations in the emotional state were explained by changes in the physical state at first evaluation, and 16% at the last one.
Emotional functioning correlated significantly with the physical disabilities at first and second evaluation, less so at third.
Communication disabilities always had the highest impact.
Depression at first evaluation and hopelessness at the next two evaluations had the highest emotional impact.
Hopelessness did not correlate with any physical disability at the third evaluation.
On the whole, emotional dysfunction was self perceived as intermediate (between none and worst), and remained stable at 1 year follow up, in both bulbar and spinal onset patients.
Conclusions: Physical dysfunctions per se have a limited role in patients´ emotional distress.
Communication disabilities, as well as feelings of depression at early stages of illness, and of hopelessness later on, had the most impact.
This requires their careful therapeutic attention.
On average, Spanish patients with ALS cope with their disease, overcoming depression, which is not felt often, and with just mid levels of emotional dysfunction.
PMID: 21933185
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-linked mutant VAPB enhances TDP-43-induced motor neuronal toxicity.
Transactive response DNA-binding protein-43 (TDP-43) has been thought to be generally involved in the pathogenesis of most amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients although it remains undefined how TDP-43 is involved in the ALS pathogenesis.
In this study, we found that a P56S mutant of vesicle-associated membrane protein-associated protein B (VAPB), which has been identified to be a familial ALS-causative protein, potentiated the TDP-43-induced motor neuronal cell death, while wild-type VAPB conversely inhibited it.
The P56S-VAPB-induced potentiation of the TDP-43-induced death was mediated by the up-regulation of Bim expression at the mRNA level and other undefined mechanisms that leads to the enhancement of Bim and Bax activity.
These observations suggest that TDP-43 and P56S-VAPB may co-operate to involve the pathogenesis of ALS.
© 2011 The Authors.
Journal of Neurochemistry © 2011 International Society for Neurochemistry.
PMID: 21783422
TDP-43 functions and pathogenic mechanisms implicated in TDP-43 proteinopathies.
Given the critical role for TDP-43 in diverse neurodegenerative diseases including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD-TDP), there has been a recent surge in efforts to understand the normal functions of TDP-43 and the molecular basis of dysregulation that occurs in TDP-43 proteinopathies.
Here, we highlight recent findings examining TDP-43 molecular functions with particular emphasis on stress-mediated regulation of TDP-43 localization, putative downstream TDP-43 target genes and RNAs, as well as TDP-43 interacting proteins, all of which represent viable points of therapeutic intervention for ALS, FTLD-TDP and related proteinopathies.
Finally, we review current mouse models of TDP-43 and discuss their similarities and potential relevance to human TDP-43 proteinopathies including ALS and FTLD-TDP.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22091594
Lithium treatment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: do we have enough trials?
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a rapidly progressive neurodegenerative disorder; riluzole is marginally effective, and as a consequence a large number of trials are regularly reported.
Lithium raised marked enthusiasm based on the report of a pilot study that suggested very positive results.
Two previous trials were negative, applying a different methodology.
The reviewed article reports the results of a third trial using a historical control group.
In this trial, lithium was detrimental to ALS progression.
Two more trials testing lithium in ALS are in progress.
This study is discussed in the context of the great competitive effort that was derived from the unsupported hope created by a false-positive preliminary study.
PMID: 22277520
[Antibody therapy targeting ALS-linked misfolded protein].
Accumulating evidence indicates that the pathogenesis of Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is tightly linked to misfolding a key protein.
Antibody therapy aims to eliminate or compete with the pathogenic proteins, through either passive or active immunization.
We and others have generated several monoclonal antibodies (MAb)s which recognize only misfolded SOD1, but not the wild-type.
Several MAbs are reported to delay the progression of mutant SOD1 Tg mice by the intraventricular application, which is mediated by different pathways.
The determination of the pathogenic domain is crucial to acquire the effect of MAb therapy.
Single chain of fragment of variance of IgG (scFv) is attracting emerging attention due to its broad application, in which intracellular proteins can be targeted by Intrabody or the modification of MAb with translocation signals.
PMID: 22611258
Restructured endoplasmic reticulum generated by mutant amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-linked VAPB is cleared by the proteasome.
VAPB (vesicle-associated membrane protein-associated protein B) is a ubiquitously expressed, ER-resident tail-anchored protein that functions as adaptor for lipid-exchange proteins.
Its mutant form, P56S-VAPB, is linked to a dominantly inherited form of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS8).
P56S-VAPB forms intracellular inclusions, whose role in ALS pathogenesis has not yet been elucidated.
We recently demonstrated that these inclusions are formed by profoundly remodelled stacked ER cisternae.
Here, we used stable HeLa-TetOff cell lines inducibly expressing wild-type VAPB and P56S-VAPB, as well as microinjection protocols in non-transfected cells, to investigate the dynamics of inclusion generation and degradation.
Shortly after synthesis, the mutant protein forms small, polyubiquitinated clusters, which then congregate in the juxtanuclear region independently of the integrity of the microtubule cytoskeleton.
The rate of degradation of the aggregated mutant is higher than that of the wild-type protein, so that the inclusions are cleared only a few hours after cessation of P56S-VAPB synthesis.
At variance with other inclusion bodies linked to neurodegenerative diseases, clearance of P56S-VAPB inclusions involves the proteasome, with no apparent participation of macro-autophagy.
Transfection of a dominant-negative form of the AAA ATPase p97/VCP stabilizes mutant VAPB, suggesting a role for this ATPase in extracting the aggregated protein from the inclusions.
Our results demonstrate that the structures induced by P56S-VAPB stand apart from other inclusion bodies, both in the mechanism of their genesis and of their clearance from the cell, with possible implications for the pathogenic mechanism of the mutant protein.
PMID: 22459602
Mutant FUS induces endoplasmic reticulum stress in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and interacts with protein disulfide-isomerase.
Mutations in the gene encoding fused in sarcoma (FUS) are linked to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), but the mechanisms by which these mutants trigger neurodegeneration remain unknown.
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is increasingly recognized as an important and early pathway to motor neuron death in ALS.
FUS is normally located in the nucleus but in ALS, FUS redistributes to the cytoplasm and forms inclusions.
In this study, we investigated whether FUS induces ER stress in a motor neuron like cell line (NSC-34).
We demonstrate that ER stress is triggered in cells expressing mutant FUS, and this is closely associated with redistribution of mutant FUS to the cytoplasm.
Mutant FUS also colocalized with protein disulfide-isomerase (PDI), an important ER chaperone, in NSC-34 cells and PDI was colocalized with FUS inclusions in human ALS lumbar spinal cords, in both sporadic ALS and mutant FUS-linked familial ALS tissues.
These findings implicate ER stress in the pathophysiology of FUS, and provide evidence for common pathogenic pathways in ALS linked to the ER.
Crown Copyright © 2012.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22455595
Barriers to and mediators of brain-computer interface user acceptance: focus group findings.
Brain-computer interfaces (BCI) are designed to enable individuals with severe motor impairments such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) to communicate and control their environment.
A focus group was conducted with individuals with ALS (n=8) and their caregivers (n=9) to determine the barriers to and mediators of BCI acceptance in this population.
Two key categories emerged: personal factors and relational factors.
Personal factors, which included physical, physiological and psychological concerns, were less important to participants than relational factors, which included corporeal, technological and social relations with the BCI.
The importance of these relational factors was analysed with respect to published literature on actor-network theory (ANT) and disability, and concepts of voicelessness and personhood.
Future directions for BCI research are recommended based on the emergent focus group themes.
This manuscript explores human factor issues involved in designing and evaluating brain-computer interface (BCI) systems for users with severe motor disabilities.
Using participatory research paradigms and qualitative methods, this work draws attention to personal and relational factors that act as barriers to, or mediators of, user acceptance of this technology.
PMID: 23418210
Fasciculation potentials and earliest changes in motor unit physiology in ALS.
There is little information on the earliest changes in motor unit (MU) physiology in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and the development of the classical neurophysiological features of ALS over time.
We studied the earliest abnormalities in MU physiology in ALS and changes over time.
Observational, cross-sectional and longitudinal study.
We studied the tibialis anterior (TA) muscle in three groups of subjects; 73 patients with ALS, 10 with benign fasciculation and 37 healthy control subjects.
In the ALS group, 61 had normal strength in the TA muscle and 12 had TA muscle strength of 4 on the medical research council scale.
In all subjects we evaluated the presence of fasciculation potentials (FPs) and fibrillation/sharp-waves (fibs-sw), and quantified MU potentials (MUPs) and jitter.
Twenty-six ALS patients with TA muscle of normal strength were investigated in serial studies.
FPs were recorded in TA muscles (medical research council 5) of 21 ALS patients with normal MUPs.
Longitudinal studies confirmed that the patients presenting with FPs as the only abnormality progressed to MUP instability before large MUPs associated with fibs-sw were detected.
FPs from ALS patients with no other neurophysiological change were simpler than in patients in whom there were also fibs-sw and neurogenic MUPs.
The complexity of FPs in patients with weak TA muscle was greater than in the latter group.
FPs in patients with benign fasciculations were simpler than FPs in ALS patients with normal TA muscle strength.
FPs are a very early marker of ALS and anticipate MUP instability or reinnervation, consistent with a very early phase of increased axonal excitability.
Later, widespread neuronal dysfunction causes widespread fibs-sw and loss of MUPs with compensatory reinnervation.
Our results confirm the importance of FP morphology analysis in the differential diagnosis of ALS and other disorders, and indicate that benign FPs represent a different phenomenon.
PMID: 22666317
Glycans in sera of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients and their role in killing neuronal cells.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease caused by degeneration of upper and lower motor neurons.
To date, glycosylation patterns of glycoproteins in fluids of ALS patients have not been described.
Moreover, the aberrant glycosylation related to the pathogenesis of other neurodegenerative diseases encouraged us to explore the glycome of ALS patient sera.
We found high levels of sialylated glycans and low levels of core fucosylated glycans in serum-derived N-glycans of patients with ALS, compared to healthy volunteer sera.
Based on these results, we analyzed the IgG Fc N(297)-glycans, as IgG are major serum glycoproteins affected by sialylation or core fucosylation and are found in the motor cortex of ALS patients.
The analyses revealed a distinct glycan, A2BG2, in IgG derived from ALS patient sera (ALS-IgG).
This glycan increases the affinity of IgG to CD16 on effector cells, consequently enhancing Antibody-Dependent Cellular Cytotoxicity (ADCC).
Therefore, we explore whether the Fc-N(297)-glycans of IgG may be involved in ALS disease.
Immunostaining of brain and spinal cord tissues revealed over-expression of CD16 and co-localization of intact ALS-IgG with CD16 and in brain with activated microglia of G93A-SOD1 mice.
Intact ALS-IgG enhanced effector cell activation and ADCC reaction in comparison to sugar-depleted or control IgG.
ALS-IgG were localized in the synapse between brain microglia and neurons of G93A-SOD1 mice, manifesting a promising in vivo ADCC reaction.
Therefore, glycans of ALS-IgG may serve as a biomarker for the disease and may be involved in neuronal damage.
PMID: 22641816
The ALS disease protein TDP-43 is actively transported in motor neuron axons and regulates axon outgrowth.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disease specifically affecting cortical and spinal motor neurons.
Cytoplasmic inclusions containing hyperphosphorylated and ubiquitinated TDP-43 are a pathological hallmark of ALS, and mutations in the gene encoding TDP-43 have been directly linked to the development of the disease.
TDP-43 is a ubiquitous DNA/RNA-binding protein with a nuclear role in pre-mRNA splicing.
However, the selective vulnerability and axonal degeneration of motor neurons in ALS pose the question of whether TDP-43 may have an additional role in the regulation of the cytoplasmic and axonal fate of mRNAs, processes important for neuron function.
To investigate this possibility, we have characterized TDP-43 localization and dynamics in primary cultured motor neurons.
Using a combination of cell imaging and biochemical techniques, we demonstrate that TDP-43 is localized and actively transported in live motor neuron axons, and that it co-localizes with well-studied axonal mRNA-binding proteins.
Expression of the TDP-43 C-terminal fragment led to the formation of hyperphosphorylated and ubiquitinated inclusions in motor neuron cell bodies and neurites, and these inclusions specifically sequestered the mRNA-binding protein HuD.
Additionally, we showed that overexpression of full-length or mutant TDP-43 in motor neurons caused a severe impairment in axon outgrowth, which was dependent on the C-terminal protein-interacting domain of TDP-43.
Taken together, our results suggest a role of TDP-43 in the regulation of axonal growth, and suggest that impairment in the post-transcriptional regulation of mRNAs in the cytoplasm of motor neurons may be a major factor in the development of ALS.
PMID: 21996525
Modeling drop-outs in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) clinical trials suffer a large proportion of drop-outs.
Ignoring missing data can lead not only to underpowered tests, but also to selection bias.
Current strategies for handling not at random missing data have several limitations.
To determine the most effective approach, we compared the standard procedures with the pattern mixture model, using the data from a randomized dose-finding trial on lithium for the treatment of ALS, which reported a high rate of drop-outs (68.4%).
We evaluated the ALS Functional Rating Scale-Revised (ALSFRS-R) profile using mixed effect models on different reference populations (1.
Intention-to-treat, 2.
Completers, 3.
Last observation carried forward, 4.
0-imputation).
All four strategies have limitations on account of: 1.
Violation of the missing completely at random assumption of the mixed model; 2.
Underpowered results on selected patients; 3.
Underestimation of the time effect on ALSFRS-R decline and misuse of the assumption that those who discontinued could not get worse; 4.
Overestimation of the time effect on ALSFRS-R decline and misuse of the assumption that those who discontinued could not have scores different from zero.
The pattern mixture models fitted better than models that did not consider the missing data pattern effect (p=0.006 and p=0.0002).
Pattern mixture model thus seem superior and we recommend its use to obtain more accurate estimates even when the information is missing.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23152212
Recombinant human insulin-like growth factor I (rhIGF-I) for the treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/motor neuron disease.
Recombinant human insulin-like growth factor I (rhIGF-I) is a possible disease modifying therapy for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, which is also known as motor neuron disease (MND)).
To examine the efficacy of rhIGF-I in affecting disease progression, impact on measures of functional health status, prolonging survival and delaying the use of surrogates (tracheostomy and mechanical ventilation) to sustain survival in ALS.
Occurrence of adverse events was also reviewed.
We searched the Cochrane Neuromuscular Disease Group Specialized Register (21 November 2011), CENTRAL (2011, Issue 4), MEDLINE (January 1966 to November 2011) and EMBASE (January 1980 to November 2011) and sought information from the authors of randomised clinical trials and manufacturers of rhIGF-I.
We considered all randomised controlled clinical trials involving rhIGF-I treatment of adults with definite or probable ALS according to the El Escorial Criteria.
The primary outcome measure was change in Appel Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Rating Scale (AALSRS) total score after nine months of treatment and secondary outcome measures were change in AALSRS at 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 months, change in quality of life (Sickness Impact Profile scale), survival and adverse events.
Each author independently graded the risk of bias in the included studies.
The lead author extracted data and the other authors checked them.
We generated some missing data by making ruler measurements of data in published graphs.
We collected data about adverse events from the included trials.
We identified three randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of rhIGF-I, involving 779 participants, for inclusion in the analysis.
In a European trial (183 participants) the mean difference (MD) in change in AALSRS total score after nine months was -3.30 (95% confidence interval (CI) -8.68 to 2.08).
In a North American trial (266 participants), the MD after nine months was -6.00 (95% CI -10.99 to -1.01).
The combined analysis from both RCTs showed a MD after nine months of -4.75 (95% CI -8.41 to -1.09), a significant difference in favour of the treated group.
The secondary outcome measures showed non-significant trends favouring rhIGF-I.
There was an increased risk of injection site reactions with rhIGF-I (risk ratio 1.26, 95% CI 1.04 to 1.54).
.
A second North American trial (330 participants) used a novel primary end point involving manual muscle strength testing.
No differences were demonstrated between the treated and placebo groups in this study.
All three trials were at high risk of bias.
Meta-analysis revealed a significant difference in favour of rhIGF-I treatment; however, the quality of the evidence from the two included trials was low.
A third study showed no difference between treatment and placebo.
There is no evidence for increase in survival with IGF1.
All three included trials were at high risk of bias.
PMID: 21921087
Onset and spreading patterns of lower motor neuron involvements predict survival in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
To define patterns of spread through the order of lower motor neuron involvement (first, second or third order), relationships between interval or sites of affected areas from onset to involvement of a second region, and prognosis, including 5 year survival, normal preservation of motor function at onset of respiratory symptoms and cumulative occurrence of each region and direction of spread.
150 patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) underwent follow-up at 3 month intervals until the appearance of respiratory symptoms.
Symptom appearances were determined using the revised version of the ALS Functional Rating Scale.
Median survival with combined type onset (two regions simultaneously) was shorter (18 months) than with bulbar onset (26 months, p=0.01).
The interval from onset to involvement of the second region correlated significantly with survival, independent of particular combinations.
5 year survival rate was 21% for lower limb onset, 18% for upper limb onset and 16% for bulbar onset.
No patient with a rapid spread pattern (two regions within 3&amp;emsp14;months from onset) survived &gt;5 years.
Early manifestations of bulbar symptoms within 1 year were associated with worse survival (p&lt;0.001) although no significant difference in survival was seen between groups with and without bulbar symptoms (p=0.51).
In terms of cumulative occurrence, symptoms spread longitudinally to adjacent regions.
Bulbar function remained preserved in 27%, lower limb function in 10% and upper limb function in 2.7%.
The interval between onset and involvement of the second region is an important predictor of survival.
The data support the contiguous anatomical propagation of lower motor neuron involvement in sporadic ALS.
PMID: 22512552
Melatonin synthetic analogs as nitric oxide synthase inhibitors.
Nitric oxide (NO), which is produced by oxidation of L-arginine to L-citrulline in a process catalyzed by different isoforms of nitric oxide synthase (NOS), exhibits diverse roles in several physiological processes, including neurotransmission, blood pressure regulation and immunological defense mechanisms.
On the other hand, an overproduction of NO is related with several disorders as Alzheimer's disease, Huntington's disease and the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Taking melatonin as a model, our research group has designed and synthesized several families of compounds that act as NOS inhibitors, and their effects on the excitability of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)-dependent neurons in rat striatum, and on the activity on both nNOS and iNOS were evaluated.
Structural comparison between the three most representative families of compounds (kynurenines, kynurenamines and 4,5-dihydro-1H-pyrazole derivatives) allows the establishment of structure-activity relationships for the inhibition of nNOS, and a pharmacophore model that fulfills all of the observed SARs were developed.
This model could serve as a template for the design of other potential nNOS inhibitors.
The last family of compounds, pyrrole derivatives, shows moderate in vitro NOS inhibition, but some of these compounds show good iNOS/nNOS selectivity.
Two of these compounds, 5-(2-aminophenyl)-1H-pyrrole-2-carboxylic acid methylamide and cyclopentylamide, have been tested as regulators of the in vivo nNOS and iNOS activity.
Both compounds prevented the increment of the inducible NOS activity in both cytosol (iNOS) and mitochondria (i-mtNOS) observed in a MPTP model of Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 22277481
[Evaluation and treatment of dysphagia in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Parkinson's disease].
As both amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and Parkinson's disease (PD) exhibit a variety of patterns of dysphagia, appropriate symptomatic treatment is provided after evaluation of swallowing function through videofluoroscopic examination of swallowing.
In ALS, disease progression is rapid, therefore, respiratory function, swallowing function and nutritional status should be evaluated regularly.
When the oral or pharyngeal stage of swallowing are affected early in dysphagia, adjusting swallowing volume and varying consistency can be beneficial in ALS.
When all stages of swallowing are impaired in ALS, such complications as pneumonia, dehydration and malnutrition, are observed.
In such patients, it is necessary to consider an alternative to oral dietary intake.
In PD, dysphagia is not necessarily associated with severity of parkinsonism and can appear at any time during the course of the disease.
Dysphagia in PD can occur at any stage of swallowing and frequently accompanies multiple abnormalities.
In particular, aspiration is an important risk factor for pneumonia in PD.
The effect of L-dopa treatment for dysphagia is often insufficient; however, this treatment remains the first choice because dysphagia is exacerbated during off state.
Rehabilitation for dysphagia in PD has also some effect.
PMID: 23431167
Global structural motions from the strain of a single hydrogen bond.
The origin and biological role of dynamic motions of folded enzymes is not yet fully understood.
In this study, we examine the molecular determinants for the dynamic motions within the β-barrel of superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1), which previously were implicated in allosteric regulation of protein maturation and also pathological misfolding in the neurodegenerative disease amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Relaxation-dispersion NMR, hydrogen/deuterium exchange, and crystallographic data show that the dynamic motions are induced by the buried H43 side chain, which connects the backbones of the Cu ligand H120 and T39 by a hydrogen-bond linkage through the hydrophobic core.
The functional role of this highly conserved H120-H43-T39 linkage is to strain H120 into the correct geometry for Cu binding.
Upon elimination of the strain by mutation H43F, the apo protein relaxes through hydrogen-bond swapping into a more stable structure and the dynamic motions freeze out completely.
At the same time, the holo protein becomes energetically penalized because the twisting back of H120 into Cu-bound geometry leads to burial of an unmatched backbone carbonyl group.
The question then is whether this coupling between metal binding and global structural motions in the SOD1 molecule is an adverse side effect of evolving viable Cu coordination or plays a key role in allosteric regulation of biological function, or both?
PMID: 22828277
Protein disulfide isomerases in neurodegeneration: from disease mechanisms to biomedical applications.
Protein disulfide isomerases (PDIs) are a family of foldases and chaperones primarily located at the endoplasmic reticulum that catalyze the formation and isomerization of disulfide bonds thereby facilitating protein folding.
PDIs also perform important physiological functions in protein quality control, cell death, and cell signaling.
Protein misfolding is involved in the etiology of the most common neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer, Parkinson, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Prion-related disorders, among others.
Accumulating evidence indicate altered expression of PDIs as a prominent and common feature of these neurodegenerative conditions.
Here we overview most recent advances in our understanding of the possible functional contribution of PDIs to neurodegeneration, depicting a complex and poorly understood scenario.
Possible therapeutic benefits of targeting PDIs in a disease context and their use as biomarkers are discussed.
Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.
Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23461249
Pulmonary function in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis at disease onset.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder affecting both the upper and lower motor neurons.
Deteriorating pulmonary function as a reflection of progressive respiratory muscle weakness is a common feature, accounting for the majority of deaths.
The aim of the study was to describe a trend in initial pulmonary function tests (PFT) of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients, in addition, differentiating between the types of disease onset, bulbar, limb muscle, and a combination.
Initial PFT were gathered from 32 consecutive patients in our clinic with the diagnosis of ALS, they were categorized by the type of disease onset.
Values obtained were referenced to the 95% confidence limits for normality.
There was evidence of significant reductions in both the FEV1 (64.7% predicted) and FVC (61.2%), with preservation of the FEV1/FVC (81.7%).
The MVV was significantly reduced (43%).
Total lung capacity was 93.2%, the residual volumes was increased at 145.7%.
Subgroup analysis failed to show significant differences between types of disease onset.
In the bulbar onset group (versus the limb group) there was a trend for the MVV to be further reduced (p = 0.15) and the RV to be higher (157.4% versus 135.9%, P = 0.24).
ALS is a devastating disease that invariably leads to respiratory failure.
Abnormal spirometric variables such as the FVC and MVV, likely reflect inspiratory muscle weakness and increased RV likely reflect expiratory muscle weakness.
The type of disease onset did not result in a different pattern of PFT abnormalities.
PMID: 22300876
The clinical and pathological phenotype of C9ORF72 hexanucleotide repeat expansions.
There is increasing evidence that frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis are part of a disease continuum.
Recently, a hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9orf72 was identified as a major cause of both sporadic and familial frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The aim of this study was to investigate clinical and neuropathological characteristics of hexanucleotide repeat expansions in C9orf72 in a large cohort of Dutch patients with frontotemporal dementia.
Repeat expansions were successfully determined in a cohort of 353 patients with sporadic or familial frontotemporal dementia with or without amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and 522 neurologically normal controls.
Immunohistochemistry was performed in a series of 10 brains from patients carrying expanded repeats using a panel of antibodies.
In addition, the presence of RNA containing GGGGCC repeats in paraffin-embedded sections of post-mortem brain tissue was investigated using fluorescence in situ hybridization with a locked nucleic acid probe targeting the GGGGCC repeat.
Hexanucleotide repeat expansions in C9orf72 were found in 37 patients with familial (28.7%) and five with sporadic frontotemporal dementia (2.2%).
The mean age at onset was 56.9 ± 8.3 years (range 39-76), and disease duration 7.6 ± 4.6 years (range 1-22).
The clinical phenotype of these patients varied between the behavioural variant of frontotemporal dementia (n = 34) and primary progressive aphasia (n = 8), with concomitant amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in seven patients.
Predominant temporal atrophy on neuroimaging was present in 13 of 32 patients.
Pathological examination of the 10 brains from patients carrying expanded repeats revealed frontotemporal lobar degeneration with neuronal transactive response DNA binding protein-positive inclusions of variable type, size and morphology in all brains.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis of brain material from patients with the repeat expansion, a microtubule-associated protein tau or a progranulin mutation, and controls did not show RNA-positive inclusions specific for brains with the GGGGCC repeat expansion.
The hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9orf72 is an important cause of frontotemporal dementia with and without amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and is sometimes associated with primary progressive aphasia.
Neuropathological hallmarks include neuronal and glial inclusions, and dystrophic neurites containing transactive response DNA binding protein.
Future studies are needed to explain the wide variation in clinical presentation.
PMID: 23147607
[The head-up-orthosis - a good solution for ambulant patients with Dropped-head-syndrome].
Severe paresis of the neck muscles, dystonia or an increased activation of the head flexor can lead to dropped-head syndrome.
It can be based on various neurological diseases.
We present a patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with severe paresis of the head extensor muscles, which led to a dropped-head syndrome.
Usual advices did not permit an adequate swallowing and breathing.
The new developed device (head-up) can be adjusted on the individual needs which lead to a marked improvement in quality of life of the patient.
Especially for ambulatory patients with Dropped-head syndrome is the «head-up» a very good solution.
PMID: 22378146
NIPA1 polyalanine repeat expansions are associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Mutations in NIPA1 cause Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia type 6, a neurodegenerative disease characterized by an (upper) motor neuron phenotype.
Deletions of NIPA1 have been associated with a higher susceptibility to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
The exact role of genetic variation in NIPA1 in ALS susceptibility and disease course is, however, not known.
We sequenced the entire coding sequence of NIPA1 and genotyped a polyalanine repeat located in the first exon of NIPA1.
A total of 2292 ALS patients and 2777 controls from three independent European populations were included.
We identified two sequence variants that have a potentially damaging effect on NIPA1 protein function.
Both variants were identified in ALS patients; no damaging variants were found in controls.
Secondly, we found a significant effect of 'long' polyalanine repeat alleles on disease susceptibility: odds ratio = 1.71, P = 1.6 × 10(-4).
Our analyses also revealed a significant effect of 'long' alleles on patient survival [hazard ratio (HR) = 1.60, P = 4.2 × 10(-4)] and on the age at onset of symptoms (HR = 1.37, P = 4.6 × 10(-3)).
In patients carrying 'long' alleles, median survival was 3 months shorter than patients with 'normal' genotypes and onset of symptoms occurred 3.6 years earlier.
Our data show that NIPA1 polyalanine repeat expansions are a common risk factor for ALS and modulate disease course.
PMID: 22997874
Neurodegenerative diseases.
Degenerative diseases of the nervous system impose substantial medical and public health burdens on populations throughout the world.
Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) are three of the major neurodegenerative diseases.
The prevalence and incidence of these diseases rise dramatically with age; thus the number of cases is expected to increase for the foreseeable future as life spans in many countries continue to increase.
Causal contributions from genetic and environmental factors are, with some exceptions, poorly understood.
Nonetheless, molecular epidemiology approaches have proven valuable for improving disease diagnoses, characterizing disease prognostic factors, identifying high-risk genes for familial neurodegenerative diseases, investigating common genetic variants that may predict susceptibility for the non-familial forms of these diseases, and for quantifying environmental exposures.
Incorporation of molecular techniques, including genomics, proteomics, and measurements of environmental toxicant body burdens into epidemiologic research, offer considerable promise for enhancing progress on characterizing pathogenesis mechanisms and identifying specific risk factors, especially for the non-familial forms of these diseases.
In this chapter, brief overviews are provided of the epidemiologic features of PD, AD, and ALS, as well as illustrative examples in which molecular epidemiologic approaches have advanced knowledge on underlying disease mechanisms and risk factors that might lead to improved medical management and ultimately disease prevention.
The chapter concludes with some recommendations for future molecular epidemiology research.
PMID: 22670881
Novel G37V mutation of SOD1 gene in autopsied patient with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
We report a novel missense mutation (G37V) in exon 2 of the superoxide dismutase-1 gene in a 63-years-old Japanese male with purely lower motor neuron disease.
His disease duration was 14 months, and he died of respiratory failure.
The disease in this patient with the G37V mutation showed a rapid progression, although patients with G37R mutation are known to have a long survival.
PMID: 23383400
Tocilizumab attenuates inflammation in ALS patients through inhibition of IL6 receptor signaling.
Patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) have evidence of chronic inflammation demonstrated by infiltration of the gray matter by inflammatory macrophages, IL17A-positive T cells, and mast cells.
Increased serum levels of IL6 and IL17A have been detected in sporadic ALS (sALS) patients when compared to healthy controls.
Herein we investigate, in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), the baseline transcription of genes associated with inflammation in sALS and control subjects and the impact of the IL6 receptor (IL6R) antibody (tocilizumab) on the transcription and/or secretion of inflammation factors (e.g. cytokines) stimulated by the apo-G37R superoxide dismutase (SOD1) mutant.
At baseline, PBMCs of four sALS patients (Group 1) showed significantly increased expression of TLR2 and CD14; ALOX5, PTGS2 and MMP1; IL1α, IL1β, IL6, IL36G, IL8 and TNF; CCL3, CCL20, CXCL2, CXCL3 and CXCL5.
In four other sALS patients (Group 2), most of the genes just mentioned were expressed at near control levels and a significant decrease in the expression of PPARG, PPARA, RARG, HDAC4 and KAT2B; IL6R, IL6ST and ADAM17; TNFRSF11A; MGAT2 and MGAT3; PLCG1; CXCL3 were detected.
Apo-G37R SOD1 up regulated the transcription of cytokines (e.g. IL1α/β, IL6, IL8, IL36G), chemokines (e.g. CCL20; CXCL3, CXCL5), and enzymes (e.g. PTGS2 and MMP1).
In vitro, tocilizumab down regulated the transcription of many inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, enzymes, and receptors, which were up regulated by pathogenic forms of SOD1.
Tocilizumab also reduced the secretion of the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL1β, IL6, TNFα, GM-CSF, IFNγ, and IL17A by Group 1 PBMCs.
Finally, sALS patients had significantly higher concentrations of IL6, sIL6R and C-reactive protein in the cerebrospinal fluid when compared to AD patients.
This pilot study demonstrates that in vitro tocilizumab suppresses many factors that drive inflammation in sALS patients, with possible increased efficacy in Group 1 ALS patients.
PMID: 22670883
Electrical impedance myography as a biomarker to assess ALS progression.
Electrical impedance myography (EIM), a non-invasive, electrophysiological technique, has preliminarily shown value as an ALS biomarker.
Here we perform a multicenter study to further assess EIM's potential for tracking ALS.
ALS patients were enrolled across eight sites.
Each subject underwent EIM, handheld dynamometry (HHD), and the ALS Functional Rating Scale-revised (ALSFRS-R) regularly.
Techniques were compared by assessing the coefficient of variation (CoV) in the rate of decline and each technique's correlation to survival.
Results showed that in the 60 patients followed for one year, EIM phase measured from the most rapidly progressing muscle in each patient had a CoV in the rate of decline of 0.62, compared to HHD (0.82) and the ALSFRS-R (0.74).
Restricting the measurements to the first six months gave a CoV of 0.55 for EIM, 0.93 for HHD, and 0.84 for ALSFRS-R.
For both time-periods, all three measures correlated with survival.
Based on these data, a six-month clinical trial designed to detect a 20% treatment effect with 80% power using EIM would require only 95 patients/arm compared to the ALSFRS-R, which would require 220 subjects/arm.
In conclusion, EIM can serve as a useful ALS biomarker that offers the prospect of greatly accelerating phase 2 clinical trials.
PMID: 22670882
Trismus as the first symptom of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
We report the case of a 75-year-old female who had a trismus as the first, long-lasting and, isolated symptom of ALS.
We discuss also therapeutic possibilities.
PMID: 23322321
Neuroprotective effects of estradiol on motoneurons in a model of rat spinal cord embryonic explants.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is an adult-onset degenerative disorder characterized by motoneuron death.
Clinical and experimental studies in animal models of ALS have found gender differences in the incidence and onset of disease, suggesting that female hormones may play a beneficial role.
Cumulative evidence indicates that 17β-estradiol (17βE2) has a neuroprotective role in the central nervous system.
We have previously developed a new culture system by using rat spinal cord embryonic explants in which motoneurons have the singularity of migrating outside the spinal cord, growing as a monolayer in the presence of glial cells.
In this study, we have validated this new culture system as a useful model for studying neuroprotection by estrogens on spinal cord motoneurons.
We show for the first time that spinal cord motoneurons express classical estrogen receptors and that 17βE2 activates, specifically in these cells, the Akt anti-apoptotic signaling pathway and two of their downstream effectors: GSK-3β and Bcl-2.
To further validate our system, we demonstrated neuroprotective effects of 17βE2 on spinal cord motoneurons when exposed to the proinflammatory cytokines TNF-α and IFN-γ.
These effects of 17βE2 were fully reverted in the presence of the estrogen receptor antagonist ICI 182,780.
Our new culture model and the results presented here may provide the basis for further studies on the effects of estrogens, and selective estrogen receptor modulators, on spinal cord motoneurons in the context of ALS or other motoneuron diseases.
PMID: 22773541
Longitudinal changes of outcome measures in spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy.
Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy is an adult-onset, hereditary motor neuron disease caused by the expansion of a trinucleotide CAG repeat within the gene encoding the androgen receptor.
To date, several agents have been shown to prevent or slow disease progression in animal models of this disease.
For the translational research of these agents, it is necessary to perform the detailed analysis of natural history with quantitative outcome measures and to establish sensitive and validated disease-specific endpoints in the clinical trials.
To this end, we performed a prospective observation of disease progression over 3 years in 34 genetically confirmed Japanese patients with spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy by using quantitative outcome measures, including functional and blood parameters.
The baseline evaluation revealed that CAG repeat length in the androgen receptor gene correlated not only with the age of onset but also with the timing of substantial changes in activity of daily living.
Multiple regression analyses indicated that the serum level of creatinine is the most useful blood parameter that reflects the severity of motor dysfunction in spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy.
In 3-year prospective analyses, a slow but steady progression was affirmed in most of the outcome measures we examined.
In the analyses using random coefficient models that summarize the individual data into a representative line, disease progression was not affected by CAG repeat length or onset age.
These models showed large interindividual variation, which was also independent of the differences of CAG repeat size.
Analyses using these models also demonstrated that the subtle neurological deficits at an early or preclinical stage were more likely to be detected by objective motor functional tests such as the 6-min walk test and grip power or serum creatinine levels than by functional rating scales, such as the revised amyotrophic lateral sclerosis functional rating scale or modified Norris scale.
Categorization of the clinical phenotypes using factor analysis showed that upper limb function is closely related to bulbar function, but not to lower limb function at baseline, whereas the site of onset had no substantial effects on disease progression.
These results suggest that patients with spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy show a slow but steady progression of motor dysfunction over time that is independent of CAG repeat length or clinical phenotype, and that objective outcome measures may be used to evaluate disease severity at an early stage of this disease.
PMID: 22116045
Nerve excitability changes related to axonal degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: Insights from the transgenic SOD1(G127X) mouse model.
Motor nerve excitability studies by threshold tracking in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) revealed heterogeneous abnormalities in motor axon membrane function possibly depending on disease stage.
It remains unclear to which extent the excitability deviations reflect a pathogenic mechanism in ALS or are merely a consequence of axonal degeneration.
We investigated motor axon excitability in presymptomatic and symptomatic SOD1(G127X) mutants, a mouse model of ALS with late clinical onset and rapid disease progression.
After clinical onset, there was a rapid loss of functional motor units associated with an increase in rheobase and strength-duration time constant, an increase in refractoriness at the expense of the superexcitability, larger than normal threshold deviations during both depolarizing and hyperpolarizing threshold electrotonus with impaired accommodation and reduction of the input conductance.
These abnormalities progressed rapidly over a few days and were associated with morphological evidence of ongoing axonal degeneration.
Presymptomatic mice with unaltered motor performance at rotor-rod measurement also had an increase in refractoriness at the expense of the superexcitability during the recovery cycle.
This was, however, associated with smaller than normal deviations during threshold electrotonus, and a steeper resting current-threshold slope indicating slight axonal depolarization in agreement with motoneuronal hyperexcitability indicated by enhanced F-waves.
Our data suggest that SOD1(G127X) motor axons undergo a state of membrane depolarization; however, during rapid motoneuron loss disease-specific nerve excitability measures are confounded by excitability changes in degenerating but still conducting axons.
These findings should be considered in the interpretation of disease-stage-related nerve excitability changes in ALS.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22677356
Nutritional and metabolic support in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is the most common form of progressive motor neuron disease and the most devastating neurodegenerative disorder.
ALS is characterized by progressive paralysis and respiratory failure leading to death within 3 to 5 years after its onset.
Protein-energy malnutrition is a frequent finding in ALS.
The pathogenesis of protein-energy malnutrition in ALS is multifactorial.
Muscle atrophy, hypophagia, dysphagia, and hypermetabolism play a role in determining the deterioration of nutritional status.
A multidisciplinary approach is crucial to set an appropriate plan for metabolic and nutritional support in ALS.
Nutritional management incorporates a continuous assessment and implementation of dietary modifications throughout the duration of the disease.
The nutritional and metabolic approaches to ALS should start when the diagnosis of ALS is made and should become an integral part of the continuous care to the patient, including nutritional surveillance, dietary counseling, management of dysphagia, and enteral nutrition when needed.
Parenteral nutrition is rarely indicated.
Standard polymeric enteral formulas are routinely used, usually providing 25 to 30 kcal/kg and protein 0.8 to 1.2 g /kg per day.
The use of fiber-enriched formulas may help prevent constipation.
However, considering the complex metabolic abnormalities of ALS, standard and/or fiber-enriched formulas might not be sufficient to achieve optimal metabolic and nutritional support.
Based on the most recent clinical and experimental evidence, it is tempting to hypothesize that personalized nutritional support including specific nutritional substrates could act on disease progression and improve the quality of life and the response to the few and yet scarcely effective, currently available pharmacologic therapies.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23577159
Characterization of FUS mutations in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis using RNA-Seq.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disease resulting in severe muscle weakness and eventual death by respiratory failure.
Although little is known about its pathogenesis, mutations in fused in sarcoma/translated in liposarcoma (FUS) are causative for familial ALS.
FUS is a multifunctional protein that is involved in many aspects of RNA processing.
To elucidate the role of FUS in ALS, we overexpressed wild-type and two mutant forms of FUS in HEK-293T cells, as well as knocked-down FUS expression.
This was followed by RNA-Seq to identify genes which displayed differential expression or altered splicing patterns.
Pathway analysis revealed that overexpression of wild-type FUS regulates ribosomal genes, whereas knock-down of FUS additionally affects expression of spliceosome related genes.
Furthermore, cells expressing mutant FUS displayed global transcription patterns more similar to cells overexpressing wild-type FUS than to the knock-down condition.
This observation suggests that FUS mutants do not contribute to the pathogenesis of ALS through a loss-of-function.
Finally, our results demonstrate that the R521G and R522G mutations display differences in their influence on transcription and splicing.
Taken together, these results provide additional insights into the function of FUS and how mutations contribute to the development of ALS.
PMID: 23389473
FUS regulates genes coding for RNA-binding proteins in neurons by binding to their highly conserved introns.
Dominant mutations and mislocalization or aggregation of Fused in Sarcoma (FUS), an RNA-binding protein (RBP), cause neuronal degeneration in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) and Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration (FTLD), two incurable neurological diseases.
However, the function of FUS in neurons is not well understood.
To uncover the impact of FUS in the neuronal transcriptome, we used high-throughput sequencing of immunoprecipitated and cross-linked RNA (HITS-CLIP) of FUS in human brains and mouse neurons differentiated from embryonic stem cells, coupled with RNA-seq and FUS knockdowns.
We report conserved neuronal RNA targets and networks that are regulated by FUS.
We find that FUS regulates splicing of genes coding for RBPs by binding to their highly conserved introns.
Our findings have important implications for understanding the impact of FUS in neurodegenerative diseases and suggest that perturbations of FUS can impact the neuronal transcriptome via perturbations of RBP transcripts.
PMID: 22167414
Modeling human neurodegenerative diseases in transgenic systems.
Transgenic systems are widely used to study the cellular and molecular basis of human neurodegenerative diseases.
A wide variety of model organisms have been utilized, including bacteria (Escherichia coli), plants (Arabidopsis thaliana), nematodes (Caenorhabditis elegans), arthropods (Drosophila melanogaster), fish (zebrafish, Danio rerio), rodents (mouse, Mus musculus and rat, Rattus norvegicus) as well as non-human primates (rhesus monkey, Macaca mulatta).
These transgenic systems have enormous value for understanding the pathophysiological basis of these disorders and have, in some cases, been instrumental in the development of therapeutic approaches to treat these conditions.
In this review, we discuss the most commonly used model organisms and the methodologies available for the preparation of transgenic organisms.
Moreover, we provide selected examples of the use of these technologies for the preparation of transgenic animal models of neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease (AD), frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Huntington's disease (HD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) and discuss the application of these technologies to AD as an example of how transgenic modeling has affected the study of human neurodegenerative diseases.
PMID: 22032434
Hypoventilation syndromes.
The hypoventilation syndromes represent a variety of disorders that affect central ventilatory control, respiratory mechanics, or both.
Obesity hypoventilation syndrome is a clinically important disorder with serious cardiovascular and metabolic consequences if unrecognized.
Hypoventilation in asthma and COPD is caused by mechanical challenges imparted by airflow obstruction and increase in dead space.
In neuromuscular disease, respiratory muscle weakness results in hypoventilation.
Decreases in thoracic volume and limited expansion of the chest highlight the restrictive ventilatory impairments seen in hypoventilation associated with chest wall disorders.
Despite the mechanism, effective hypoventilation treatment targets the underlying disease and use of noninvasive ventilation.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21623664
Autonomic dysfunction in the early stage of ALS with bulbar involvement.
Our objective was to assess the autonomic function of ALS patients with and without bulbar signs to characterize dysautonomia in ALS disease.
Standard autonomic tests and spectral analysis of heart rate variability (HRV), reflecting changes in the sympathovagal balance, were examined in 33 ALS patients (14 with bulbar signs) and 30 controls.
Results showed that in the supine position, ALS patients had significantly lower total power and absolute values of high-frequency power indicating a depressed sinus arrhythmia.
Patients with bulbar signs showed more marked autonomic alterations at rest.
Tilting did not induce the expected increase in low-frequency and decrease in high-frequency power of HRV in all patients.
No correlation was found between autonomic tests and clinical parameters.
Our findings suggest an early subclinical involvement of the autonomic system in ALS, particularly affecting parasympathetic cardiac control.
Patients with prominent bulbar signs show a more severe autonomic dysfunction under resting conditions.
PMID: 23143995
Regulatory T-lymphocytes mediate amyotrophic lateral sclerosis progression and survival.
In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) mice, regulatory T-lymphocytes (Tregs) are neuroprotective, slowing disease progression.
To address whether Tregs and FoxP3, a transcription factor required for Treg function, similarly influence progression rates of ALS patients, T-lymphocytes from patients were assessed by flow cytometry.
Both numbers of Tregs and their FoxP3 protein expressions were reduced in rapidly progressing ALS patients and inversely correlated with progression rates.
The mRNA levels of FoxP3, TGF-β, IL4 and Gata3, a Th2 transcription factor, were reduced in rapidly progressing patients and inversely correlated with progression rates.
Both FoxP3 and Gata3 were accurate indicators of progression rates.
No differences in IL10, Tbx21, a Th1 transcription factor or IFN-γ expression were found between slow and rapidly progressing patients.
A 3.5-year prospective study with a second larger cohort revealed that early reduced FoxP3 levels were indicative of progression rates at collection and predictive of future rapid progression and attenuated survival.
Collectively, these data suggest that Tregs and Th2 lymphocytes influence disease progression rates.
Importantly, early reduced FoxP3 levels could be used to identify rapidly progressing patients.
Copyright © 2013 The Authors.
Published by John Wiley and Sons, Ltd on behalf of EMBO.
PMID: 22426854
Pattern of ubiquilin pathology in ALS and FTLD indicates presence of C9ORF72 hexanucleotide expansion.
C9ORF72-hexanucleotide repeat expansions and ubiquilin-2 (UBQLN2) mutations are recently identified genetic markers in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD).
We investigate the relationship between C9ORF72 expansions and the clinical phenotype and neuropathology of ALS and FTLD.
Genetic analysis and immunohistochemistry (IHC) were performed on autopsy-confirmed ALS (N = 75), FTLD-TDP (N = 30), AD (N = 14), and controls (N = 11).
IHC for neurodegenerative disease pathology consisted of C9ORF72, UBQLN, p62, and TDP-43.
A C9ORF72 expansion was identified in 19.4 % of ALS and 31 % of FTLD-TDP cases.
ALS cases with C9ORF72 expansions frequently showed a bulbar onset of disease (57 %) and more rapid disease progression to death compared to non-expansion cases.
Staining with C9ORF72 antibodies did not yield specific pathology.
UBQLN pathology showed a highly distinct pattern in ALS and FTLD-TDP cases with the C9ORF72 expansion, with UBQLN-positive cytoplasmic inclusions in the cerebellar granular layer and extensive UBQLN-positive aggregates and dystrophic neurites in the hippocampal molecular layer and CA regions.
These UBQLN pathologies were sufficiently unique to allow correct prediction of cases that were later confirmed to have C9ORF72 expansions by genetic analysis.
UBQLN pathology partially co-localized with p62, and to a minor extent with TDP-43 positive dystrophic neurites and spinal cord skein-like inclusions.
Our data indicate a pathophysiological link between C9ORF72 expansions and UBQLN proteins in ALS and FTLD-TDP that is associated with a highly characteristic pattern of UBQLN pathology.
Our study indicates that this pathology is associated with alterations in clinical phenotype, and suggests that the presence of C9ORF72 repeat expansions may indicate a worse prognosis in ALS.
PMID: 22555651
Tongue movements and their acoustic consequences in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The relations between acoustic measures and their articulatory bases have rarely been tested in dysarthria but are important for diagnostic and treatment purposes.
We tested the association between acoustic measures of F2 range and F2 slope with kinematic measures of tongue movement displacement and speed in individuals with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and healthy controls speaking at normal and slow rates.
Relations between acoustic and kinematic measures and speech intelligibility were examined.
As healthy controls reduced their speaking rate, their F2 slopes and movement speeds decreased.
In talkers with ALS, acoustic and kinematic variables were associated with changes in speaking rate, characteristic of disease progression.
Participants with slow rate had shallower F2 slopes and slower movement speeds than those with normal rate.
Relations between F2 range and tongue displacement were weaker.
F2 slope, displacement, and duration were correlated with speech intelligibility most consistently.
Findings suggested that F2 slope is a useful marker for tracking disease progression in ALS.
F2 slope reflects changes in tongue function with disease progression and is linked to speech intelligibility.
Changes in movement speed, however, might be the earliest sign of disease in the tongue.
Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.
PMID: 22321369
Increased expression of valosin-containing protein in the skin of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Valosin-containing protein (VCP) may have a pivotal role in ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation and is implicated in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases.
Skin studies from patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) have shown unique abnormalities.
We undertook a quantitative immunohistochemical study of VCP in the skin from patients with ALS and control participants.
The proportion of VCP-positive (VCP+) cells in the epidermis in patients with ALS was significantly higher (p&lt;0.001) than in controls.
There was a significant positive relationship (r=0.59, p&lt;0.01) between this proportion and duration of illness in patients with ALS.
The optical density of VCP+ cells in the epidermis in patients with ALS was higher (p&lt;0.001) than in controls.
There was a significant positive relationship (r=0.61, p&lt;0.01) between the immunoreactivity and duration of illness in patients with ALS.
These data suggest that changes in VCP identified in skin from patients with ALS are likely to be related to the disease process.
Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 21913867
Modifying effect of arterial hypertension on amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Given the high oxygen consumption of motor neurons, we sought to assess the frequency and prognostic value of arterial hypertension (affecting brain's oxygen supply) in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
We consecutively and prospectively included all ALS patients with regular medical follow-up and documented blood pressure measurements and monitored them until death.
Vascular factors diagnosed prior to the onset of motor signs in ALS patients were compared with those in a stratified, age- and gender-matched case-control population.
The severity of leukoaraiosis on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was blindly assessed.
Post mortem examinations were performed when authorized.
Compared with controls (n = 408), the 102 ALS patients were significantly more likely to display hypertension (41-57%) and current smoking (15-26%).
The number of years of hypertension was associated with survival (HR = 1.04 (1.01-1.07)).
In a multivariate analysis, leukoaraiosis severity (HR = 1.214 (1.096-1.344)), current smoking (HR = 1.766 (1.085-2.872)) and low vital capacity (HR = 2.422 (1.266-4.633)) remained independent predictors of survival.
Post mortem examinations revealed a greater frequency of leukoaraiosis in ALS patients (p = 0.02).
In conclusion, the effect of chronic hypertension on survival might be exerted through abnormal neural perfusion.
The higher frequency of recent hypertension in ALS patients may be due to a compensatory increase in blood pressure in response to a lower oxygen supply.
PMID: 22800896
Therapeutic effects of dl-3-n-butylphthalide in a transgenic mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive death of the upper and lower motor neurons.
Transgenic mice over-expressing a mutant form of the human SOD1 gene develop an ALS-like phenotype.
Currently, there is no effective treatment or drug for the fatal disease.
Previous studies reported potent efficacy of dl-3-n-butylphthalide (DL-NBP) for several neurodegenerative disorders and cerebral ischemia.
SOD1-G93A mice are a mouse model of ALS.
In this study, we investigated the efficacy of DL-NBP on this ALS mouse model.
Sixty SOD1-G93A female mice were divided into four groups.
The vehicle control group received 0 mg×kg(-1)×d(-1) DL-NBP.
The experimental groups received DL-NBP with doses of 30, 60 or 120 mg×kg(-1)×d(-1), respectively.
For measurement of motor activity, the hanging wire test and rotarod test were performed.
Survival statistics were analyzed by Kaplan-Meier survival curves.
The body weight of each mouse was recorded twice per week.
The statistical motor unit number estimation (MUNE) technique was used to estimate the number of functioning motor units in gastrocnemius muscle.
Muscle morphology was evaluated by hematoxylin and eosin staining.
Motor neuron quantitation was performed by Nissl staining and microglia activation was observed by immunohistochemistry.
Oral administration of 60 mg×kg(-1)×d(-1)1 DL-NBP significantly prolonged survival ((164.78 ± 16.67) days) of SOD1-G93A mice compared with vehicle control ((140.00 ± 16.89) days).
Treating mice with DL-NBP (60 mg×kg(-1)×d(-1)) significantly decreased the progression rate of motor deficits and suppressed body weight reduction.
Furthermore, we found that treating SOD1-G93A mice with DL-NBP (60 mg×kg(-1)×d(-1)) slowed the rate of MUNE reduction (P &lt; 0.01).
Motor neurons were remarkably preserved in the anterior horns in mice treated with DL-NBP (60 mg×kg(-1)×d(-1)) at the stage of 19 weeks (P &lt; 0.01).
Treating mice with DL-NBP (60 mg×kg(-1)×d(-1)) significantly reduced CD11b immunoreactivity compared with vehicle control mice (P &lt; 0.05).
No significant effect was observed in mice treated with DL-NBP of 30 or 120 mg×kg(-1)×d(-1).
The post-disease-onset administration of DL-NBP significantly prolonged survival and improved motor performance in SOD1-G93A mice.
DL-NBP may be a potential therapeutic agent for ALS.
PMID: 23162510
Efficacy of hypnosis-based treatment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a pilot study.
Background: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and its devastating neurodegenerative consequences have an inevitably psychological impact on patients and their caregivers: however, although it would be strongly needed, there is a lack of research on the efficacy of psychological intervention.
Our aim was to investigate the effect of hypnosis-based intervention on psychological and perceived physical wellbeing in patients and the indirect effect on caregivers.
Methods: We recruited eight ALS volunteers patients as a pilot sample for an hypnosis intervention and self-hypnosis training protocol lasting 1 month.
Anxiety and depression level was measured in patients and caregivers at pre and post treatment phase.
Quality of life and perceived physical symptoms changes were also investigated in patients.
Results: One month pre-post treatment improvement in depression, anxiety, and quality of life was clearly clinically observed and confirmed by psychometric analyses on questionnaire data.
Moreover, decreases in physical symptoms such as pain, sleep disorders, emotional lability, and fasciculations were reported by our patients.
Improvements in caregiver psychological wellbeing, likely as a consequence of patients psychological and perceived physical symptomatology improvement, were also observed.
Conclusion: To the best of our knowledge, even if at a preliminary level, this is the first report on efficacy psychological intervention protocol on ALS patients.
The findings provide initial support for using hypnosis and self-hypnosis training to manage some ALS physical consequences and mainly to cope its dramatic psychological implications for patients and, indirectly, for their caregivers.
PMID: 23318296
Motor neuron disease in 2012: Novel causal genes and disease modifiers.
In 2012, researchers published extensively on the genetic and clinicopathological characterization of patients with the newly discovered C9ORF72 repeat expansions, which cause amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia.
Novel ALS-linked genes and genetic modifiers were identified through screening in animal models and patients.
PMID: 23075763
Use of sugammadex in a patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
To report on general anesthesia management in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
A 47-year-old man presented with fracture of the humerus.
The patient was diagnosed with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
General anesthesia was induced with propofol, rocuronium and remifentanil.
After uneventful surgical repair, TOF (train-of-four) ratio reached &gt;0.90 at the end of operation.
However, muscle strength and tidal volume were inadequate.
After sugammadex 2 mg kg(-1) i.v.
was given, the patient was extubated 120 s later.
This case highlights that rocuronium and sugammadex can be used safely in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis undergoing surgery with general anesthesia.
Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.
PMID: 22415951
Neurotrophic bone marrow cellular nests prevent spinal motoneuron degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients: a pilot safety study.
The objective of this article is to assess the safety of intraspinal infusion of autologous bone marrow mononuclear cells (BMNCs) and, ultimately, to look for histopathological signs of cellular neurotrophism in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients.
We conducted an open single arm phase I trial.
After 6 months observation, autologous BMNCs were infused into the posterior spinal cord funiculus.
Safety was the primary endpoint and was defined as the absence of serious transplant-related adverse events.
In addition, forced vital capacity (FVC), ALS-functional rating scale (ALS-FRS), Medical Research Council scale for assessment of muscle power (MRC), and Norris scales were assessed 6 and 3 months prior to the transplant and quarterly afterward for 1 year.
Pathological studies were performed in case of death.
Eleven patients were included.
We did not observe any severe transplant-related adverse event, but there were 43 nonsevere events.
Twenty-two (51%) resolved in ≤2 weeks and only four were still present at the end of follow-up.
All were common terminology criteria for adverse events grade ≤2.
No acceleration in the rate of decline of FVC, ALS-FRS, Norris, or MRC scales was observed.
Four patients died on days 359, 378, 808, and 1,058 post-transplant for reasons unrelated to the procedure.
Spinal cord pathological analysis showed a greater number of motoneurons in the treated segments compared with the untreated segments (4.2 ± 0.8 motoneurons per section [mns per sect] and 0.9 ± 0.3 mns per sect, respectively).
In the treated segments, motoneurons were surrounded by CD90+ cells and did not show degenerative ubiquitin deposits.
This clinical trial confirms not only the safety of intraspinal infusion of autologous BMNC in ALS patients but also provides evidence strongly suggesting their neurotrophic activity.
Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.
PMID: 22275781
Conjugal amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a disease characterized by progressive degeneration of motor neurons in the motor cortex, brainstem, and spinal cord.
The incidence of sporadic ALS is 1.5 to 2.7 in 100,000, and the prevalence is 5.2 to 6.0 in 100,000.
Conjugal ALS is even rarer than sporadic ALS.
We report a case of conjugal ALS encountered in our outpatient neurology clinic.
PMID: 22900172
Administration of Recombinant Heat Shock Protein 70 Delays Peripheral Muscle Denervation in the SOD1(G93A) Mouse Model of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
A prominent clinical feature of ALS is muscle weakness due to dysfunction, denervation and degeneration of motoneurons (MNs).
While MN degeneration is a late stage event in the ALS mouse model, muscle denervation occurs significantly earlier in the disease.
Strategies to prevent this early denervation may improve quality of life by maintaining muscle control and slowing disease progression.
The precise cause of MN dysfunction and denervation is not known, but several mechanisms have been proposed that involve potentially toxic intra- and extracellular changes.
Many cells confront these changes by mounting a stress response that includes increased expression of heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70).
MNs do not upregulate Hsp70, and this may result in a potentially increased vulnerability.
We previously reported that recombinant human hsp70 (rhHsp70) injections delayed symptom onset and increased lifespan in SOD1(G93A) mice.
The exogenous rhHsp70 was localized to the muscle and not to spinal cord or brain suggesting it modulates peripheral pathophysiology.
In the current study, we focused on earlier administration of Hsp70 and its effect on initial muscle denervation.
Injections of the protein appeared to arrest denervation with preserved large myelinated peripheral axons, and reduced glial activation.
PMID: 23338750
Frontotemporal dementia-amyotrophic lateral sclerosis syndrome locus on chromosome 16p12.1-q12.2: genetic, clinical and neuropathological analysis.
Numerous families exhibiting both frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) have been described, and although many of these have been shown to harbour a repeat expansion in C9ORF72, several C9ORF72-negative FTD-ALS families remain.
We performed neuropathological and genetic analysis of a large European Australian kindred (Aus-12) with autosomal dominant inheritance of dementia and/or ALS.
Affected Aus-12 members developed either ALS or dementia; some of those with dementia also had ALS and/or extrapyramidal features.
Neuropathology was most consistent with frontotemporal lobar degeneration with type B TDP pathology, but with additional phosphorylated tau pathology consistent with corticobasal degeneration.
Aus-12 DNA samples were negative for mutations in all known dementia and ALS genes, including C9ORF72 and FUS.
Genome-wide linkage analysis provided highly suggestive evidence (maximum multipoint LOD score of 2.9) of a locus on chromosome 16p12.1-16q12.2.
Affected individuals shared a chromosome 16 haplotype flanked by D16S3103 and D16S489, spanning 37.9 Mb, with a smaller suggestive disease haplotype spanning 24.4 Mb defined by recombination in an elderly unaffected individual.
Importantly, this smaller region does not overlap with FUS.
Whole-exome sequencing identified four variants present in the maximal critical region that segregate with disease.
Linkage analysis incorporating these variants generated a maximum multipoint LOD score of 3.0.
These results support the identification of a locus on chromosome 16p12.1-16q12.2 responsible for an unusual cluster of neurodegenerative phenotypes.
This region overlaps with a separate locus on 16q12.1-q12.2 reported in an independent ALS family, indicating that this region may harbour a second major locus for FTD-ALS.
PMID: 23344603
[Electromyography (EMG) and neurography in patients with severe neuromuscular diseases].
Many neuromuscular diseases are potentially severe, and EMG and neurography are methods used in the assessment of these conditions.
The article is based on the authors' knowledge and experience, with special emphasis on the use of these methods in the assessment of severe diseases affecting striated muscle and peripheral nerves.
A PubMed search was performed with the cut-off fifteen years back in time, and in addition a discretionary selection was made of articles known to the authors.
EMG is the most valuable method for assessing myopathy, and neurography provides most information about neuropathy, but the methods are complementary.
These examinations are the most sensitive for diagnosing some conditions (for example myasthaenia) A high level of expertise is necessary for diagnosing these conditions.
EMG and neurography are important and often necessary means of assessing patients with severe neuromuscular disease.
PMID: 22523565
Ablation of proliferating cells in the CNS exacerbates motor neuron disease caused by mutant superoxide dismutase.
Proliferation of glia and immune cells is a common pathological feature of many neurodegenerative diseases including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Here, to investigate the role of proliferating cells in motor neuron disease, SOD1(G93A) transgenic mice were treated intracerebroventicularly (i.c.v.) with the anti-mitotic drug cytosine arabinoside (Ara-C).
I.c.v. delivery of Ara-C accelerated disease progression in SOD1(G93A) mouse model of ALS.
Ara-C treatment caused substantial decreases in the number of microglia, NG2+ progenitors, Olig2+ cells and CD3+ T cells in the lumbar spinal cord of symptomatic SOD1(G93A) transgenic mice.
Exacerbation of disease was also associated with significant alterations in the expression inflammatory molecules IL-1β, IL-6, TGF-β and the growth factor IGF-1.
PMID: 22957047
Transposable elements in TDP-43-mediated neurodegenerative disorders.
Elevated expression of specific transposable elements (TEs) has been observed in several neurodegenerative disorders.
TEs also can be active during normal neurogenesis.
By mining a series of deep sequencing datasets of protein-RNA interactions and of gene expression profiles, we uncovered extensive binding of TE transcripts to TDP-43, an RNA-binding protein central to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD).
Second, we find that association between TDP-43 and many of its TE targets is reduced in FTLD patients.
Third, we discovered that a large fraction of the TEs to which TDP-43 binds become de-repressed in mouse TDP-43 disease models.
We propose the hypothesis that TE mis-regulation contributes to TDP-43 related neurodegenerative diseases.
PMID: 22001604
Viral vectors for gene delivery to the central nervous system.
The potential benefits of gene therapy for neurological diseases such as Parkinson's, Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), Epilepsy, and Alzheimer's are enormous.
Even a delay in the onset of severe symptoms would be invaluable to patients suffering from these and other diseases.
Significant effort has been placed in developing vectors capable of delivering therapeutic genes to the CNS in order to treat neurological disorders.
At the forefront of potential vectors, viral systems have evolved to efficiently deliver their genetic material to a cell.
The biology of different viruses offers unique solutions to the challenges of gene therapy, such as cell targeting, transgene expression and vector production.
It is important to consider the natural biology of a vector when deciding whether it will be the most effective for a specific therapeutic function.
In this review, we outline desired features of the ideal vector for gene delivery to the CNS and discuss how well available viral vectors compare to this model.
Adeno-associated virus, retrovirus, adenovirus and herpesvirus vectors are covered.
Focus is placed on features of the natural biology that have made these viruses effective tools for gene delivery with emphasis on their application in the CNS.
Our goal is to provide insight into features of the optimal vector and which viral vectors can provide these features.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23628680
[Fall risk and fracture. Falls and fractures in patients with neurological disorders].
Neurological disorders are frequently associated with risk factors for falls, such as gait and balance disorders, deficits of lower extremity strength, sensation and coordination, in addition to cognitive impairments.
Patients with various kinds of neurological disorders, including Parkinson's disease, Parkinson's syndrome, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, peripheral neuropathy, stroke, etc, easily suffer from falls.
To prevent falls among such patients, treatments of the underlying neurological diseases and assessments risk factors for falls are most important to cope effectively with these patients.
In general, maintenance of the appropriate environment, consideration of the injury prevention, rehabilitation for increasing muscular strength, etc, are useful for the prevention of falls in patients with neurological disorders.
PMID: 22088212
Misfolded SOD1 forms high-density molecular complexes with synaptic molecules in mutant SOD1-linked familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis cases.
Mutations in the superoxide dismutase 1 (sod1) gene cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS), likely due to the toxic properties of misfolded mutant SOD1 protein.
Here we report identification of various synaptic molecules forming molecular complexes with misfolded SOD1 in mutant SOD1-associated FALS patient tissues as well as in cellular FALS models.
In the FALS cellular model system, we found that membrane depolarization that mimics synaptic hyperactivation/excitotoxicity could cause misfolding of mutant SOD, as well as acceleration of misfolded SOD1-synaptic protein complex formation.
These results suggest that inhibition of synaptic release mechanism by association of misfolded SOD1 with synaptic molecules plays a role in the dysfunction of FALS.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23303748
Characterization of superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD-1) by electrospray ionization-ion mobility mass spectrometry.
In this paper, we report nano-electrospray ionization-ion mobility mass spectrometry (nano-ESI-IM-MS) characterization of bovine superoxide dismutase (SOD-1) and human SOD-1 purified from erythrocytes.
SOD-1 aggregates are characteristic of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a fatal neurodegenerative disease in humans that could be triggered by dissociation of the native dimeric enzyme (Cu(2),Zn(2)-dimer SOD-1).
In contrast to ESI-MS, nano-ESI-IM-MS allowed an extra dimension for ion separation, yielding three-way mass spectra (drift time, mass-to-charge ratio and intensity).
Drift time provided valuable structural information related to ion size, which proved useful to differentiate between the dimeric and monomeric forms of SOD-1 under non denaturing conditions.
In order to obtain detailed structural information, including the most relevant post-translational modifications, we evaluated several parameters of the IM method, such as sample composition (10 mM ammonium acetate, pH 7) and activation voltages (trap collision energy and cone voltage).
Neutral pH and a careful selection of the most appropriate activation voltages were necessary to minimize dimer dissociation, although human enzyme resulted less prone to dissociation.
Under optimum conditions, a comparison between monomer-to-dimer abundance ratios of two small sets of blood samples from healthy control and ALS patients demonstrated the presence of a higher relative abundance of Cu,Zn-monomer SOD-1 in patient samples.
Copyright © 2013 John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd.
PMID: 23422695
Frontotemporal degeneration in the patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: helping the caregiver cope.
Research in the previous decade has found a link between amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal degeneration (FTD).
It is estimated that as many as 50% of all people with ALS will have some degree of cognitive impairment and that approximately 10%-25% of patients will meet the Neary criteria for FTD.
For the caregivers of persons with both ALS and FTD, the burden of care can be quite high.
Nurses are in a position to help the caregivers cope.
PMID: 23734113
Exploring sarcasm detection in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis using ecologically valid measures.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a rapidly progressive condition involving degeneration of both upper and lower motor neurons.
Recent research suggests that a proportion of persons with ALS show a profile similar to that of frontotemporal dementia (FTD), with this group of ALS patients exhibiting social cognitive deficits.
Although social cognitive deficits have been partially explored in ALS, research has yet to investigate such changes using ecologically valid measures.
Therefore, this study aimed to further characterize the scope of social cognitive and emotion recognition deficits in non-demented ALS patients using an ecologically valid measure of social cognition.
A sample of 35 ALS patients and 30 age-and-education matched controls were assessed using the Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination, the Brixton Spatial Anticipation Test, and The Awareness of Social Inference Test, where participants were required to discriminate between various emotions and decipher socially challenging scenarios enacted in video vignettes.
Participants with ALS showed significant difficulties in recognizing both sarcastic and paradoxical sarcastic statements, but not sincere statements, when compared to controls.
After controlling for executive difficulties, ALS patients still displayed significant difficulties on tasks that assessed their comprehension of both sarcastic and paradoxical sarcastic statements.
The inability to read social cues and make social inferences has the potential to place significant strain on familial/interpersonal relationships in ALS.
The findings of this study highlight the importance of employing a broader range of neuropsychological assessment tools to aid in early detection of frontal lobe impairment in non-demented ALS patients.
PMID: 22150063
Organ donation after cardiac death from withdrawal of life support in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Donation after cardiac death (DCD) or donation of organs after removal of life support is an accepted means of organ retrieval that usually occurs in the setting of sudden illness but has not been described in people with progressive neurologic illness.
We report DCD in two people with progressive amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Case series at an academic medical center of two men with progressive ALS who underwent withdrawal of artificial life support, rapid cardiac death, and subsequent organ donation.
The primary outcome was donation of organs in concordance with patient and family wishes.
Both patients underwent peaceful withdrawal of life support in the presence of family, and multiple organs were donated.
Patients may legally and ethically refuse life-sustaining care.
These patients considered their lives to be more burdensome than beneficial near the end of their lives, both carefully planned the time and circumstance of their deaths, and both fulfilled a long-standing desire to donate their organs.
This study describes a potential opportunity for patients with progressive neurologic illness.
PMID: 23637551
RANTES and fibroblast growth factor 2 in jawbone cavitations: triggers for systemic disease?
Jawbone cavitations (JC) are hollow dead spaces in jawbones with dying or dead bone marrow.
These areas are defined as fatty degenerative osteonecrosis of the jawbone or neuralgia-inducing cavitational osteonecrosis and may produce facial pain.
These afflictions have been linked to the immune system and chronic illnesses.
Surgical debridement of JC is reported to lead to an improvement in immunological complaints, such as rheumatic, allergic, and other inflammatory diseases (ID).
Little is known about the underlying cause/effect relationship.
JC bone samples were analyzed to assess the expression and quantification of immune modulators that can play a role in the pathogenesis of IDs.
The study supports a potential mechanism where JC is a mediating link in IDs.
Samples of fatty softened bone taken from JCs were extracted from 31 patients.
The specimens were analyzed by bead-based multiplex technology and tested for seven immune messengers.
Regulated upon activation, normal T-cell expressed, and secreted (RANTES) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-2 were found at high levels in the JCs tested.
Other cytokines could not be detected at excessive levels.
The study confirms that JC is able to produce inflammatory messengers, primarily RANTES, and, secondarily, FGF-2.
Both are implicated in many serious illnesses.
The excessive levels of RANTES/FGF-2 in JC patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and breast cancer are compared to levels published in medical journals.
Levels detected in JCs are higher than in the serum and cerebrospinal fluid of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and multiple sclerosis patients and four-fold higher than in breast cancer tissue.
This study suggests that JC might serve as a fundamental cause of IDs, through RANTES/FGF-2 production.
Thus, JC and implicated immune messengers represent an integrative aspect of IDs and serve as a possible cause.
Removing JCs may be a key to reversing IDs.
There is a need to raise awareness about JC throughout medicine and dentistry.
PMID: 22527240
Prognostic value of decreased tongue strength on survival time in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Decreased tongue strength (TS) might herald bulbar involvement in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) well before dysarthria or dysphagia occur, and as such might be prognostic of short survival.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the prognostic value of a decreased TS, in addition to other prognostic factors, such as site of onset, bulbar symptoms, bulbar signs, age, sex, maximum phonation time, time from symptoms to diagnosis, and gastrostomy, for survival time in patients with ALS.
TS was measured in four directions in 111 patients who attended the diagnostic outpatient motor neuron clinic of our university hospital.
Of these patients, 54 were diagnosed with ALS.
TS was considered abnormal if the strength in minimally one direction was at least two standard deviations below the reference values obtained from comparable age category and sex-groups of healthy controls (n = 119).
Twenty of the patients with ALS had a decreased TS.
Multivariable analysis showed that, in addition to age, TS was an independent prognostic factor for survival time in patients with ALS.
PMID: 22797895
Fibrillation precursor of superoxide dismutase 1 revealed by gradual tuning of the protein-folding equilibrium.
Although superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) stands out as a relatively soluble protein in vitro, it can be made to fibrillate by mechanical agitation.
The mechanism of this fibrillation process is yet poorly understood, but attains considerable interest due to SOD1's involvement in the neurodegenerative disease amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
In this study, we map out the apoSOD1 fibrillation process from how it competes with the global folding events at increasing concentrations of urea: We determine how the fibrillation lag time (τ(lag)) and maximum growth rate (ν(max)) depend on gradual titration of the folding equilibrium, from the native to the unfolded state.
The results show that the agitation-induced fibrillation of apoSOD1 uses globally unfolded precursors and relies on fragmentation-assisted growth.
Mutational screening and fibrillation m-values (∂ log τ(lag)/∂[urea] and ∂ log ν(max)/∂[urea]) indicate moreover that the fibrillation pathway proceeds via a diffusely bound transient complex that responds to the global physiochemical properties of the SOD1 sequence.
Fibrillation of apoSOD1, as it bifurcates from the denatured ensemble, seems thus mechanistically analogous to that of disordered peptides, save the competing folding transition to the native state.
Finally, we examine by comparison with in vivo data to what extent this mode of fibrillation, originating from selective amplification of mechanically brittle aggregates by sample agitation, captures the mechanism of pathological SOD1 aggregation in ALS.
PMID: 23419876
New findings concerning vertebrate porin II--on the relevance of glycine motifs of type-1 VDAC.
New findings concerning vertebrate porin part I was published in 1997, then summarizing early data and reflections regarding the molecular structure of vertebrate voltage-dependent anion-selective channels, VDAC/eukaryotic porin, and the extra-mitochondrial expression pattern of human type-1 VDAC.
Meanwhile, endeavors of different laboratories confirmed and widened this beginning by encircling the function of the channels.
Regarding the function of mitochondrial outer membrane-standing VDACs the channels are established parts of the intrinsic apoptotic pathway and thus therapeutic targets in studies on several diseases: cancer, Alzheimer's disease, Down Syndrome, Parkinson's disease, Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis, cystic fibrosis and malaria.
Regarding cell membrane-integrated type-1 VDAC it has been documented by different approaches that this porin channel is engaged in cell volume regulation, trans-membrane electron transport and apoptosis.
Furthermore, new data insinuate a bridging of extrinsic and intrinsic apoptotic pathways, putatively gaining relevance in Alzheimer research.
Mammalian type-1 VDAC, a β-barrel, is basically built up by nineteen β-sheets connected by peptide stretches of varying lengths.
The molecule also comprises an N-terminal stretch of some twenty amino acids which, according to biochemical data, traverses the channel lumen towards the cytosolic surface of outer mitochondrial membranes or the plasma lemma, respectively and works as voltage sensor in channel gating.
In artificial lipid bilayers VDACs figure as anion or cation-channels, as VDACs are permeable to both cations and anions, with voltage shifts changing the relative permeability.
Type-1 VDAC carries several motifs where glycine residues are in critical positions.
Motifs of this type, on the on hand, are established nucleotide binding sites.
On the other hand, the GxxxG motifs are also discussed as relevant peptide dimerization/aggregation/membrane perturbation motifs.
Finally, GxxxG motifs bind cholesterol.
Type-1 VDAC shows one such GxxxG motif at the proximal end of its N-terminal voltage sensor while amyloid Aβ peptides include three of them in series.
Noteworthy, two additional may be modified versions, GxxxGxG and GxxGxxxG, are found on β-sheet 19 or 9, respectively.
Recent data have allowed speculating that amyloid Aβ induces apoptosis via opening type-1 VDAC in cell membranes of hypo-metabolic neurons, a process most likely running over life time--as leaves fall from trees in the tropics--and ending in Alzheimer's disease whenever critical brain regions are affected.
The expression of GxxxG motifs on either reactant under consideration is in line with this model of Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis, which clearly differs from the amyloid Aβ cascade theory, and which can, furthermore, be understood as a basic model for apoptosis induction.
However, to assume randomly distributed interactions of body wide found amyloid Aβ peptides with the N-terminal voltage sensors of ubiquitously expressed cell membrane-standing human type-1 VDAC opens up a new view on Alzheimer's disease, which might even include a clue on systemic aspects of the disease.
While elaborating this concept, my focus was at first only on the GxxxG motif at the proximal end of the N-terminal voltage sensor of type-1 VDAC.
Here, I include a corresponding sequence stretch on the channel's β-sheet 19, too.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22384217
Longitudinal tracking of human fetal cells labeled with super paramagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles in the brain of mice with motor neuron disease.
Stem Cell (SC) therapy is one of the most promising approaches for the treatment of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS).
Here we employed Super Paramagnetic Iron Oxide nanoparticles (SPIOn) and Hoechst 33258 to track human Amniotic Fluid Cells (hAFCs) after transplantation in the lateral ventricles of wobbler (a murine model of ALS) and healthy mice.
By in vitro, in vivo and ex vivo approaches we found that: 1) the main physical parameters of SPIOn were maintained over time; 2) hAFCs efficiently internalized SPIOn into the cytoplasm while Hoechst 33258 labeled nuclei; 3) SPIOn internalization did not alter survival, cell cycle, proliferation, metabolism and phenotype of hAFCs; 4) after transplantation hAFCs rapidly spread to the whole ventricular system, but did not migrate into the brain parenchyma; 5) hAFCs survived for a long time in the ventricles of both wobbler and healthy mice; 6) the transplantation of double-labeled hAFCs did not influence mice survival.
PMID: 21895509
Cognitive screening in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in early stages.
Few studies have examined the use of a short cognitive screening of ALS patients in order to establish which patients should undergo a more comprehensive neuropsychological assessment.
We tested 20 patients with early ALS with four cognitive screening instruments and subsequently with an extensive neuropsychological assessment.
Sixty percent of patients showed a deficit in at least two scores of tests administered, while 40% had three abnormal tests.
Dysexecutive syndrome was the most common neuropsychological impairment.
The Frontal Assessment Battery (FAB) proved a useful indicator of the presence of cognitive dysfunction to complete neuropsychological evaluation.
In conclusion, the FAB can be considered a sensitive cognitive screening tool in these patients.
These data will be verified on a larger sample of patients.
PMID: 23186902
Spinal cord: motor neuron diseases.
Spinal cord motor neuron diseases affect lower motor neurons in the ventral horn.
This article focuses on the most common spinal cord motor neuron disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, which also affects upper motor neurons.
Also discussed are other motor neuron diseases that only affect the lower motor neurons.
Despite the identification of several genes associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, the pathogenesis of this complex disease remains elusive.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22013888
Dusty: an assistive mobile manipulator that retrieves dropped objects for people with motor impairments.
People with physical disabilities have ranked object retrieval as a high-priority task for assistive robots.
We have developed Dusty, a teleoperated mobile manipulator that fetches objects from the floor and delivers them to users at a comfortable height.
In this paper, we first demonstrate the robot's high success rate (98.4%) when autonomously grasping 25 objects considered being important by people with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
We tested the robot with each object in five different configurations on five types of flooring.
We then present the results of an experiment in which 20 people with ALS operated Dusty.
Participants teleoperated Dusty to move around an obstacle, pick up an object and deliver the object to themselves.
They successfully completed this task in 59 out of 60 trials (3 trials each) with a mean completion time of 61.4 SD = 20.5 seconds), and reported high overall satisfaction using Dusty (7-point Likert scale; 6.8 SD = 0.6).
Participants rated Dusty to be significantly easier to use than their own hands, asking family members, and using mechanical reachers (p &lt; 0.03, paired t-tests).
Fourteen of the 20 participants reported that they would prefer using Dusty over their current methods.
[Box: see text].
PMID: 23936767
A Complex Network of MicroRNAs Expressed in Brain and Genes Associated with Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is a rare neurological disease affecting mainly motor neurons and often leads to paralysis and death in extreme cases.
For exploring the role of microRNAs in genes regulation in ALS disease, miRanda was employed for prediction of target sites of miRNAs expressed in various parts of brain and CNS on 35 genes associated with ALS.
Similar search was conducted using TargetScan and PicTar for prediction of target sites in 3' UTR only.
1456 target sites were predicted using miRanda and more target sites were found in 5' UTR and CDS region as compared to 3' UTR.
11 target sites were predicted to be common by all the algorithms and, thus, these represent the most significant sites.
Target site hotspots were identified and were recognized as hotspots for multiple miRNAs action, thus, acting as favoured sites of action for the repression of gene expression.
The complex interplay of genes and miRNAs brought about by multiplicity and cooperativity was explored.
This investigation will aid in elucidating the mechanism of action of miRNAs for the considered genes.
The intrinsic network of miRNAs expressed in nervous system and genes associated with ALS may provide rapid and effective outcome for therapeutic applications and diagnosis.
PMID: 22028162
Artificial external glottic device for passive lung insufflation.
For patients with neuromuscular disease, air stacking, which inflates the lungs to deep volumes, is important for many reasons.
However, neuromuscular patients with severe glottic dysfunction or indwelling tracheostomy tubes cannot air stack effectively.
For these patients, we developed a device that permits deep lung insufflations substituting for glottic function.
Thirty- seven patients with bulbar-innervated muscle weakness and/or tracheostomies were recruited.
Twenty-three had amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and 14 were tetraplegic patients due to cervical spinal cord injury.
An artificial external glottic device (AEGD) was used to permit passive deep lung insufflation.
In order to confirm the utility of AEGD, vital capacity, maximum insufflation capacity (MIC), and lung insufflation capacity (LIC) with AEGD (LICA) were measured.
For 30 patients, MICs were initially zero.
However, with the use of the AEGD, LICA was measurable for all patients.
The mean LICA was 1,622.7±526.8 mL.
Although MIC was measurable for the remaining 7 patients without utilizing the AEGD, it was significantly less than LICA, which was 1,084.3±259.9 mL and 1,862.9±248 mL, respectively (p&lt;0.05).
The AEGD permits lung insufflation by providing deeper lung volumes than possible by air stacking.
PMID: 23186722
Transplantation of mesenchymal stem cells in ALS.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating incurable, neurodegenerative disease that targets motor neurons (MNs) in the primary motor cortex, brainstem, and spinal cord, leading to muscle atrophy, paralysis, and death due to respiratory failure within 2-5 years.
Currently, there is no cure for ALS.
The development of a therapy that can support or restore MN function and attenuate toxicity in the spinal cord provides the most comprehensive approach for treating ALS.
Mesenchymal stem cells might be suitable for cell therapy in ALS because of their immunomodulatory and protective properties.
In this review, the authors discuss the major challenges to the translation of in vitro and animal studies of MSCs therapy in the clinical setting.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22029574
Expression of mutant TDP-43 induces neuronal dysfunction in transgenic mice.
Abnormal distribution, modification and aggregation of transactivation response DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) are the hallmarks of multiple neurodegenerative diseases, especially frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive inclusions (FTLD-U) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Researchers have identified 44 mutations in the TARDBP gene that encode TDP-43 as causative for cases of sporadic and familial ALS http://www.molgen.ua.ac.be/FTDMutations/.
Certain mutant forms of TDP-43, such as M337V, are associated with increased low molecular weight (LMW) fragments compared to wild-type (WT) TDP-43 and cause neuronal apoptosis and developmental delay in chick embryos.
Such findings support a direct link between altered TDP-43 function and neurodegeneration.
To explore the pathogenic properties of the M337V mutation, we generated and characterized two mouse lines expressing human TDP-43 (hTDP-43(M337V)) carrying this mutation.
hTDP-43(M337V) was expressed primarily in the nuclei of neurons in the brain and spinal cord, and intranuclear and cytoplasmic phosphorylated TDP-43 aggregates were frequently detected.
The levels of TDP-43 LMW products of ~25 kDa and ~35 kDa species were also increased in the transgenic mice.
Moreover, overexpression of hTDP-43(M337V) dramatically down regulated the levels of mouse TDP-43 (mTDP-43) protein and RNA, indicating TDP-43 levels are tightly controlled in mammalian systems.
TDP-43M337V mice displayed reactive gliosis, widespread ubiquitination, chromatolysis, gait abnormalities, and early lethality.
Abnormal cytoplasmic mitochondrial aggregates and abnormal phosphorylated tau were also detected in the mice.
Our novel TDP-43M337V mouse model indicates that overexpression of hTDP-43(M337V) alone is toxic in vivo.
Because overexpression of hTDP-43 in wild-type TDP-43 and TDP-43M337V mouse models produces similar phenotypes, the mechanisms causing pathogenesis in the mutant model remain unknown.
However, our results suggest that overexpression of the hTDP-43(M337V) can cause neuronal dysfunction due to its effect on a number of cell organelles and proteins, such as mitochondria and TDP-43, that are critical for neuronal activity.
The mutant model will serve as a valuable tool in the development of future studies designed to uncover pathways associated with TDP-43 neurotoxicity and the precise roles TDP-43 RNA targets play in neurodegeneration.
PMID: 23136129
The frontotemporal lobar degeneration risk factor, TMEM106B, regulates lysosomal morphology and function.
Haploinsufficiency of Progranulin (PGRN), a gene encoding a secreted glycoprotein, is a major cause of frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin (FTLD-U) positive inclusions.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the TMEM106B gene were recently discovered as a risk factor for FTLD-U, especially in patients with PGRN mutations.
TMEM106B is also associated with cognitive impairment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients.
Despite these studies, little is known about TMEM106B at molecular and cellular levels and how TMEM106B contributes to FTLD.
Here, we show that TMEM106B is localized in the late endosome/lysosome compartments and TMEM106B levels are regulated by lysosomal activities.
Ectopic expression of TMEM106B induces morphologic changes of lysosome compartments and delays the degradation of endocytic cargoes by the endolysosomal pathway.
Furthermore, overexpression of TMEM106B correlates with elevated levels of PGRN, possibly by attenuating lysosomal degradation of PGRN.
These results shed light on the cellular functions of TMEM106B and the roles of TMEM106B in the pathogenesis of FTLD-U with PGRN mutations.
PMID: 23712361
Astrocytic vesicle mobility in health and disease.
Astrocytes are no longer considered subservient to neurons, and are, instead, now understood to play an active role in brain signaling.
The intercellular communication of astrocytes with neurons and other non-neuronal cells involves the exchange of molecules by exocytotic and endocytotic processes through the trafficking of intracellular vesicles.
Recent studies of single vesicle mobility in astrocytes have prompted new views of how astrocytes contribute to information processing in nervous tissue.
Here, we review the trafficking of several types of membrane-bound vesicles that are specifically involved in the processes of (i) intercellular communication by gliotransmitters (glutamate, adenosine 5'-triphosphate, atrial natriuretic peptide), (ii) plasma membrane exchange of transporters and receptors (EAAT2, MHC-II), and (iii) the involvement of vesicle mobility carrying aquaporins (AQP4) in water homeostasis.
The properties of vesicle traffic in astrocytes are discussed in respect to networking with neighboring cells in physiologic and pathologic conditions, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple sclerosis, and states in which astrocytes contribute to neuroinflammatory conditions.
PMID: 23742895
ALS/FTLD-linked TDP-43 regulates neurite morphology and cell survival in differentiated neurons.
Tar-DNA binding protein of 43kDa (TDP-43) has been characterized as a major component of protein aggregates in brains with neurodegenerative diseases such as frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
However, physiological roles of TDP-43 and early cellular pathogenic effects caused by disease associated mutations in differentiated neurons are still largely unknown.
Here, we investigated the physiological roles of TDP-43 and the effects of missense mutations associated with diseases in differentiated cortical neurons.
The reduction of TDP-43 by siRNA increased abnormal neurites and decreased cell viability.
ALS/FTLD-associated missense mutant proteins (A315T, Q331K, and M337V) were partially mislocalized to the cytosol and neurites when compared to wild-type and showed abnormal neurites similar to those observed in cases of loss of TDP-43.
Interestingly, cytosolic expression of wild-type TDP-43 with mutated nuclear localization signals also induced abnormal neurtie morphology and reduction of cell viability.
However, there was no significant difference in the effects of cytosolic expression in neuronal morphology and cell toxicity between wild-type and missense mutant proteins.
Thus, our results suggest that mislocalization of missense mutant TDP-43 may contribute to loss of TDP-43 function and affect neuronal morphology, probably via dominant negative action before severe neurodegeneration in differentiated cortical neurons.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22732899
Ambiguity domain-based identification of altered gait pattern in ALS disorder.
The onset of a neurological disorder, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), is so subtle that the symptoms are often overlooked, thereby ruling out the option of early detection of the abnormality.
In the case of ALS, over 75% of the affected individuals often experience awkwardness when using their limbs, which alters their gait, i.e. stride and swing intervals.
The aim of this work is to suitably represent the non-stationary characteristics of gait (fluctuations in stride and swing intervals) in order to facilitate discrimination between normal and ALS subjects.
We define a simple-yet-representative feature vector space by exploiting the ambiguity domain (AD) to achieve efficient classification between healthy and pathological gait stride interval.
The stride-to-stride fluctuations and the swing intervals of 16 healthy control and 13 ALS-affected subjects were analyzed.
Three features that are representative of the gait signal characteristics were extracted from the AD-space and are fed to linear discriminant analysis and neural network classifiers, respectively.
Overall, maximum accuracies of 89.2% (LDA) and 100% (NN) were obtained in classifying the ALS gait.
PMID: 22445064
The tip of the iceberg: RNA-binding proteins with prion-like domains in neurodegenerative disease.
Prions are self-templating protein conformers that are naturally transmitted between individuals and promote phenotypic change.
In yeast, prion-encoded phenotypes can be beneficial, neutral or deleterious depending upon genetic background and environmental conditions.
A distinctive and portable 'prion domain' enriched in asparagine, glutamine, tyrosine and glycine residues unifies the majority of yeast prion proteins.
Deletion of this domain precludes prionogenesis and appending this domain to reporter proteins can confer prionogenicity.
An algorithm designed to detect prion domains has successfully identified 19 domains that can confer prion behavior.
Scouring the human genome with this algorithm enriches a select group of RNA-binding proteins harboring a canonical RNA recognition motif (RRM) and a putative prion domain.
Indeed, of 210 human RRM-bearing proteins, 29 have a putative prion domain, and 12 of these are in the top 60 prion candidates in the entire genome.
Startlingly, these RNA-binding prion candidates are inexorably emerging, one by one, in the pathology and genetics of devastating neurodegenerative disorders, including: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive inclusions (FTLD-U), Alzheimer's disease and Huntington's disease.
For example, FUS and TDP-43, which rank 1st and 10th among RRM-bearing prion candidates, form cytoplasmic inclusions in the degenerating motor neurons of ALS patients and mutations in TDP-43 and FUS cause familial ALS.
Recently, perturbed RNA-binding proteostasis of TAF15, which is the 2nd ranked RRM-bearing prion candidate, has been connected with ALS and FTLD-U.
We strongly suspect that we have now merely reached the tip of the iceberg.
We predict that additional RNA-binding prion candidates identified by our algorithm will soon surface as genetic modifiers or causes of diverse neurodegenerative conditions.
Indeed, simple prion-like transfer mechanisms involving the prion domains of RNA-binding proteins could underlie the classical non-cell-autonomous emanation of neurodegenerative pathology from originating epicenters to neighboring portions of the nervous system.
This article is part of a Special Issue entitled RNA-Binding Proteins.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22778949
From Transcriptome to Noncoding RNAs: Implications in ALS Mechanism.
In the last years, numerous studies have focused on understanding the metabolism of RNA and its implication in disease processes but abnormal RNA metabolism is still unknown.
RNA plays a central role in translating genetic information into proteins and in many other catalytic and regulatory tasks.
Recent advances in the study of RNA metabolism revealed complex pathways for the generation and maintenance of functional RNA in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Interestingly, perturbations in RNA processing have been described in ALS at various levels such as gene transcription, mRNA stabilization, transport, and translational regulations.
In this paper, we will discuss the alteration of RNA profile in ALS disease, starting from transcription, the first step leading to gene expression, through the posttranscriptional regulation, including RNA/DNA binding proteins and aberrant exon splicing to protein noncoding RNAs, as lncRNA and microRNA.
PMID: 22445063
Coadministration of bicuculline and NMDA induces paraplegia in the rat.
Motor neurons (MNs) of an adult rat are normally insensitive to the neurotoxic action of NMDA.
Meanwhile, the experiments in non-motor neurons showed that sensitivity to NMDA can be increased by bicuculline, an antagonist at GABA(A) receptors.
The aim of the present work was to examine whether bicuculline would produce such an effect in the adult MNs.
In adult Wistar rats, intrathecal injection of bicuculline and NMDA individually failed to affect motor activity of the extremities.
In contrast, bicuculline-NMDA combination dose-dependently impaired hindlimb functions.
At the 9th day after injections of the combination, a paraplegia with persistent bilateral spastic extension developed in all animals.
Light microscopic assessment showed that the development of the motor deficit is associated with pathological changes in spinal motor neurons (swelling, accumulation of the Nissl substance near nucleus, hyperchromatosis, shrinkage, and chromatolysis), mainly in the lumbar ventral horns.
Additionally, distinct abnormalities were observed in the white matter of the lumbar cords.
The bicuculline-NMDA combination induced a loss of spinal cord MNs while sparing the dorsal horn neurons.
The effects of the combination were reversed by muscimol, a GABA(A) agonist.
Thus, an inhibition of GABA(A)ergic processes can induce NMDA sensitivity in adult MNs.
The present data may provide new insights into the mechanism of motor disorders in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and other states wherein the combination of glutamatergic overstimulation and GABA(A)ergic understimulation takes place.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22964832
Investigation of c9orf72 in 4 neurodegenerative disorders.
OBJECTIVE To estimate the allele frequency of C9orf72 (G4C2) repeats in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), Alzheimer disease (AD), and Parkinson disease (PD).
DESIGN The number of repeats was estimated by a 2-step genotyping strategy.
For expansion carriers, we sequenced the repeat flanking regions and obtained APOE genotypes and MAPT H1/H2 haplotypes.
SETTING Hospitals specializing in neurodegenerative disorders.
SUBJECTS We analyzed 520 patients with FTLD, 389 patients with ALS, 424 patients with AD, 289 patients with PD, 602 controls, 18 families, and 29 patients with PD with the LRRK2 G2019S mutation.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE The expansion frequency.
RESULTS Based on a prior cutoff (&amp;gt;30 repeats), the expansion was detected in 9.3% of patients with ALS, 5.2% of patients with FTLD, and 0.7% of patients with PD but not in controls or patients with AD.
It was significantly associated with family history of ALS or FTLD and age at onset of FTLD.
Phenotype variation (ALS vs FTLD) was not associated with MAPT, APOE, or variability in the repeat flanking regions.
Two patients with PD were carriers of 39 and 32 repeats with questionable pathological significance, since the 39-repeat allele does not segregate with PD.
No expansion or intermediate alleles (20-29 repeats) were found among the G2019S carriers and AD cases with TAR DNA-binding protein 43-positive inclusions.
Surprisingly, the frequency of the 10-repeat allele was marginally increased in all 4 neurodegenerative diseases compared with controls, indicating the presence of an unknown risk variation in the C9orf72 locus.
CONCLUSIONS The C9orf72 expansion is a common cause of ALS and FTLD, but not of AD or PD.
Our study raises concern about a reliable cutoff for the pathological repeat number, which is important in the utility of genetic screening.
PMID: 21558795
Motoneuron subtypes show specificity in glycine receptor channel abnormalities in a transgenic mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease characterized by selective loss of motoneurons.
Recently we studied glycine receptors (GlyRs) in motoneurons in an ALS mouse model expressing a mutant form of human superoxide dismutase-1 with a Gly93→Ala substitution (G93A-SOD1).
Living motoneurons in dissociated spinal cord cultures were identified by using transgenic mice expressing eGFP driven by the Hb9 promoter.
We showed that GlyR-mediated currents were reduced in large-sized (diameter &gt; 28 μm) Hb9-eGFP(+) motoneurons from G93A-SOD1 embryonic mice.
Here we analyze GlyR currents in a morphologically distinct subgroup of medium-sized (diameter 10-28 μm) Hb9-eGFP(+) motoneurons, presumably gamma or slow-type alpha motoneurons.
We find that glycine-induced current densities were not altered in medium-sized G93A-SOD1 motoneurons.
No significant differences in glycinergic mIPSCs were observed between G93A-SOD1 and control medium-sized motoneurons.
These results indicate that GlyR deficiency early in the disease process of ALS is specific for large alpha motoneurons.
PMID: 23229103
[ALS and frontotemporal dementia - case report and review of the literature].
The occurrence of cognitive decline in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), especially in the form of frontotemporal dementia (FTD), has been described previously.
Recent molecular biology and histopathology data suggest that both ALS and FTD may share common pathological pathways and may present two phenotypes of the same proteinopathy.
The underlying pathophysiological mechanism may be defective RNA- and DNA-modulation, mediated by the proteins TDP43 and FUS. These findings are suggestive of a new disease category of TDP43-proteinopathies, which include ALS, FTD and overlap syndromes.
While about half of the FTD cases are associated with TDP43-deposits, tau is found in the other half.
A significant clinical overlap to other tauopathies exists here as well, for instance with corticobasal degeneration.
In this paper, we present a case report and review the clinical spectrum and current pathogenetic concepts of FTD.
© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.
PMID: 22248478
Novel FUS deletion in a patient with juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (JALS) refers to a form of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) in which a progressive upper and lower motor neuron degeneration begins before 25 years of age.
It is generally associated with slow disease progression.
During the past decade, a number of genes have been reported to cause JALS.
Mutations in the ALSIN gene cause JALS type 2 (ALS2) as well as juvenile primary lateral sclerosis and infantile-onset ascending spastic paralysis.
Mutations in the SETX gene can also sometimes lead to JALS.
Conversely, mutations in SOD1, TARDBP, and FUS typically cause pure ALS, with adult onset between 46 and 56 years of age and usually rapid progression over 3 to 5 years.
Recently, a few mutations in FUS have been associated with juvenile-onset of ALS characterized by a very rapid progression.
To investigate the genetics of a patient with juvenile-onset ALS.
We sequenced all the coding exons of SOD1, TARDBP, and FUS in a 19-year-old patient experiencing rapid degeneration of upper and lower motor neurons.
A novel 1-base pair deletion was detected in exon 14 of the FUS gene, leading to a frameshift and the integration of 33 new amino acids.
The variant p.R495QfsX527 is located in the highly conserved, extreme C terminal of the FUS protein, where most of the mutations in FUS have been identified.
The variant was also identified in the unaffected 47-year-old mother of the patient, who remains asymptomatic.
Our finding, along with other research, further confirms that FUS mutations can lead to an early-onset malignant form of ALS.
In addition, our data lend additional support to the notion that disruption of the conserved C terminal of FUS is critical for developing ALS.
PMID: 22047141
Generation and characterization of transgenic mice expressing mitochondrial targeted red fluorescent protein selectively in neurons: modeling mitochondriopathy in excitotoxicity and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Mitochondria have roles or appear to have roles in the pathogenesis of several chronic age-related and acute neurological disorders, including Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, and cerebral ischemia, and could be critical targets for development of rational mechanism-based, disease-modifying therapeutics for treating these disorders effectively.
A deeper understanding of neural tissue mitochondria pathobiologies as definitive mediators of neural injury, disease, and cell death merits further study, and the development of additional tools to study neural mitochondria will help achieve this unmet need.
We created transgenic mice that express the coral (Discosoma sp.) red fluorescent protein DsRed2 specifically in mitochondria of neurons using a construct engineered with a Thy1 promoter, specific for neuron expression, to drive expression of a fusion protein of DsRed2 with a mitochondrial targeting sequence.
The biochemical and histological characterization of these mice shows the expression of mitochondrial-targeted DsRed2 to be specific for mitochondria and concentrated in distinct CNS regions, including cerebral cortex, hippocampus, thalamus, brainstem, and spinal cord.
Red fluorescent mitochondria were visualized in cerebral cortical and hippocampal pyramidal neurons, ventrobasal thalamic neurons, subthalamic neurons, and spinal motor neurons.
For the purpose of proof of principle application, these mice were used in excitotoxicity paradigms and double transgenic mice were generated by crossing Thy1-mitoDsRed2 mice with transgenic mice expressing enhanced-GFP (eGFP) under the control of the Hlxb9 promoter that drives eGFP expression specifically in motor neurons and by crossing Thy1-mitoDsRed2 mice to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) mice expressing human mutant superoxide dismutase-1.
These novel transgenic mice will be a useful tool for better understanding the biology of mitochondria in mouse and cellular models of human neurological disorders as exemplified by the mitochondrial swelling and fission seen in excitotoxicity and mouse ALS.
PMID: 23581544
In vivo D-serine hetero-exchange through alanine-serine-cysteine (ASC) transporters detected by microelectrode biosensors.
D-serine, a co-agonist of N-methyl D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors, has been implicated in neurological and psychiatric disorders such as cerebral ischemia, lateral amyotrophic sclerosis, or schizophrenia.
D-serine signaling represents an important pharmacological target for treating these diseases; however, the biochemical mechanisms controlling extracellular D-serine levels in vivo are still unclear.
D-serine heteroexchange through small neutral amino acid transporters has been shown in cell cultures and brain slices and could provide a biochemical mechanism for the control of D-serine extracellular concentration in vivo.
Alternatively, exocytotic D-serine release has also been proposed.
In this study, the dynamics of D-serine release and clearance were explored in vivo on a second-by-second time scale using microelectrode biosensors.
The rate of D-serine clearance in the rat frontal cortex after a microionophoretic injection revealed a transporter-mediated uptake mechanism.
D-serine uptake was blocked by small neutral l-amino acids, implicating alanine-serine-cysteine (ASC) transporters, in particular high affinity Asc-1 and low affinity ASCT2 transporters.
Interestingly, changes in alanine, serine, or threonine levels resulted in D-serine release through ASC transporters.
Asc-1, but not ASCT2, appeared to release D-serine in response to changes in amino acid concentrations.
Finally, neuronal silencing by tetrodotoxin increased D-serine extracellular concentration by an ASC-transporter-dependent mechanism.
Together, these results indicate that D-serine heteroexchange through ASC transporters is present in vivo and may constitute a key component in the regulation of D-serine extracellular concentration.
PMID: 23231972
Angiogenin variants are not associated with Parkinson's disease in the ethnic Chinese population.
Recently, the angiogenin gene has been reported to be significantly associated with Parkinson's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in populations of European and American ancestry.
But there have been no studies investigating the association between angiogenin and Parkinson's disease in the ethnic Chinese population.
We conducted a case-control study to evaluate the association between angiogenin and Parkinson's disease in a Chinese population from mainland China.
We sequenced the exons of angiogenin in 532 Parkinson's disease patients and 480 controls.
We did not detect an angiogenin coding region mutation in either the patients or the controls.
Our data do not support the association of angiogenin variants with PD in Han Chinese of mainland China.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23231971
TARDBP mutations in Parkinson's disease.
Mutations of the TARDBP gene encoding TDP-43 protein have been shown to cause amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and have been reported to present with clinical heterogeneity including parkinsonism.
In addition, TDP-43 pathology has been observed across a spectrum of neurodegenerative disorders, including Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease.
Herein we report the presence of a TDP-43 mutation in a patient with a clinical diagnosis of Parkinson's disease.
The TDP-43 p.N267S substitution has been previously implicated in both amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia.
Our findings widen the phenotypic presentation for the TDP-43 p.N267S substitution and support a possible role for rare TDP-43 mutations presenting with Parkinson's disease.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22749050
Diagnostic accuracy using diffusion tensor imaging in the diagnosis of ALS: a meta-analysis.
A number of studies have reported decreases in fractional anistropy (FA) in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI).
The purpose of this study was to perform a meta-analysis in order to estimate the diagnostic test accuracy measures of DTI for the diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
We searched MEDLINE (1966-April 2011), EMBASE (1999-April 2011), CINAHL (1999-April 2011), and Cochrane (2005-April 2011) databases to identify studies that measured FA in ALS subjects.
Human, single-center studies using a DTI region of interest (ROI) or tractography techniques were used to compare FA values along the brain corticospinal tracts between ALS subjects and healthy controls.
There were no language restrictions.
Independent extraction of articles by 2 authors using predefined data fields including study quality indicators.
We identified 30 case-control studies that used region of interest or tractography DTI techniques.
We applied binormal receiver operative characteristic (ROC) curve analysis to assign specificity and sensitivity for each study.
We applied the bivariate mixed-effects regression model using the Markov Chain Monte Carlo Simulation to calculate summary estimates for the sensitivity and specificity.
We used the metan module in Stata, version 11.0, to calculate the area under the ROC curve, diagnostic odds ratio and the test effectiveness summary estimates.
The pooled sensitivity was 0.65 (95% CI 0.61-0.69); the pooled specificity, 0.67 (95% CI 0.63-0.72); the pooled diagnostic odds ratio, 1.88 (95% CI 1.46-2.30); the pooled test effectiveness, 1.04 (95% CI 0.81-1.27); and the pooled area under the ROC curve, 0.76 (95% CI 0.71-0.81).
Subanalyses comparing magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) field strength (1.5T vs. 3.0T) and brain location (corticospinal tract average vs. internal capsule) revealed no significant differences in the test accuracy measures.
Reference standard used for the diagnosis of ALS was the El Escorial criteria.
There was at least moderate heterogeneity between the studies.
True study quality is uncertain.
The discriminatory capability of DTI to make a diagnosis of ALS is only modest.
There were no significant differences in the diagnostic test accuracy summary estimates with respect to MRI field strength or brain location.
Copyright © 2012 AUR.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23010029
Real-time analysis and direct observations of different superoxide dismutase (SOD1) molecules bindings to aggregates in temporal evolution step.
The misfolding and intracellular aggregation of Cu-Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) is pathologically key feature of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Although details of the mechanisms continue to be unclear, there are key steps in the possible pathway to the development of ALS.
This study focuses on interactions between different SOD1 molecules (A4V apo/holo, and WT apo/holo) and homogeneous aggregates in the temporal evolution step, and a determination of whether any of the SOD1 molecules are reactive to the aggregates with the extent of binding, as determined by surface plasmon resonance (SPR) measurements.
Using a kinetic binding model, the association constant of A4V apo was found to be three times larger than that for the WT apo species.
Differences in the extent of the interactions were also simultaneously measured and visualized by means of SPR imaging techniques.
The SPR-based approach suggests direct correlation between SPR signal and the extent of molecular binding, which can identify the significant contributors to the formation of macroaggregates of SOD1 in the temporal evolution step.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22985429
No GGGGCC-hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 in parkinsonism patients in Sweden.
An intronic GGGGCC-hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 was recently identified as a major cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia.
Some amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients have signs of parkinsonism, and many parkinsonism patients develop dementia.
In this study we examined if the hexanucleotide repeat expansion was present in parkinsonism patients, to clarify if there could be a relationship between the repeat expansion and disease.
We studied the size of the hexanucleotide repeat expansion in a well defined population-based cohort of 135 Parkinson's disease patients and 39 patients with atypical parkinsonism and compared with 645 Swedish control subjects.
We found no correlation between Parkinson's disease or atypical parkinsonism and the size of the GGGGCC repeat expansion in C9ORF72.
In conclusion, this GGGGCC-repeat expansion in C9ORF72 is not a cause of parkinsonism in the Swedish population.
PMID: 22305565
Clinical translation of stem cells in neurodegenerative disorders.
Stem cells and their derivatives show tremendous potential for treating many disorders, including neurodegenerative diseases.
We discuss here the challenges and potential for the translation of stem-cell-based approaches into treatments for Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23148231
New frontiers in human cell biology and medicine: can pluripotent stem cells deliver?
Human pluripotent stem cells provide enormous opportunities to treat disease using cell therapy.
But human stem cells can also drive biomedical and cell biological discoveries in a human model system, which can be directly linked to understanding disease or developing new therapies.
Finally, rigorous scientific studies of these cells can and should inform the many science and medical policy issues that confront the translation of these technologies to medicine.
In this paper, I discuss these issues using amyotrophic lateral sclerosis as an example.
PMID: 22410533
The first clinical trial in Tohoku University Hospital after the Great East Japan Earthquake: the heroic efforts of my friend, Professor Masashi Aoki.
The Great East Japan Earthquake of 2011 seriously jeopardized our collaborative       research with Professor Masashi Aoki (Tohoku University School of Medicine) on the development       of new therapies for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) using hepatocyte growth factor.
After       the earthquake struck, Professor Aoki made a tremendous contribution to saving patients' lives       and to recovering from the disastrous situation.
Thanks to his strong leadership and support       from many reliable colleagues, we could finally start new clinical trials for ALS patients.
In       this article, I wish to introduce Professor Aoki's heroic efforts.
PMID: 22015310
C/EBPβ expression in activated microglia in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Neuroinflammation is thought to play a pathogenic role in many neurodegenerative disorders including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
In this study we demonstrate that the expression of nitric oxide (NO) synthase-2 (NOS2), and cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 induced by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) with interferon-γ is higher in microglial-enriched cultures from G93A-SOD1 mice, an ALS animal model, than from wild type mice.
The levels of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein β (C/EBPβ), a transcription factor that regulates proinflammatory gene expression, are also upregulated in activated G93A-SOD1 microglial cells.
In vivo, systemic lipopolysaccharide also induces an exacerbated neuroinflammatory response in G93A-SOD1 mice versus wild type mice, with increased expression of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), CD11b, nitric oxide synthase-2, cyclooxygenase-2, proinflammatory cytokines, and C/EBPβ.
Finally, we report that C/EBPβ is expressed by microglia in the spinal cord of ALS patients.
This is the first demonstration to our knowledge of microglial C/EBPβ expression in human disease.
Altogether these findings indicate that G93A-SOD1 expression results in an exacerbated pattern of neuroinflammation and suggest that C/EBPβ is a candidate to regulate the expression of potentially neurotoxic genes in microglial cells in ALS.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22560226
Elevated PGC-1α activity sustains mitochondrial biogenesis and muscle function without extending survival in a mouse model of inherited ALS.
The transcriptional coactivator PGC-1α induces multiple effects on muscle, including increased mitochondrial mass and activity.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive, fatal, adult-onset neurodegenerative disorder characterized by selective loss of motor neurons and skeletal muscle degeneration.
An early event is thought to be denervation-induced muscle atrophy accompanied by alterations in mitochondrial activity and morphology within muscle.
We now report that elevation of PGC-1α levels in muscles of mice that develop fatal paralysis from an ALS-causing SOD1 mutant elevates PGC-1α-dependent pathways throughout disease course.
Mitochondrial biogenesis and activity are maintained through end-stage disease, accompanied by retention of muscle function, delayed muscle atrophy, and significantly improved muscle endurance even at late disease stages.
However, survival was not extended.
Therefore, muscle is not a primary target of mutant SOD1-mediated toxicity, but drugs increasing PGC-1α activity in muscle represent an attractive therapy for maintaining muscle function during progression of ALS.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22402721
[Inflammatory mechanisms in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis].
Neuroinflammation is a pathological hallmark in human amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients and in the transgenic models of the disease.
The importance of glial cell activation and pro-inflammatory cytokines in ALS has been confirmed by numerous studies.
For instance, tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), a major pro-inflammatory cytokine, activates microglia and cause neurotoxicity in motor neurons.
More recently, the relationship of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and motor neuron degeneration has garnered attention since optineurin (OPTN) mutations were reported in familial ALS.
OPTN negatively regulates TNF-α-induced NF-κB activation, but OPTN mutations can lead to dysinhibition of NF-κB-induced neurotoxicity.
Notably, OPTN-positive inclusions are observed not only in familial ALS with OPTN mutation but also in sporadic ALS and in familial ALS with SOD1 and fused in sarcoma mutations, suggesting that OPTN- and NF-κB-related pathways are relevant to the general pathomechanisms of ALS.
In this review, we discuss inflammatory aspects of ALS comprising the roles of cytokines, glial cells, and T cells.
PMID: 23373475
The impact of clinical factors, riluzole and therapeutic interventions on ALS survival: a population based study in Modena, Italy.
The prognostic role of riluzole, enteral nutrition (EN), non-invasive ventilation (NIV) and interdisciplinary care in ALS is still debated.
A population based study has been performed focusing on ALS survival, with particular attention to prognostic factors and therapeutic intervention.
All patients diagnosed with ALS between 2000 and 2009 and residing in Modena, Italy, have been registered.
A centre for motor neuron disease (MND) has been active in our province since 2000, in addition to a prospective registry collecting all incident cases.
One hundred and ninety-three incident cases have been collected during the 10 years of the study.
Results demonstrated that median survival was 41 months (the overall three-year and five-year survival rates being 54.36% and 28.81%, respectively).
Based on univariate analysis, factors related to survival were: age at diagnosis, gender, site of onset, phenotype, riluzole treatment and tracheostomy.
In the Cox multivariable model, the factors independently related to a longer survival were age (p &lt; 0.01), site of onset (p = 0.02) and riluzole treatment (p &lt; 0.01), with a median gain in survival of 29 months (patients aged &lt; 55 years compared with patients ≥ 55 years), 20 months (spinal versus bulbar onset), and 12 months (riluzole, yes vs. no), respectively.
In conclusion, the study has confirmed the prognostic role of clinical features, but has surprisingly demonstrated that riluzole prolonged life significantly longer than NIV and EN.
This observational study described the effects of ALS management in a setting that may approximate routine clinical practice more closely than randomized controlled trial (RCT); effects of uncontrolled potential confounders, however, cannot be excluded.
PMID: 23286754
Prevalence and characteristics of pain in early and late stages of ALS.
The purpose of this study was to compare pain frequency in early and late stages of ALS and to describe the relationship between pain intensity and functional status.
Sixty-four patients in different stages of ALS were asked to complete the Neuropathic Pain Scale and to draw the localization of their pain on a body cartoon.
The Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Functional Rating Scale-Revised (ALSFRS-R) and Forced Vital Capacity (FVC) values were obtained from the medical record.
A χ(2) correlation was used to compare the proportion of patients with pain in different stages of ALS.
Correlation coefficient was used to describe the relationship between pain intensity and functional status (ALSFRS-R).
Pain was reported by about half the patients.
Using FVC values, patients were subdivided into early, intermediate and late stage of the disease.
There was a negative correlation between pain intensity and functional status.
There was no statistically significant difference in the presence of pain among patients in the different stages of ALS.
In conclusion, our study showed that pain is common in ALS patients.
Although pain intensity did correlate negatively with functional status, as expected, we were surprised to find that pain was also present in the early stages of the disease.
PMID: 21893207
Direct evidence of intra- and interhemispheric corticomotor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: an automated MRI structural connectivity study.
Although the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is uncertain, there is mounting neuroimaging evidence to suggest a mechanism involving the degeneration of multiple white matter (WM) motor and extramotor neural networks.
This insight has been achieved, in part, by using MRI Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and the voxelwise analysis of anisotropy indices, along with DTI tractography to determine which specific motor pathways are involved with ALS pathology.
Automated MRI structural connectivity analyses, which probe WM connections linking various functionally discrete cortical regions, have the potential to provide novel information about degenerative processes within multiple white matter (WM) pathways.
Our hypothesis is that measures of altered intra- and interhemispheric structural connectivity of the primary motor and somatosensory cortex will provide an improved assessment of corticomotor involvement in ALS.
To test this hypothesis, we acquired High Angular Resolution Diffusion Imaging (HARDI) scans along with high resolution structural images (sMRI) on 15 patients with clinical evidence of upper and lower motor neuron involvement, and 20 matched control participants.
Whole brain probabilistic tractography was applied to define specific WM pathways connecting discrete corticomotor targets generated from anatomical parcellation of sMRI of the brain.
The integrity of these connections was interrogated by comparing the mean fractional anisotropy (FA) derived for each WM pathway.
To assist in the interpretation of results, we measured the reproducibility of the FA summary measures over time (6months) in control participants.
We also incorporated into our analysis pipeline the evaluation and replacement of outlier voxels due to head motion and physiological noise.
When assessing corticomotor connectivity, we found a significant reduction in mean FA within a number of intra- and interhemispheric motor pathways in ALS patients.
The abnormal intrahemispheric pathways include the corticospinal tracts involving the left and right precentral gyri (lh.preCG, rh.preCG) and brainstem (bs); right postcentral gyrus (rh.postCG) and bs; lh.preCG and left posterior cingulate gyrus (lh.PCG); rh.preCG and right posterior cingulate gyrus (rh.PCG); and the rh.preCG and right paracentral gyrus (rh.paraCG).
The abnormal interhemispheric pathways included the lh.preCG and rh.preCG; lh.preCG and rh.paraCG; lh.preCG and right superior frontal gyrus (rh.supFG); lh.preCG and rh.postCG; rh.preCG and left paracentral gyrus (lh.paraCG); rh.preCG and left superior frontal gyrus (lh.supFG); and the rh.preCG and left caudal middle frontal gyrus (lh.caudMF).
The reproducibility of the measurement of these pathways was high (variation less than 5%).
Maps of the outlier rejection voxels, revealed clusters within the corpus callosum and corticospinal projections.
This finding highlights the importance of correcting for motion artefacts and physiological noise when studying clinical populations.
Our novel findings, many of which are consistent with known pathology, show extensive involvement and degeneration of multiple corticomotor pathways in patients with upper and lower motor neuron signs and provide support for the use of automated structural connectivity techniques for studying neurodegenerative disease processes.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22049684
[Screening of mutations in SOD1 gene and analysis of genotype-phenotype correlation in Chinese patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis].
In this study, we screened for the Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) mutations in 8 probands who had been clinically diagnosed with familiar amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS) using PCR and direct sequencing.
Two known mutations were detected in the three probands.
Two probands carried the same Cys111Tyr (c.332G &gt; A) mutation in exon 4, and others carried Gly147Asp (c.440G &gt; A) mutation in exon 5.
These two mutations were first reported in the Chinese ALS patients.
After reviewing all clinical data of these three pedigrees, we found that Cys111Tyr led to a relatively mild phenotype and Gly147Asp displayed a rapidly progression, which needs to be confirmed by further study in more ALS patients.
In conclusion, this study extends the spectrum of SOD1 mutations in the Chinese FALS patients and facilitates to investigate characteristics and distribution of SOD1 mutations in the Chinese population.
PMID: 23527497
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and cancer: a register-based study in Sweden.
Comorbidity of cancer with ALS has been studied previously.
Detailed description of the temporal relationship between cancer and ALS is, however, lacking.
We conducted a nested case-control study of ALS in Sweden during 1987-2009, including 5481 cases of ALS identified from the Swedish Patient Register and 27,405 controls randomly selected from the general Swedish population.
Odds ratios (ORs) for association of ALS with previous cancer diagnosis and incidence rate ratios (IRRs) of cancer after diagnosis were calculated to compare ALS patients with ALS-free individuals.
Overall, a previous cancer diagnosis was not associated with subsequent risk of ALS (OR 1.00; 95% CI 0.91-1.10).
No overall association was observed for any specific cancer type.
An increased risk of ALS was observed during the first year after cancer diagnosis (OR 1.50; 95% CI 1.17-1.92).
In contrast, a lower risk of cancer was observed in ALS patients after diagnosis compared with ALS-free individuals (IRR 0.84; 95% CI 0.69-1.02).
The risk reduction was seen primarily two or more years after ALS diagnosis (IRR 0.64; 95% CI 0.45-0.88).
Our results provide no evidence for comorbidity of cancer and ALS overall.
Surveillance biases seem the most likely explanation for the limited associations detected.
PMID: 23653884
Neurosurgery and the dawning age of Brain-Machine Interfaces.
Brain-machine interfaces (BMIs) are on the horizon for clinical neurosurgery.
Electrocorticography-based platforms are less invasive than implanted microelectrodes, however, the latter are unmatched in their ability to achieve fine motor control of a robotic prosthesis capable of natural human behaviors.
These technologies will be crucial to restoring neural function to a large population of patients with severe neurologic impairment - including those with spinal cord injury, stroke, limb amputation, and disabling neuromuscular disorders such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
On the opposite end of the spectrum are neural enhancement technologies for specialized applications such as combat.
An ongoing ethical dialogue is imminent as we prepare for BMI platforms to enter the neurosurgical realm of clinical management.
PMID: 23090035
The association between cancer and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Increasing evidence suggests that some neurodegenerative disorders, such as Parkinson's disease, are inversely related to cancer.
Few epidemiologic studies have examined the relationship between cancer and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), another major neurodegenerative disease.
This study addresses that gap.
Using data from 16 population-based cancer registries of the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program of the U.S.
National Cancer Institute and death certificates, we followed 2.7 million cancer survivors who were diagnosed between 1973 and 2007, and who survived at least 1 year following cancer diagnosis.
The standardized mortality ratio (SMR) of observed to expected ALS deaths in cancer survivors was calculated.
A total of 1,216 ALS deaths were reported among 1 year survivors of cancer over 16.6 million person-years of follow-up.
ALS mortality was not significantly associated with the incidence of total cancers [SMR = 1.00 (95 % confidence interval (CI), 0.95-1.06)].
There was, however, a significantly elevated risk of ALS death among survivors of melanoma [SMR = 1.49 (95 % (CI), 1.17-1.85)] and of tongue cancer [SMR = 2.57 (95 % CI, 1.41-4.32)], and a significantly reduced ALS death risk among prostate cancer survivors [SMR = 0.86 (95 % CI, 0.76-0.96)].
Cancer at certain sites may be related to risk of ALS death.
Possible biologic factors linking ALS to these cancers are discussed.
Future studies should attempt to confirm these associations using incident ALS outcomes.
Establishing relationships between cancer and neurodegenerative diseases, such as ALS, opens new opportunities for understanding related pathophysiologic and therapeutic possibilities for these diseases.
PMID: 22198567
Oxidative stress induced by glutathione depletion reproduces pathological modifications of TDP-43 linked to TDP-43 proteinopathies.
TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) is a major component of ubiquitin-positive inclusion of TDP-43 proteinopathies including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitinated inclusions, which is now referred to as FTLD-TDP.
TDP-43 in the aberrant inclusion is known to be hyperphosphorylated at C-terminal sites, to be truncated at the N-terminal region, and to re-distribute from nucleus to cytoplasm or neurite.
The pathogenic role of these modifications, however, has not been clarified.
Furthermore, there is no evidence about the initial cause of these modifications.
Herein we show that ethacrynic acid (EA), which is able to increase cellular oxidative stress through glutathione depletion, induces TDP-43 C-terminal phosphorylation at serine 403/404 and 409/410, insolubilization, C-terminal fragmentation, and cytoplasmic distribution in NSC34 cells and primary cortical neurons.
In the investigation using a nonphosphorylable mutant of TDP-43, there was no evidence that C-terminal phosphorylation of TDP-43 contributes to its solubility or distribution under EA induction.
Our findings suggest that oxidative stress induced by glutathione depletion is associated with the process of the pathological TDP-43 modifications and provide new insight for TDP-43 proteinopathies.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22645277
Evidence for an oligogenic basis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder with a substantial heritable component.
In pedigrees affected by its familial form, incomplete penetrance is often observed.
We hypothesized that this could be caused by a complex inheritance of risk variants in multiple genes.
Therefore, we screened 111 familial ALS (FALS) patients from 97 families, and large cohorts of sporadic ALS (SALS) patients and control subjects for mutations in TAR DNA-binding protein (TARDBP), fused in sarcoma/translated in liposarcoma (FUS/TLS), superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1), angiogenin (ANG) and chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 (C9orf72).
Mutations were identified in 48% of FALS families, 8% of SALS patients and 0.5% of control subjects.
In five of the FALS families, we identified multiple mutations in ALS-associated genes.
We detected FUS/TLS and TARDBP mutations in combination with ANG mutations, and C9orf72 repeat expansions with TARDBP, SOD1 and FUS/TLS mutations.
Statistical analysis demonstrated that the presence of multiple mutations in FALS is in excess of what is to be expected by chance (P = 1.57 × 10(-7)).
The most compelling evidence for an oligogenic basis was found in individuals with a p.N352S mutation in TARDBP, detected in five FALS families and three apparently SALS patients.
Genealogical and haplotype analyses revealed that these individuals shared a common ancestor.
We obtained DNA of 14 patients with this TARDBP mutation, 50% of whom had an additional mutation (ANG, C9orf72 or homozygous TARDBP).
Hereby, we provide evidence for an oligogenic aetiology of ALS.
This may have important implications for the interpretation of whole exome/genome experiments designed to identify new ALS-associated genes and for genetic counselling, especially of unaffected family members.
PMID: 23268907
[Palliative care for elderly patients living in rented housing by pharmacists].
Yanase Pharmacy Co., Ltd. actively provides home health care intervention.
The present study examined the effects of drug management guidance provided as home-visit-based health care support for elderly patients living in rented housing.
The subjects were 117 patients who moved into rented accommodation for the elderly between June 2009 and February 2012, and who received drug administration guidance.
The majority of the subjects had intractable diseases: 74(63%)were terminally ill with cancer, 7(6%)had amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and 2(2%)had muscular dystrophy.
Home-visit-based support included accompanying physicians' visits, formulation support, participation in the conference, and the provision of drug information for home-visiting nurses.
The following formulation support measures were used: reducing intravenous infusion was proposed to address terminally ill cancer patients with a large amount of sputum; advice was provided on the selection of opioids for patients with renal failure; and drug options were discussed to alleviate the symptoms of gastrointestinal obstruction.
All of these measures effectively alleviated symptoms.
PMID: 21989245
Clinical genetics of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: what do we really know?
Hereditary amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) encompasses a group of genetic disorders characterized by adult-onset loss of the lower and upper motor neuron systems, often with involvement of other parts of the nervous system.
Cases of hereditary ALS have been attributed to mutations in 12 different genes, the most common being SOD1, FUS and TARDBP-mutations in the other genes are rare.
The identified genes explain 25-35% of cases of familial ALS, but identifying the remaining genes has proved difficult.
Only a few genes seem to account for significant numbers of ALS cases, with many others causing a few cases each.
Hereditary ALS can be inherited in an autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive or X-linked manner, and families with low disease penetrance are frequently observed.
In such families, the genetic predisposition may remain unnoticed, so many patients carry a diagnosis of isolated or sporadic ALS.
The only clinical feature that distinguishes recognized hereditary from apparently sporadic ALS is a lower mean age of onset in the former.
All the clinical features reported in hereditary cases (including signs of extrapyramidal, cerebellar or cognitive involvement) have also been observed in sporadic cases.
Genetic counseling and risk assessment in relatives depend on establishing the specific gene defect and the disease penetrance in the particular family.
PMID: 23589615
The NADPH oxidase pathway is dysregulated by the P2X7 receptor in the SOD1-G93A microglia model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Inflammation and oxidative stress are thought to play determinant roles in the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Degenerating motor neurons produce signals that activate microglia to release reactive oxygen species (ROS) and proinflammatory cytokines, resulting in a vicious cycle of neurodegeneration.
The ALS-causing mutant protein Cu(+)/Zn(+) superoxide dismutase SOD1-G93A directly enhances the activity of the main ROS-producing enzyme in microglia, NADPH oxidase 2 (NOX2), a well-known player in the pathogenesis of ALS.
Considering that extracellular ATP through P2X7 receptor constitutes a neuron-to-microglia alarm signal implicated in ALS pathology, we used primary microglial cells derived from transgenic SOD1-G93A mice and SOD1-G93A mice lacking the P2X7 receptor to investigate the effects of both pharmacological induction and genetic ablation of receptor activity on the NOX2 pathway.
We observed that, in SOD1-G93A microglia, the stimulation of P2X7 receptor by 2'-3'-O-(benzoyl-benzoyl) ATP enhanced NOX2 activity in terms of translocation of p67(phox) to the membrane and ROS production; this effect was totally dependent on Rac1.
We also found that, following P2X7 receptor stimulation, the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 was augmented in ALS microglia, and there was a mutual dependency between the NOX2 and ERK1/2 pathways.
All of these microglia-mediated damaging mechanisms were prevented by knocking out P2X7 receptor and by the use of specific antagonists.
These findings suggest a noxious mechanism by which P2X7 receptor leads to enhanced oxidative stress in ALS microglia and identify the P2X7 receptor as a promising target for the development of therapeutic strategies to slow down the progression of ALS.
PMID: 22530473
Reducing fistula rates following laryngotracheal separation.
Laryngotracheal separation (LTS) is an uncommonly performed but highly effective procedure for intractable aspiration in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and other neurodegenerative conditions.
Previously published series have noted rates of postoperative tracheocutaneous fistula formation as high as 1 in 3 patients.
This report details the use of a muscle flap-reinforced imbrication technique to reduce the incidence of fistula formation after LTS surgery.
All patients who underwent LTS surgery at the reporting institutions between 2004 and 2010 were identified.
The principal diagnosis, patient characteristics, the presence of a preexisting tracheotomy, and postoperative complications were recorded.
We describe the technique for imbrication closure of the proximal stump with strap muscle reinforcement.
Thirteen patients (10 male, 3 female; median age, 53 years; interquartile range, 45 to 66 years) underwent the LTS procedure; amyotrophic lateral sclerosis was the principal diagnosis in 8 of the 13 patients.
Six patients had a preexisting tracheotomy.
None developed tracheocutaneous fistula, hematoma, or wound infection.
Two patients required stomaplasty at a later date.
Strap muscle flap-reinforced imbrication closure of the proximal tracheal stump after LTS surgery allows for a low incidence of postoperative fistula formation.
PMID: 22234310
Protein misfolding, mitochondrial dysfunction and muscle loss are not directly dependent on soluble and aggregation state of mSOD1 protein in skeletal muscle of ALS.
Mutant superoxide dismutase 1 (mSOD1) is often found as aggregates at the outer-membrane of mitochondria in motor neurons of various mouse models and familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (f-ALS) patients.
It has been postulated that disruption of mitochondrial function by physical association of misfolded mSOD1 aggregates may actually be the trigger for initiation of degeneration of motor neurons in ALS.
However, it was not clear if the same mechanism is involved in muscle degeneration and mitochondrial dysfunction in skeletal muscles of ALS.
Recent study from our laboratory show that two skeletal muscle proteins, namely creatine kinase (CK) and glyceraldehydes-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) undergo major conformational and functional changes in the f-ALS mouse model of ALS (G93A).
In this paper, we report two intriguing observations which are as follows:(i) G93A protein does not form aggregates in skeletal muscle at any stages of disease process probably due to high chymotrypsin-like activity of proteasome and thus G93A protein aggregates have no direct effects on progressive loss of muscle mass and global changes in protein conformation in ALS, and (ii) the soluble G93A protein does not have direct effects on mitochondrial dysfunction as determined by quantifying the release of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in skeletal muscle mitochondria; instead, the proteins affected by G93A possibly affect mitochondrial ROS release.
These data strongly suggest for the first time that unlike in motor neurons, the soluble and aggregation states of the G93A protein do not have direct effects on protein misfolding and mitochondrial dysfunction in skeletal muscle during ALS.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
PMID: 22935988
Sigma-1R agonist improves motor function and motoneuron survival in ALS mice.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive weakness, muscle atrophy, and paralysis due to the loss of upper and lower motoneurons (MNs).
Sigma-1 receptor (sigma-1R) activation promotes neuroprotection after ischemic and traumatic injuries to the central nervous system.
We recently reported that sigma-1R agonist (PRE-084) improves the survival of MNs after root avulsion injury in rats.
Moreover, a mutation of the sigma-1R leading to frontotemporal lobar degeneration/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) was recently described in human patients.
In the present study, we analyzed the potential therapeutic effect of the sigma-1R agonist (PRE-084) in the SOD1(G93A) mouse model of ALS.
Mice were daily administered with PRE-084 (0.25 mg/kg) from 8 to 16 weeks of age.
Functional outcome was assessed by electrophysiological tests and computerized analysis of locomotion.
Histological, immunohistochemical analyses and Western blot of the spinal cord were performed.
PRE-084 administration from 8 weeks of age improved the function of MNs, which was manifested by maintenance of the amplitude of muscle action potentials and locomotor behavior, and preserved neuromuscular connections and MNs in the spinal cord.
Moreover, it extended survival in both female and male mice by more than 15 %.
Delayed administration of PRE-084 from 12 weeks of age also significantly improved functional outcome and preservation of the MNs.
There was an induction of protein kinase C-specific phosphorylation of the NR1 subunit of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor in SOD1(G93A) animals, and a reduction of the microglial reactivity compared with untreated mice.
PRE-084 exerts a dual therapeutic contribution, modulating NMDA Ca(2+) influx to protect MNs, and the microglial reactivity to ameliorate the MN environment.
In conclusion, sigma-1R agonists, such as PRE-084, may be promising candidates for a therapeutical strategy of ALS.
PMID: 23108236
Autophagy activation ameliorates neuronal pathogenesis of FTLD-U mice: a new light for treatment of TARDBP/TDP-43 proteinopathies.
The administration of rapamycin, an MTOR-dependent autophagy activator, for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases has been tested in several animal models.
Thus, whether autophagy activation would lead to the clearance of abnormal accumulation of aggregated proteins in neurodegenerative diseases is worthy of exploration.
We have recently shown that rapamycin administration at the early pathological stage of a mouse model with frontotemporal lobar dementia (FTLD-U) characterized with cytoplasmic TARDBP/TDP-43(+)/ubiquitin(+) inclusions (UBIs) in the diseased neurons could rescue the learning/memory deficiency and the abnormal motor function disorder of the mice.
This was accompanied by a decreased level of CASP3/caspase-3 and a reduction of the neuronal loss in the mouse forehead.
Moreover, autophagy activation at a late pathological stage also could improve motor function, which was accompanied by a reduction of the TARDBP(+) UBIs.
This study has set the principal for therapy of neurodegenerative diseases with the TARDBP protein, i.e., amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)-TDP and FTLD-TDP43, with the use of autophagy activators.
PMID: 22172070
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: from research to therapeutic attempts and therapeutic perspectives.
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease characterized by progressive degeneration of motor neurons which brings to muscular atrophy, paralysis and death in 3-5 years from starting symptoms.
In about 10% of cases ALS is familiar and in a relevant percent of these cases, mutations of the enzyme copper-zinc superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) are found.
Transgenic mice expressing mutated forms of SOD1 replicate with fidelity the onset and progression of the disease and have been largely used to test therapies to be translated to patients in clinical trials.
Over years, many therapeutic approaches have been attempted in mice model often with significant, albeit limited, benefits on disease onset, progression and lifespan.
Unfortunately almost all the clinical trials based on these preclinical results, have been unsuccessful.
In the present review, both results of preclinical and clinical studies are summarized, focusing on the main mechanisms that are believed to contribute to this complex disease: oxidative stress, excitotoxicity, neuroinflammation, mitochondrial dysfunction, errors in protein folding and disposal, lack of trophic factors.
Future perspectives related to genetic and stem cell approaches are briefly considered.
PMID: 23137736
Nutrition assessment and management in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
In recent years nutrition assessment and management in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) have drawn increased attention.
Frequent evaluation of nutrition status is warranted in ALS, given the common occurrence of dysphagia and hypermetabolism and varying disease progression rates.
Nutrition management includes dietary and swallow strategies, possible gastrostomy tube placement, and recommendations for vitamin and mineral supplementation.
Strategies to assess and optimize nutrition status and prolong survival in ALS patients are reviewed with recommendations based on current research.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23137737
Bone health and associated metabolic complications in neuromuscular diseases.
This article reviews the recent literature regarding bone health as it relates to the patient living with neuromuscular disease (NMD).
Studies defining the scope of bone-related disease in NMD are scant.
The available evidence is discussed, focusing on abnormal calcium metabolism, increased fracture risk, and the prevalence of both scoliosis and hypovitaminosis D in Duchenne muscular dystrophy, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and spinal muscular atrophy.
Future directions are discussed, including the urgent need for studies both to determine the nature and extent of poor bone health, and to evaluate the therapeutic effect of available osteoporosis treatments in patients with NMD.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22949158
Jelly Belly trans-synaptic signaling to anaplastic lymphoma kinase regulates neurotransmission strength and synapse architecture.
In Drosophila, the secreted signaling molecule Jelly Belly (Jeb) activates anaplastic lymphoma kinase (Alk), a receptor tyrosine kinase, in multiple developmental and adult contexts.
We have shown previously that Jeb and Alk are highly enriched at Drosophila synapses within the CNS neuropil and neuromuscular junction (NMJ) and postulated a conserved intercellular signaling function.
At the embryonic and larval NMJ, Jeb is localized in the motor neuron presynaptic terminal whereas Alk is concentrated in the muscle postsynaptic domain surrounding boutons, consistent with anterograde trans-synaptic signaling.
Here, we show that neurotransmission is regulated by Jeb secretion by functional inhibition of Jeb-Alk signaling.
Jeb is a novel negative regulator of neuromuscular transmission.
Reduction or inhibition of Alk function results in enhanced synaptic transmission.
Activation of Alk conversely inhibits synaptic transmission.
Restoration of wild-type postsynaptic Alk expression in Alk partial loss-of-function mutants rescues NMJ transmission phenotypes and confirms that postsynaptic Alk regulates NMJ transmission.
The effects of impaired Alk signaling on neurotransmission are observed in the absence of associated changes in NMJ structure.
Complete removal of Jeb in motor neurons, however, disrupts both presynaptic bouton architecture and postsynaptic differentiation.
Nonphysiologic activation of Alk signaling also negatively regulates NMJ growth.
Activation of Jeb-Alk signaling triggers the Ras-MAP kinase cascade in both pre- and postsynaptic compartments.
These novel roles for Jeb-Alk signaling in the modulation of synaptic function and structure have potential implications for recently reported Alk functions in human addiction, retention of spatial memory, cognitive dysfunction in neurofibromatosis, and pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 23137738
Current pharmacologic management in selected neuromuscular diseases.
For generations, the neuromuscular disorder care community has focused on establishing the correct diagnosis and providing supportive care.
As the pathophysiology and genetics of these conditions became better understood, novel treatments targeting the disease mechanism were developed.
This has led to some significant disease-modifying and supportive treatments for several neuromuscular disorders.
The current treatments for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), neuromuscular junction disorders, inflammatory myopathies, and myotonia are reviewed.
Additionally, investigational treatments for ALS, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, and spinal muscular atrophy are discussed.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22454507
A mutation in VAPB that causes amyotrophic lateral sclerosis also causes a nuclear envelope defect.
A proline to serine mutation (P56S) in vesicle-associated membrane protein-associated protein B and C (VAPB) causes an autosomal dominant form of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
We show that the mutation also causes a nuclear envelope defect.
Transport of nucleoporins (Nups) and emerin (EMD) to the nuclear envelope is blocked, resulting in their sequestration in dilated cytoplasmic membranes.
Simultaneous overexpression of the FFAT motif (two phenylalanine residues in an acidic track) antagonizes the effect of mutant VAPB and restores transport to the nuclear envelope.
VAPB function is required for transport to the nuclear envelope, with knockdown of endogenous VAPB recapitulating this phenotype.
Moreover, we identified the compartment into which the Nups and EMD were sequestered as the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC), with nuclear envelope membrane proteins transiting to the ERGIC before VAPB-dependent retrograde transport to the nuclear envelope.
PMID: 21778247
Mesial prefrontal cortex degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a high-field proton MR spectroscopy study.
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration is responsible for the cognitive abnormalities seen in patients with ALS.
We sought to evaluate the in vivo neurochemical changes associated with this pathology indicative of neuronal loss and gliosis.
Twenty-four patients with ALS (2 with ALS-FTD) and 15 healthy controls were studied.
High-field proton MR spectroscopy of the mesial prefrontal cortex was used to determine concentrations of NAA and mIns, markers of neuronal integrity and gliosis, respectively.
Metabolite concentrations were correlated with cognitive tests (verbal fluency, ACE).
NAA/mIns was decreased 17% (P =.002).
Abnormalities were present to a lesser degree in the individual metabolites NAA (decreased 9%; P =.08) and mIns (increased 11%; P =.06) than the ratio of the 2 metabolites.
These measures did not correlate significantly with verbal fluency or the ACE.
Prefrontal lobe degeneration exists in patients with ALS as indicated by an abnormal mesial prefrontal cortex neurochemical profile.
Further study is necessary to determine the potential utility of the NAA/mIns ratio as a biomarker for frontal lobe degeneration in ALS.
PMID: 22069488
Structural, stability, dynamic and binding properties of the ALS-causing T46I mutant of the hVAPB MSP domain as revealed by NMR and MD simulations.
T46I is the second mutation on the hVAPB MSP domain which was recently identified from non-Brazilian kindred to cause a familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Here using CD, NMR and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, we characterized the structure, stability, dynamics and binding capacity of the T46I-MSP domain.
The results reveal: 1) unlike P56S which we previously showed to completely eliminate the native MSP structure, T46I leads to no significant disruption of the native secondary and tertiary structures, as evidenced from its far-UV CD spectrum, as well as Cα and Cβ NMR chemical shifts.
2) Nevertheless, T46I does result in a reduced thermodynamic stability and loss of the cooperative urea-unfolding transition.
As such, the T46I-MSP domain is more prone to aggregation than WT at high protein concentrations and temperatures in vitro, which may become more severe in the crowded cellular environments.
3) T46I only causes a 3-fold affinity reduction to the Nir2 peptide, but a significant elimination of its binding to EphA4.
4) EphA4 and Nir2 peptide appear to have overlapped binding interfaces on the MSP domain, which strongly implies that two signaling networks may have a functional interplay in vivo.
5) As explored by both H/D exchange and MD simulations, the MSP domain is very dynamic, with most loop residues and many residues on secondary structures highly fluctuated or/and exposed to bulk solvent.
Although T46I does not alter overall dynamics, it does trigger increased dynamics of several local regions of the MSP domain which are implicated in binding to EphA4 and Nir2 peptide.
Our study provides the structural and dynamic understanding of the T46I-causing ALS; and strongly highlights the possibility that the interplay of two signaling networks mediated by the FFAT-containing proteins and Eph receptors may play a key role in ALS pathogenesis.
PMID: 22580736
Disclosure of diagnosis:  to tell or not to tell?
Jimmy is an 8-year-old boy with hepatitis B, e antigen (HBeAg)-positive, HIV and hepatitis C negative, who was adopted from Vietnam when he was 5 years and has been followed in your primary care practice since that time.
Before adoption, he lived in an orphanage, where he was placed soon after birth.
Jimmy currently lives with his adoptive mother and grandparents.
His adoptive father has amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and recently moved to a nursing home due to a need for more intensive care.
Jimmy continues to see him regularly.Jimmy's mother presents today upset about a recent encounter with his hepatologist.
During this visit, Jimmy's doctor was insistent that Jimmy should be told about his illness immediately.
He felt that Jimmy had a right to know and that it was important for the protection of other children.
Jimmy's family practices universal precautions and Jimmy is compliant with these safety measures.
Jimmy's mother has chosen not to share his diagnosis with the school and in addition has not felt the time was right to disclose the diagnosis to Jimmy.
He is asymptomatic, takes no medications, and is followed yearly by a hepatologist.
His mother is concerned that Jimmy would have difficulty managing this information and maintaining a secret.
However, she also worries that he may feel his trust has been violated if she delays telling him.Jimmy is currently 8 years old, in second grade, and is struggling academically with math and reading.
Socially, he is reported to have difficulty making friends and reading social cues.
For example, he displays inappropriate boundaries, often standing too close or touching others, which has resulted in children avoiding him.
During your annual visit, Jimmy presented as a friendly and engaging boy.
He maintained conversation about school and some of his interests, but he was often distractible, impulsive, at times grabbing things, and fidgety, frequently standing up and then sitting back down.
Jimmy's mother reports that this behavior is similar to what he exhibits in the classroom.
He is currently receiving English as a Second Language services and is enrolled in a weekly lunch bunch.
What advice would you give the family?
PMID: 22410647
Analysis of the hexanucleotide repeat in C9ORF72 in Alzheimer's disease.
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is a highly familial neurodegenerative disease.
It has recently been shown that the most common genetic cause of FTLD and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72.
To investigate whether this expansion was specific to the FTLD/ALS disease spectrum, we genotyped the hexanucleotide repeat region of C9ORF72 in a large cohort of patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD).
A normal range of repeats was found in all cases.
We conclude that the hexanucleotide repeat expansion is specific to the FTLD/ALS disease spectrum.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22436704
Clinical advances in diaphragm pacing.
Diaphragmatic pacing is a valuable tool that can significantly benefit certain patients with respiratory insufficiency provided they have an intact phrenic nerve and a functional diaphragm.
Careful patient selection is critical to successful long-term results.
The main populations that derive benefit from pacing include those with congenital or acquired central hypoventilation syndrome and more commonly those with a high cervical spinal cord injury, where the phrenic nerves remain intact.
The pacing electrode of most phrenic nerve pacemakers is implanted directly on the phrenic nerve.
A newer device relies on intramuscular implantation of the electrode on the diaphragm at the phrenic nerve motor point.
Most patients can be successfully weaned from mechanical ventilation for a substantial time each day, if not completely.
This has significant impact on quality of life and implications for healthcare costs.
The potential exists for application of this technology to patients with other types of respiratory failure as investigative experience emerges.
These include the chronic progressive disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or temporary scenarios in difficult-to-wean intensive care unit patients.
This enabling technology should hold a place in the thoracic surgeon's armamentarium.
PMID: 22608240
Divergent brain network connectivity in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Using resting state (RS) functional magnetic resonance imaging and independent component analysis, the integrity of brain networks related to cognition and behavior was investigated in 20 nondemented patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
The association between RS functional connectivity and executive functions was assessed in 16 patients with neuropsychological assessment.
ALS patients compared with control subjects showed a decreased connectivity of the right orbitofrontal cortex, and an enhanced connectivity of the left precuneus in the default mode network; a decreased connectivity of the left inferior frontal cortex, and an increased connectivity of the right angular gyrus in the right frontoparietal network; and an increased connectivity of the parietal cortex in the left frontoparietal network.
The enhanced parietal connectivity was associated with the clinical and cognitive deficits of the patients.
In ALS, an alteration of large-scale functional brain networks associated with cognition does occur, even in the absence of overt dementia.
The increased parietal connectivity may have a role in an attempt to maintain cognitive efficiency in the presence of structural frontotemporal injury.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22700435
Mitochondrial dysfunction in neurodegenerative diseases.
Neurodegenerative diseases are a large group of disabling disorders of the nervous system, characterized by the relative selective death of neuronal subtypes.
In most cases, there is overwhelming evidence of impaired mitochondrial function as a causative factor in these diseases.
More recently, evidence has emerged for impaired mitochondrial dynamics (shape, size, fission-fusion, distribution, movement etc.) in neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and Alzheimer's disease.
Here, we provide a concise overview of the major findings in recent years highlighting the importance of healthy mitochondria for a healthy neuron.
PMID: 21811811
Rodent models of TDP-43 proteinopathy: investigating the mechanisms of TDP-43-mediated neurodegeneration.
Since the identification of phosphorylated and truncated transactive response DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) as a primary component of ubiquitinated inclusions in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive inclusions, much effort has been directed towards ascertaining how TDP-43 contributes to the pathogenesis of disease.
As with other protein misfolding disorders, TDP-43-mediated neuronal death is likely caused by both a toxic gain and loss of TDP-43 function.
Indeed, the presence of cytoplasmic TDP-43 inclusions is associated with loss of nuclear TDP-43.
Moreover, post-translational modifications of TDP-43, including phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and cleavage into C-terminal fragments, may bestow toxic properties upon TDP-43 and cause TDP-43 dysfunction.
However, the exact neurotoxic TDP-43 species remain unclear, as do the mechanism(s) by which they cause neurotoxicity.
Additionally, given our incomplete understanding of the roles of TDP-43, both in the nucleus and the cytoplasm, it is difficult to truly appreciate the detrimental consequences of aberrant TDP-43 function.
The development of TDP-43 transgenic animal models is expected to narrow these gaps in our knowledge.
The aim of this review is to highlight the key findings emerging from TDP-43 transgenic animal models and the insight they provide into the mechanisms driving TDP-43-mediated neurodegeneration.
PMID: 23884045
C9ORF72 expansions, parkinsonism, and Parkinson disease: a clinicopathologic study.
To determine the histopathologic bases for the observed incidence of parkinsonism in families with C9ORF72 expansions, which typically cause amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and/or frontotemporal dementia.
DNA was extracted from 377 brains with the histopathologic diagnosis of idiopathic Parkinson disease or related disorders and analyzed for C9ORF72 expansions.
α-Synuclein and p62 immunohistochemistry of the substantia nigra (SN) was undertaken in brains of 17 ALS cases with (C9ORF72+) and 51 without (C9ORF72-) the C9ORF72 expansion.
Only 1 of 338 cases with pathologically confirmed idiopathic Parkinson disease had a C9ORF72 expansion.
Similarly, only 1 of 17 C9ORF72+ brains displayed features suggestive of α-synucleinopathy.
In contrast, p62-positive, TDP-43-negative neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions within the SN were considerably more frequent in C9ORF72+ brain tissue than in the C9ORF72- brains (p = 0.005).
Furthermore, there was a more marked loss of dopaminergic neurons in the SN of C9ORF72+ ALS brains than C9ORF72- ALS brains (p = 0.029).
SN involvement is common in C9ORF72+ ALS but can be clearly distinguished from Parkinson disease-related mechanisms by the presence of p62-positive inclusions and the absence of α-synuclein-positive Lewy bodies or Lewy neurites.
PMID: 21978082
Intracerebroventricular administration of human umbilical cord blood cells delays disease progression in two murine models of motor neuron degeneration.
The lack of effective drug therapies for motor neuron diseases (MND), and in general for all the neurodegenerative disorders, has increased the interest toward the potential use of stem cells.
Among the cell therapy approaches so far tested in MND animal models, systemic injection of human cord blood mononuclear cells (HuCB-MNCs) has proven to reproducibly increase, although modestly, the life span of SOD1G93A mice, a model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), even if only few transplanted cells were found in the damaged areas.
In attempt to improve the potential efficacy of these cells in the central nervous system, we examined the effect and distribution of Hoechst 33258-labeled HuCB-MNCs after a single bilateral intracerberoventricular injection in two models of motor neuron degeneration, the transgenic SOD1G93A and wobbler mice.
HuCB-MNCs significantly ameliorated symptoms progression in both mouse models and prolonged survival in SOD1G93A mice.
They were localized in the lateral ventricles, even 4 months after administration.
However, HuCB-MNCs were not found in the spinal cord ventral horns.
This evidence strengthens the hypothesis that the beneficial role of transplanted cells is not due to cell replacement but is rather associated with the production and release of circulating protective factors that may act both at the central and/or peripheral levels.
In particular, we show that HuCB-MNCs release a series of cytokines and chemokines with antiinflammatory properties that could be responsible of the functional improvement of mouse models of motor neuron degenerative disorders.
PMID: 22708870
Mutational analysis of familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with OPTN mutations in Japanese population.
Our objective was to elucidate the genetic epidemiology of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS) and sporadic ALS (SALS) with OPTN mutations in the Japanese population.
Mutational analysis of OPTN was conducted in 18 FALS pedigrees in whom mutations in other causative genes have been excluded and in 218 SALS patients by direct nucleotide sequence analysis.
Novel non-synonymous variants identified in ALS patients were further screened in 271 controls.
Results showed that although no mutations were identified in the FALS pedigrees, a novel heterozygous non-synonymous variant c.481G &gt; A (p.V161M) was identified in one SALS patient, who originated from the southernmost part of the Kii Peninsula.
The mutation was not present in 271 controls.
As the clinical feature, the patient carrying V161M showed predominantly upper motor neuron signs with slow progression.
This study suggests that mutations in OPTN are not the main cause of ALS in the Japanese population.
PMID: 22708871
Frontotemporal dementia, Parkinsonism and lower motor neuron involvement in a patient with C9ORF72 expansion.
It has been recently reported that a large proportion of patients with familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and/or frontotemporal dementia (FTD) carries the hexanucleotide (GGGGCC) repeat expansion in the first intron of C9ORF72.
We describe a patient with a complex phenotype characterized by behavioural variant of FTD, Parkinsonism and ALS with predominant lower motor neuron involvement in which the C9ORF72 expansion was detected.
PMID: 22708872
What is the relevance of percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy on the survival of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis?
Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) is a standard procedure for feeding dysphagic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients.
Nevertheless, the effect of prognostic factors influencing survival after PEG remains unclear.
We aimed to evaluate the prognostic value of several clinical features on survival after PEG placement.
This study investigated 151 patients with ALS, in whom a PEG was inserted over the last 16 years in our centre.
Survival curves were determined by Kaplan-Meier and the analysis of potential prognostic factors was performed by a Cox regression model.
The overall median survival was 32 months, longer in spinal-onset disease patients - 42 vs. 29 months in bulbar-onset patients (p &lt; 0.001).
Median survival after PEG placement was 7.5 months, similar in both bulbar- and spinal-onset patients, 7.9 vs. 7.1 months, respectively.
Thirteen percent of patients died within one month after PEG placement; this short-term survival was influenced by low forced vital capacity (FVC &lt; 50%).
In a multivariate analysis, only older age at disease onset was independently associated with poor outcome after PEG placement.
In conclusion, survival after PEG placement was similar in bulbar- and spinal-onset patients, suggesting that the latter were in a more advanced stage at the time of PEG placement.
Low FVC was associated with higher risk of short-term mortality.
Older age at disease onset was associated with poorer outcome in bulbar-onset patients.
Younger bulbar-onset patients are those who benefited most from PEG.
PMID: 23143281
The dynactin p150 subunit: cell biology studies of sequence changes found in ALS/MND and Parkinsonian syndromes.
The dynactin p150glued subunit, encoded by the gene DCTN1 is part of the dynein-dynactin motor protein complex responsible for retrograde axonal transport.
This subunit is a candidate modifier for neurodegenerative diseases, in particular motoneuron and extrapyramidal diseases.
Based on an extensive screening effort of all 32 exons in more than 2,500 ALS/MND patients, patients suffering from Parkinsonian Syndromes and controls, we investigated 24 sequence variants of p150 in cell-based studies.
We used both non-neuronal cell lines and primary rodent spinal motoneurons and report on cell biological abnormalities in five of these sequence alterations and also briefly report on the clinical features.
Our results suggest the presence of biological changes caused by some p150 mutants pointing to a potential pathogenetic significance as modifier of the phenotype of the human disease.
PMID: 21914052
EFNS guidelines on the clinical management of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (MALS)--revised report of an EFNS task force.
The evidence base for the diagnosis and management of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is weak.
To provide evidence-based or expert recommendations for the diagnosis and management of ALS based on a literature search and the consensus of an expert panel.
All available medical reference systems were searched, and original papers, meta-analyses, review papers, book chapters and guidelines recommendations were reviewed.
The final literature search was performed in February 2011.
Recommendations were reached by consensus.
Patients with symptoms suggestive of ALS should be assessed as soon as possible by an experienced neurologist.
Early diagnosis should be pursued, and investigations, including neurophysiology, performed with a high priority.
The patient should be informed of the diagnosis by a consultant with a good knowledge of the patient and the disease.
Following diagnosis, the patient and relatives/carers should receive regular support from a multidisciplinary care team.
Medication with riluzole should be initiated as early as possible.
Control of symptoms such as sialorrhoea, thick mucus, emotional lability, cramps, spasticity and pain should be attempted.
Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy feeding improves nutrition and quality of life, and gastrostomy tubes should be placed before respiratory insufficiency develops.
Non-invasive positive-pressure ventilation also improves survival and quality of life.
Maintaining the patient's ability to communicate is essential.
During the entire course of the disease, every effort should be made to maintain patient autonomy.
Advance directives for palliative end-of-life care should be discussed early with the patient and carers, respecting the patient's social and cultural background.
© 2011 The Author(s).
European Journal of Neurology © 2011 EFNS.
PMID: 21930182
Protective effects and mechanisms of sirtuins in the nervous system.
Silent information regulator two proteins (sirtuins or SIRTs) are a group of histone deacetylases whose activities are dependent on and regulated by nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD(+)).
They suppress genome-wide transcription, yet upregulate a select set of proteins related to energy metabolism and pro-survival mechanisms, and therefore play a key role in the longevity effects elicited by calorie restriction.
Recently, a neuroprotective effect of sirtuins has been reported for both acute and chronic neurological diseases.
The focus of this review is to summarize the latest progress regarding the protective effects of sirtuins, with a focus on SIRT1.
We first introduce the distribution of sirtuins in the brain and how their expression and activity are regulated.
We then highlight their protective effects against common neurological disorders, such as cerebral ischemia, axonal injury, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and multiple sclerosis.
Finally, we analyze the mechanisms underlying sirtuin-mediated neuroprotection, centering on their non-histone substrates such as DNA repair enzymes, protein kinases, transcription factors, and coactivators.
Collectively, the information compiled here will serve as a comprehensive reference for the actions of sirtuins in the nervous system to date, and will hopefully help to design further experimental research and expand sirtuins as therapeutic targets in the future.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
PMID: 23457444
Prediction of auditory and visual p300 brain-computer interface aptitude.
Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) provide a non-muscular communication channel for patients with late-stage motoneuron disease (e.g., amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)) or otherwise motor impaired people and are also used for motor rehabilitation in chronic stroke.
Differences in the ability to use a BCI vary from person to person and from session to session.
A reliable predictor of aptitude would allow for the selection of suitable BCI paradigms.
For this reason, we investigated whether P300 BCI aptitude could be predicted from a short experiment with a standard auditory oddball.
Forty healthy participants performed an electroencephalography (EEG) based visual and auditory P300-BCI spelling task in a single session.
In addition, prior to each session an auditory oddball was presented.
Features extracted from the auditory oddball were analyzed with respect to predictive power for BCI aptitude.
Correlation between auditory oddball response and P300 BCI accuracy revealed a strong relationship between accuracy and N2 amplitude and the amplitude of a late ERP component between 400 and 600 ms.
Interestingly, the P3 amplitude of the auditory oddball response was not correlated with accuracy.
Event-related potentials recorded during a standard auditory oddball session moderately predict aptitude in an audiory and highly in a visual P300 BCI.
The predictor will allow for faster paradigm selection.
Our method will reduce strain on patients because unsuccessful training may be avoided, provided the results can be generalized to the patient population.
PMID: 21621298
A meta-analysis of diffusion tensor imaging studies in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Studies involving diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) with whole-brain voxel-based analysis yielded variable findings.
A systematic review was conducted on whole-brain voxel-based diffusion tensor imaging fractional anisotropy (FA) studies of ALS patients and healthy controls (HC) in PubMed, ISI Web of Science, Embase, and MEDLINE databases from 1990 to December 25, 2010.
Coordinates were extracted from clusters with significant difference in FA between ALS patients and HC.
Meta-analysis was performed using signed differential mapping.
Eight studies were enrolled, comprising 143 ALS patients and 145 HC.
The included studies reported FA reduction at 67 coordinates in ALS and no FA increased.
Significant reductions were present in the bilateral frontal white matter/cingulate gyrus and the posterior limb of bilateral internal capsule.
The findings remain largely unchanged in quartile and jackknife sensitivity analyses.
Our finding suggests that ALS is a multisystem disease beyond motor dysfunction and provides evidence that FA reduction in the frontal white matter and cingulate gyrus may be a special biomarker of ALS.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22048794
Serum caspase-9 levels are increased in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
It is known that apoptosis may play a role in the pathophysiology of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Moreover, caspase-9 is implicated in the apoptosis pathway.
The aim of the study was to investigate caspase-9 levels in serum of patients with ALS.
The study involved 30 patients with ALS and 30 patients from the control group.
The serum caspase-9 levels were measured using the enzyme-linked immunosorbent method.
The study showed that caspase-9 levels are significantly increased in serum of the patients with ALS comparing to the control group (p &lt; 0.05).
There was a significant correlation of serum caspase-9 levels with severity of clinical state of ALS patients and duration of the disease (p &lt; 0.05).
The results indicate that caspase-9 may be implicated in pathomechanism of neurodegeneration in ALS.
PMID: 23626653
A case of frontotemporal dementia with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis presenting with pathological gambling.
Pathological gambling (PG), which is characterized by consistent, repetitive gambling and unsuccessful quitting attempts, is classified as an impulse control disorder.
PG has also been reported in patients with Parkinson's disease, frontotemporal dementia, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
A 53-year-old male visited the outpatient clinic due to excessive gambling and personality changes.
Based on electrophysiological findings and neuropsychiatric assessment, he was diagnosed as frontotemporal dementia-amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
This case report underlines that PG can also be seen in patients with neurological disorders involving the orbitofrontal cortex.
PMID: 21866427
Ondine's curse: anesthesia for laparoscopic implantation of a diaphragm pacing stimulation system.
Central alveolar hypoventilation syndrome (CAHS) is a rare disease characterized by the loss of autonomic control of breathing.
This condition causes hypoventilation and obstruction during sleep.
Throughout their lives, these patients require ventilatory assistance by means of positive pressure ventilation to their lungs via mask, tracheotomy, or other means, such as phrenic nerve pacers.
The diaphragm pacing stimulation system (DPSS) is a new treatment where electrodes are implanted into the diaphragm and cause contraction on stimulation.
The DPSS has been used successfully in tetraplegic patients and patients suffering from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
It has been shown to improve quality of life and to extend survival in patients with advanced respiratory muscle weakness.
In our case, we describe the perioperative management of an adult patient with acquired CAHS who presented for laparoscopic DPSS insertion.
Our patient was a 50-yr-old female who developed CAHS at age thirteen after contracting encephalitis.
Since the onset of her disease, she had been managed with positive pressure ventilation to her lungs via mask.
Due to her longstanding disease, she presented with pulmonary hypertension and cor pulmonale and was scheduled for laparoscopic DPSS implantation.
Our anesthetic technique included a total intravenous technique with remifentanil and propofol, and her trachea was intubated without the use of muscle relaxants.
The pacemakers were switched on when the patient emerged from anesthesia, which provided her with ventilatory support and allowed us to extubate her trachea.
We present the successful anesthetic management of an adult patient with CAHS undergoing laparoscopic DPSS insertion.
PMID: 23549648
Neuromuscular and systemic presentations in adults: diagnoses beyond MERRF and MELAS.
Mitochondrial diseases are a diverse group of inherited and acquired disorders that result in inadequate energy production.
They can be caused by inheritable genetic mutations, acquired somatic mutations, and exposure to toxins (including some prescription medications).
Normal mitochondrial physiology is responsible, in part, for the aging process itself, as free radical production within the mitochondria results in a lifetime burden of oxidative damage to DNA, especially the mitochondrial DNA that, in turn, replicate the mutational burden in future copies of itself, and lipid membranes.
Primary mitochondrial diseases are those caused by mutations in genes that encode for mitochondrial structural and enzymatic proteins, and those proteins required for mitochondrial assembly and maintenance.
A number of common adult maladies are associated with defective mitochondrial energy production and function, including diabetes, obesity, hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, and hyperlipidemia.
Mitochondrial dysfunction has been demonstrated in many neurodegenerative disorders, including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and some cancers.
Polymorphisms in mitochondrial DNA have been linked to disease susceptibility, including death from sepsis and survival after head injury.
There is considerable overlap in symptoms caused by primary mitochondrial diseases and those illnesses that affect mitochondrial function, but are not caused by primary mutations, as well as disorders that mimic mitochondrial diseases, but are caused by other identified mutations.
Evaluation of these disorders is complex, expensive, and not without false-negative and false-positive results that can mislead the physician.
Most of the common heritable mitochondrial disorders have been well-described in the literature, but can be overlooked by many clinicians if they are uneducated about these disorders.
In general, the evaluation of the classic mitochondrial disorders has become straightforward if the clinician recognized the phenotype and orders appropriate confirmatory testing.
However, the majority of patients referred for a mitochondrial evaluation do not have a clear presentation that allows for rapid identification and testing.
This article provides introductory comments on mitochondrial structure, physiology, and genetics, but will focus on the presentation and evaluation of adults with mitochondrial symptoms, but who may not have a primary mitochondrial disease.
PMID: 23069673
Association between DPP6 polymorphism and the risk of progressive multiple sclerosis in Northern and Southern Europeans.
In this study, we investigated the role of the dipeptidyl-peptidase-6 (DPP6) gene in the etiopathogenesis of progressive forms of multiple sclerosis (PrMS).
This gene emerged as a candidate gene in a genome-wide association study (GWAS) performed in an Italian sample of PrMS and controls in which two SNPs located in the gene (rs6956703 and rs11767658) showed evidence of association (nominal p-value&lt;10(-4)) (Martinelli-Boneschi et al.) [18].
Moreover, the gene is highly expressed in the central nervous system, and it has been found to be associated with sporadic cases of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis which shares some feature with PrMS.
We genotyped 19 SNPs selected using a direct and tagging approach in 244 Italian PrMS and 225 controls, and we measured the expression levels of the gene in 13 PrMS cases and 25 controls.
Five out of 19 SNPs were found to be associated with the disease (adjusted p&lt;0.05), and they have been tested in an independent sample of 179 primary progressive MS and 198 controls from Northern Europe.
None of the SNPs was replicated, but combined analysis confirmed the presence of association for rs2046748 (p=2.5×10(-3),OR=1.82, 95%CI=1.24-2.69).
These results, inflated by the limited sample size determined by the rarity of this condition, suggest a possible role of this gene in the susceptibility to PrMS, at least in Southern Europeans.
Moreover, DPP6 was over-expressed in PrMS patients compared to controls.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23407618
Apply Awaji-shima Consensus Conference Criteria Before Diagnosing Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
ALS may be diagnosed although affection of other organs suggests another pathogenetic back-ground.
In a 72yo non-smoking male progressive gait disturbance with recurrent falls since 2y was initially attributed to axonal polyneuropathy.
Additionally, he had arterial hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, hyperuricemia, hyper-CK-emia, hepatopathy, atrial fibrillation, recurrent heart-failure, pulmonary hypertension, mitral insufficiency, and restrictive cardiomyopathy.
Possible causes of polyneuropathy were diabetes, long-standing alcoholism, folate-deficiency, or hereditary disease.
Later the patient was re-diagnosed as ALS despite absence of upper motor-neuron or bulbar signs, the presence of multiple risk factors for polyneuropathy, of stocking-type sensory disturbances, and of cardiac abnormalities, which could explain dyspnea.
Misdiagnosing polyneuropathy as ALS stigmatized the patient and prevented him from further diagnostic work-up for cardiac disease and adequate treatment for heart-failure.
Though the diagnosis of ALS was withdrawn, he was put on comfort care and opiates were given when dyspnea acutely deteriorated to death without further cardiac or pulmonary investigations or specific cardiac treatment.
ALS should be diagnosed only if the Awaji-shima criteria are fulfilled and if all differential diagnoses were profoundly excluded.
Respiratory insufficiency should not be attributed to bulbar involvement in ALS as long as cardiac, pulmonary, or myopathic causes were excluded.
PMID: 23463272
The changing scene of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Several recent breakthroughs have provided notable insights into the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), with some even shifting our thinking about this neurodegenerative disease and raising the question as to whether this disorder is a proteinopathy, a ribonucleopathy or both.
In addition, these breakthroughs have revealed mechanistic links between ALS and frontotemporal dementia, as well as between ALS and other neurodegenerative diseases, such as the cerebellar atrophies, myotonic dystrophy and inclusion body myositis.
Here, we summarize the new findings in ALS research, discuss what they have taught us about this disease and examine issues that are still outstanding.
PMID: 23144905
Male-specific differences in proliferation, neurogenesis, and sensitivity to oxidative stress in neural progenitor cells derived from a rat model of ALS.
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease characterized by progressive motor dysfunction and the loss of large motor neurons in the spinal cord and brain stem.
A clear genetic link to point mutations in the superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) gene has been shown in a small group of familial ALS patients.
The exact etiology of ALS is still uncertain, but males have consistently been shown to be at a higher risk for the disease than females.
Here we present male-specific effects of the mutant SOD1 transgene on proliferation, neurogenesis, and sensitivity to oxidative stress in rat neural progenitor cells (rNPCs).
E14 pups were bred using SOD1(G93A) transgenic male rats and wild-type female rats.
The spinal cord and cortex tissues were collected, genotyped by PCR using primers for the SOD1(G93A) transgene or the male-specific Sry gene, and cultured as neurospheres.
The number of dividing cells was higher in male rNPCs compared to female rNPCs.
However, SOD1(G93A) over-expression significantly reduced cell proliferation in male cells but not female cells.
Similarly, male rNPCs produced more neurons compared to female rNPCs, but SOD1(G93A) over-expression significantly reduced the number of neurons produced in male cells.
Finally we asked whether sex and SOD1(G93A) transgenes affected sensitivity to oxidative stress.
There was no sex-based difference in cell viability after treatment with hydrogen peroxide or 3-morpholinosydnonimine, a free radical-generating agent.
However, increased cytotoxicity by SOD1(G93A) over-expression occurred, especially in male rNPCs.
These results provide essential information on how the mutant SOD1 gene and sexual dimorphism are involved in ALS disease progression.
PMID: 22210350
Local unfolding of Cu, Zn superoxide dismutase monomer determines the morphology of fibrillar aggregates.
Aggregation of Cu, Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) is often found in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients.
The fibrillar aggregates formed by wild type and various disease-associated mutants have recently been found to have distinct cores and morphologies.
Previous computational and experimental studies of wild-type SOD1 suggest that the apo-monomer, highly aggregation prone, displays substantial local unfolding dynamics.
The residual folded structure of locally unfolded apoSOD1 corresponds to peptide segments forming the aggregation core as identified by a combination of proteolysis and mass spectroscopy.
Therefore, we hypothesize that the destabilization of apoSOD1 caused by various mutations leads to distinct local unfolding dynamics.
The partially unfolded structure, exposing the hydrophobic core and backbone hydrogen bond donors and acceptors, is prone to aggregate.
The peptide segments in the residual folded structures form the building block for aggregation, which in turn determines the morphology of the aggregates.
To test this hypothesis, we apply a multiscale simulation approach to study the aggregation of three typical SOD1 variants: wild type, G37R, and I149T.
Each of these SOD1 variants has distinct peptide segments forming the core structure and features different aggregate morphologies.
We perform atomistic molecular dynamics simulations to study the conformational dynamics of apoSOD1 monomer and coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations to study the aggregation of partially unfolded SOD1 monomers.
Our computational studies of monomer local unfolding and the aggregation of different SOD1 variants are consistent with experiments, supporting the hypothesis of the formation of aggregation building blocks via apo-monomer local unfolding as the mechanism of SOD1 fibrillar aggregation.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22212489
Proximal giant neurofilamentous axonopathy in mice genetically engineered to resist calpain and caspase cleavage of α-II spectrin.
We use 1,2-diacetylbenzene (1,2-DAB) to probe molecular mechanisms of proximal giant neurofilamentous axonopathy (PGNA), a pathological hallmark of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The spinal cord proteome of rodents displaying 1,2-DAB PGNA suggests a reduction in the abundance of α-II spectrin (Spna2), a key protein in the maintenance of axonal integrity.
Protein immunoblotting indicates that this reduction is due to Spna2 degradation.
We investigated the importance of such degradation in 1,2-DAB PGNA.
Spna2 mutant mice lacking a calpain- and/or caspase-sensitive domain (CSD), thus hypothetically resistant to 1,2-DAB, and wild-type littermates, were treated with 1,2-DAB, 35 mg/kg/day, or saline control, for 3 weeks.
1,2-DAB induced motor weakness and PGNA, irrespective of the genotype.
Spna2-calpain breakdown products were not detected in mutant mice, which displayed a normal structure of the nervous system under saline treatment.
Intriguingly, treatment with 1,2-DAB reduced the abundance of the caspase-specific 120-kDa Spna2 breakdown products.
Our findings indicate that degradation of Spna2 by calpain- and/or caspase is not central to the pathogenesis of 1,2-DAB axonopathy.
In addition, the Spna2-CSD seems to be not required for the maintenance of the cytoskeleton integrity.
Our conceptual framework offers opportunities to study the role of calpain-caspase cross talk, including that of the protease degradomics, in models of axonal degeneration.
PMID: 23853506
An Italian kindred with FALS due to c.149T&gt;C mutation in the SOD1 gene: case report of an affected family member.
We report the first Italian kindred with Familial Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (FALS) due to c.149T&gt;C mutation in the exon 5 of superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1) gene.
The proband was a 49-year-old woman who came to our observation because of an history of progressive limbs weakness and gait impairment.
She belonged to a family of 24 affected members.
The prevalent phenotype of the affected members was characterized by slowly progressive spinal impairment with proximal distribution of weakness, and bulbar involvement in advanced stages.
We briefly reviewed the few previous reports about the same SOD1 mutation and discussed the hypothesis that structural instability of the mutant codon 149 protein may underlie some toxic effects significantly involved in FALS pathogenesis.
PMID: 21732732
Changing incidence and subtypes of ALS in Modena, Italy: A 10-years prospective study.
We performed a prospective population-based study to describe the temporal pattern of the incidence and prevalence and the clinical features and phenotypes of ALS in Modena, Italy, from 2000 to 2009.
From 2000 onwards, a prospective registry has been collecting all cases of incident ALS among residents in the province of Modena.
This source was implemented by cases resulting from the provincial hospitals, and by death certificates.
Based on 193 newly diagnosed cases, the crude average annual incidence rate of ALS was 2.9 cases per 100,000 person years (py); adjusted incidence rate was 2.8/100,000.
The age-standardized incidence rates increased from 2.6 per 100,000 py in 2000-2004 to 2.9 per 100,000 py in 2005-2009, representing an annual increase of approximately 2% throughout the 10-year period.
There was a constant increase in prevalence rates throughout the years of the study (from 5.8/100,000 on 31 December 2000 to 11.2/100,000 on 31 December 2009).
Median life time was 29 months for patients diagnosed before the year 2000 and 36 months for patients diagnosed from 1 January 2000 (p &lt; 0.01).
Thus, we report incidence rates similar to those reported by recent European population based studies, but we observed an increasing trend over the 10 years of the study.
The increasing incidence is not explained by aging of the population, and our study raises the question as to whether local environmental or genetic factors are driving this temporal trend.
Along with an increasing incidence, we found an important increase in prevalence and survival probably related to access to mutidisciplinary clinics and improvements in symptomatic care of ALS.
PMID: 22277411
[JaCALS: a prospective multicenter ALS cohort study].
To investigate the longitudinal course of Japanese patients with Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), we constructed a multicenter registration and follow-up system called Japanese Consortium for Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis research (JaCALS).
Genomic DNA samples of ALS patients were stored and linked to the clinical information.
We designed a telephone survey system using a clinical research coordinator (CRC) to check the score of the ALS Functional Rating Scale-R (ALSFRS-R) and the prognosis every 3 months.
In January 2006, we began registering ALS patients, and, at present, 22 neurology facilities are participating in the JaCALS.
Currently, 571 Japanese ALS patients are registered.
From the longitudinal data of the 279 patients who were registered before September 2009, the older age at onset was a significant risk factor for not only earlier death or introduction of mechanical ventilation, but also earlier loss of speech, loss of swallowing function and loss of upper limb function.
In collaboration with the RIKEN Center for Genomic Medicine, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) using 1,305 ALS samples from the JaCALS and BioBank Japan were conducted, which showed that ZNF512B gene was associated with susceptibility to ALS.
The JaCALS has established an efficient registration and follow-up system with genomic DNA resources of ALS patients, and will contribute to identify ALS-associated genes and to promote clinical researches.
PMID: 22668777
Selective knockdown of mutant SOD1 in Schwann cells ameliorates disease in G85R mutant SOD1 transgenic mice.
Mutants of superoxide dismutase type 1 (mtSOD1) that have full dismutase activity (e.g., G37R) as well as none (e.g., G85R) cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS), indicating that mtSOD1-induced FALS results from a toxicity rather than loss in SOD1 enzymatic activity.
Still, it has remained unclear whether mtSOD1 dismutase activity can influence disease.
A previous study demonstrated that Cre-mediated knockdown of G37R expression in Schwann cells (SCs) of G37R transgenic mice shortened the late phase of disease and survival.
These results suggested that the neuroprotective effect of G37R expressed in SCs was greater than its toxicity, presumably because its dismutase activity counteracted reactive oxygen species (ROS).
In order to further investigate this, we knocked down G85R in SCs by crossing G85R(flox) mice with myelin-protein-zero (P(0)):Cre mice, which express Cre recombinase in SCs.
Knockdown of G85R in SCs of G85R mice delayed disease onset and extended survival indicating that G85R expression in SCs is neurotoxic.
These results demonstrate differences in the effect on disease of dismutase active vs. inactive mtSOD1 suggesting that both a loss as well as gain in function of mtSOD1 influence FALS pathogenesis.
The results suggest that mtSOD1-induced FALS treatment may have to be adjusted depending on the cell type targeted and particular mtSOD1 involved.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22811764
Therapeutic approach to neurodegenerative diseases by medical gases: focusing on redox signaling and related antioxidant enzymes.
Oxidative stress in the central nervous system is strongly associated with neuronal cell death in the pathogenesis of several neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
In order to overcome the oxidative damage, there are some protective signaling pathways related to transcriptional upregulation of antioxidant enzymes, such as heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) and superoxide dismutase (SOD)-1/-2.
Their expression is regulated by several transcription factors and/or cofactors like nuclear factor-erythroid 2 (NF-E2) related factor 2 (Nrf2) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator 1α (PGC-1α).
These antioxidant enzymes are associated with, and in some cases, prevent neuronal death in animal models of neurodegenerative diseases.
They are activated by endogenous mediators and phytochemicals, and also by several gases such as carbon monoxide (CO), hydrogen sulphide (H(2)S), and hydrogen (H(2)).
These might thereby protect the brain from severe oxidative damage and resultant neurodegenerative diseases.
In this paper, we discuss how the expression levels of these antioxidant enzymes are regulated.
We also introduce recent advances in the therapeutic uses of medical gases against neurodegenerative diseases.
PMID: 22438708
Brain computer interfaces, a review.
A brain-computer interface (BCI) is a hardware and software communications system that permits cerebral activity alone to control computers or external devices.
The immediate goal of BCI research is to provide communications capabilities to severely disabled people who are totally paralyzed or 'locked in' by neurological neuromuscular disorders, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, brain stem stroke, or spinal cord injury.
Here, we review the state-of-the-art of BCIs, looking at the different steps that form a standard BCI: signal acquisition, preprocessing or signal enhancement, feature extraction, classification and the control interface.
We discuss their advantages, drawbacks, and latest advances, and we survey the numerous technologies reported in the scientific literature to design each step of a BCI.
First, the review examines the neuroimaging modalities used in the signal acquisition step, each of which monitors a different functional brain activity such as electrical, magnetic or metabolic activity.
Second, the review discusses different electrophysiological control signals that determine user intentions, which can be detected in brain activity.
Third, the review includes some techniques used in the signal enhancement step to deal with the artifacts in the control signals and improve the performance.
Fourth, the review studies some mathematic algorithms used in the feature extraction and classification steps which translate the information in the control signals into commands that operate a computer or other device.
Finally, the review provides an overview of various BCI applications that control a range of devices.
PMID: 23039217
Evolution of quality of life, mental health, and coping strategies in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a pilot study.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal, neurological disease, which can potentially impact mental health as well as the adaptation process of people who are affected.
Most of the results available are cross-sectional.
The aim of this study was to study the evolution of coping strategies, Quality of Life (QoL), and mental health in a sample of ALS patients.
Forty-nine patients with ALS were interviewed in order to obtain their demographic and medical data.
Then, each one was asked to complete a questionnaire of coping strategies (Brief COPE), mental health (GHQ-28), and QoL (SF-36) at two different moments of the disease evolution.
As many patients died in the interim, only 30 completed questionnaires at T2.
The Wilcoxon test was used in order to compare mean scores between T1 and T2.
On the GHQ-28, the differences concerned two dimensions: somatic disorders (Z=-2.15, p=0.03) and anxiety sleep disorders (Z=-2.07, p=0.04).
We noted that mean scores increased between T1 and T2.
Regarding coping strategies, only one tendency was found on the COPE.
It concerned behavioral disengagement (Z=1.84, p=0.06), which was used more at T2 than at T1.
Concerning QoL, one significant difference and one tendency between T1 and T2 were found.
They involved pain (Z=2.52, p=0.01) and a tendency toward emotional role functioning (Z=-1.86, p=0.06).
This study, the first to evaluate psychosocial aspects of ALS over time, underlines the importance of global, multidisciplinary, and adapted care.
PMID: 22608482
Use of Bayesian MUNE to show differing rate of loss of motor units in subgroups of ALS.
To evaluate differences among patients with different clinical features of ALS, we used our Bayesian method of motor unit number estimation (MUNE).
We performed serial MUNE studies on 42 subjects who fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for ALS during the course of their illness.
Subjects were classified into three subgroups according to whether they had typical ALS (with upper and lower motor neurone signs) or had predominantly upper motor neurone weakness with only minor LMN signs, or predominantly lower motor neurone weakness with only minor UMN signs.
In all subjects we calculated the half life of MUs, defined as the expected time for the number of MUs to halve, in one or more of the abductor digiti minimi (ADM), abductor pollicis brevis (APB) and extensor digitorum brevis (EDB) muscles.
The mean half life of MUs was less in subjects who had typical ALS with both upper and lower motor neurone signs than in those with predominantly upper motor neurone weakness or predominantly lower motor neurone weakness.
In 18 subjects we analysed the estimated size of the MUs and demonstrated the appearance of large MUs in subjects with upper or lower motor neurone predominant weakness.
We found that the appearance of large MUs was correlated with the half life of MUs.
Patients with different clinical features of ALS have different rates of loss and different sizes of MUs.
These findings could indicate differences in disease pathogenesis.
Copyright © 2012 International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology.
Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23626651
Hypolipidemia in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a possible gender difference?
We compared the levels of serum lipid, protein, and glucose between patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and healthy controls.
The serum levels of lipids [including triglycerides, cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein (LDL), and high-density lipoprotein (HDL)], protein, and glucose of 95 patients with ALS (60 men) were compared with those of 99 age- and sex-matched healthy controls (64 men).
Both groups had normal dietary intakes.
Total cholesterol (p=0.004), LDL (p=0.040), triglyceride (p=0.025), and protein (p=0.010) levels, and LDL/HDL ratios (p&lt;0.001) in men with ALS were significantly lower than those in their control counterparts.
There were no such significant differences in these parameters between female patients with ALS and female controls.
The serum levels of lipid and protein were significantly lower in male patients with ALS than in the male controls.
Since we controlled for the confounding effects of dietary intake, hypolipidemia in ALS might be associated with the pathophysiology of the disease rather than being the result of the decreased dietary intake in ALS patients.
Metabolic demand might increase in ALS, and it may be affected by gender.
PMID: 22632444
An ALS case with a novel D90N-SOD1 heterozygous missense mutation.
Abstract   Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is the most common form of motor neuron disease.
We describe the case of a patient with a rapidly progressive form of ALS characterized by both upper and lower motor neuron impairment, no early bulbar signs and severe pain in all four extremities.
The patient had a heterozygous c.271G &gt; A mutation in SOD1, leading to an amino acids substitution of asparagine to aspartate at position 90 of the protein chain (p.D90N).
Our report confirms that ALS patients with D90 codon heterozygous mutations may be associated with rapid progression and a prominent pain syndrome.
PMID: 22632443
Impaired proteasome function in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Abstract   The ubiquitin-proteasome system, important for maintaining protein quality control, is compromised in experimental models of familial ALS.
The objective of this study was to determine if proteasome function is impaired in sporadic ALS.
Proteasomal activities and subunit composition were evaluated in homogenates of spinal cord samples obtained at autopsy from sporadic ALS and non-neurological control cases, compared to cerebellum as a clinically spared tissue.
The level of 20S α structural proteasome subunits was assessed in motor neurons by immunohistochemistry.
Catalysis of peptide substrates of the three major proteasomal activities was substantially reduced in ALS thoracic spinal cord, but not in cerebellum, accompanied by alterations in the constitutive proteasome machinery.
Chymotrypsin-like activity was decreased to 60% and 65% of control in ventral and dorsal spinal cord, respectively, concomitant with reduction in the β5 subunit with this catalytic activity.
Caspase- and trypsin-like activities were reduced to a similar extent (46% - 68% of control).
Proteasome levels, although generally maintained, appeared reduced specifically in motor neurons by immunolabelling.
In conclusion, there are commonalities of findings in sporadic ALS patients and presymptomatic SOD1-G93A transgenic mice and these implicate inadequate proteasome function in the pathogenesis of both familial and sporadic ALS.
PMID: 22632442
Reduction rate of body mass index predicts prognosis for survival in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a multicenter study in Japan.
Malnutrition in the early stage has been reported as an independent predictor of survival in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
We analyzed retrospectively the effect of variation of body mass index (BMI) on survival in ALS patients.
In total, 77 consecutive ALS patients were enrolled from nine hospitals in Japan.
Reduction rate of BMI was calculated from BMI before the disease onset and at the time of the first visit to each hospital.
We analyzed the correlation between BMI reduction rate and total disease duration.
Results showed that the median BMI reduction rate was 2.5 per year (interquartile range 1.3-3.8).
The BMI reduction rate was significantly correlated with survival length (p &lt;0.0001).
There was also a significant difference in survival between ALS patients with a BMI reduction rate ≥ and &lt; 2.5 (Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and the log-rank test, p &lt; 0.0001; hazard ratio by the Cox model, 2.9816).
In conclusion, faster reduction of BMI at the initial stage before the first visit to hospital predicts shorter survival length also in Japanese ALS patients.
PMID: 22632441
An increase in ALS incidence on the Kii Peninsula, 1960-2009: a possible link to change in drinking water source.
We investigated changes in the incidence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) in the Koza/Kozagawa/Kushimoto area (K. area) in the Kii Peninsula, Japan in 1960-2009.
Probable and definite ALS cases diagnosed using El Escorial criteria were collected during a five-decade period: period I-V, 1960-2009.
Forty-three ALS patients matched the selection criteria in the overall K. area, including three patients on Oshima, a small island opposite the mainland K. area.
The age- and gender-adjusted incidence of ALS in the overall K. area (standardized for the 2005 Japanese population) decreased from 5.47/100,000 (95% CI 1.86-9.08) in period I to 0.61/100,000 (95% CI-0.28-1.50) in period III, and then increased to 4.39/100,000 (95% CI 1.70-7.07) in period V.
On Oshima, the age- and gender-adjusted incidence of ALS was 9.45/100,000 (95% CI-7.39-26.29) in period V.
The present research indicates an increase of ALS incidence in the K. area, especially on Oshima.
A limitation of this study was the small population.
PMID: 24093046
Open Randomized Clinical Trial on JWSJZ Decoction for the Treatment of ALS Patients.
Objective.
To investigate the efficacy and safety of the traditional Chinese medicine Jiawei Sijunzi (JWSJZ) decoction for the treatment of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Methods.
Forty-eight patients with ALS were divided into a JWSJZ group (n = 24) and a control group (n = 24) using a randomized number method.
Together with the basic treatment for ALS, JWSJZ decoction was added to the treatment regimen of patients in the JWSJZ group or Riluzole was administered to the control group for 6 months.
Neurologists evaluated the treated and control patients using the ALS functional rating scale (ALSFRS) before, 3 and 6 months after starting the additional treatments.
Results.
The ALSFRS scores in both groups were lower 3 and 6 months after treatment than before.
There was a significant difference at 6 months after treatment between the subgroups of patients with ALS whose limbs were the initial site of attack.
No serious adverse effects were observed in the JWSJZ group.
Conclusion.
JWSJZ decoction may be a safe treatment for ALS, and may have delayed the development of ALS, especially in the subgroup of patients in whom the limbs were attacked first when compared with Riluzole treatment.
PMID: 22708602
AMPA receptors as drug targets in neurological disease--advantages, caveats, and future outlook.
Most excitatory transmission in the brain is mediated by the AMPA receptor subtype of the ionotropic glutamate receptors.
In many neurological diseases, synapse structure and AMPA receptor function are altered, thus making AMPA receptors potential therapeutic targets for clinical intervention.
The work summarized in this review suggests a link between AMPA receptor function and debilitating neuropathologies, and discusses the current state of therapies targeting AMPA receptors in four diseases.
In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, AMPA receptors allow cytotoxic levels of calcium into neurons, leading to motor neuron death.
Likewise, in some epilepsies, overactivation of AMPA receptors leads to neuron damage.
The same is true for ischemia, where oxygen deprivation leads to excitotoxicity.
Conversely, Alzheimer's disease is characterized by decreased AMPA activation and synapse loss.
Unfortunately, many clinical studies have had limited success by directly targeting AMPA receptors in these diseases.
We also discuss how the use of AMPA receptor modulators, commonly known as ampakines, in neurological diseases initially seemed promising in animal studies, but mostly ineffective in clinical trials.
We propose that indirectly affecting AMPA receptors, such as by modulating transmembrane AMPA receptor regulatory proteins or, more generally, by regulating glutamatergic transmission, may provide new therapeutic potential for neurological disorders.
© 2012 The Authors.
European Journal of Neuroscience © 2012 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
PMID: 23286748
Concurrent amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and cystic fibrosis supports common pathways of pathogenesis.
Abstract We present a case of concurrent cystic fibrosis (CF) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
To our knowledge this is the first reported coincidence of these two diseases.
Although TDP-43 dysfunction has been linked to both pathologies, it does not appear to be pivotal in this individual who does not display TDP-43 mediated aberrant splicing of the CFTR gene or carry a mutation in the TARDBP gene.
Alternative reasons for the coincidence are discussed including medication, infection, hypoxia and loss of function of the CFTR channel.
Our findings await validation by others, but as the prognosis of CF improves then clinicians in both fields should be aware of the possibilities highlighted by this case.
PMID: 22277493
[Seed, aggregation and propagation of abnormal proteins could explain neurodegeneration?].
Braak proposed propagation staging paradigm of Lewy- related alpha-synucleinopathy, which starts from medulla oblongata and extends rostrally to neocortex.
Since this propagation shares that of bovine spongiformic encephalopathy, alpha- synuclein- prionopathy hypothesis was presented and augumented by pathological reports of Lewy body pathology in fetal tansplants of midbrain to patients with Parkinson disease (PD).
The prionopathy hypothesis expanded to include tau and TDP- 43, is now receiving considerable attention world wide.
Laterality of clinical symptoms can be explained with this hypothesis in PD, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis- TDP43, frontotemoral lobar degeneration- semantic dementia- TDP43 and tauopathy including corticobasal degeneration and argyrophilic grain dementia.
Major cons of prionopathy hypothesis is how to explain cell to cell transmission of intracellular amyloid- like proteins.
Several clinical and experimental data are now accumulated to answer this question.
The difference in speed of spread between prion disease and neurodegenerative disease could be explained by aggregation size of abnormal proteins.
The hypothesis could also explain glinoneuronal interaction, which is receiving another hot topic of neurodeneration.
We propose that seed, aggregation propagation of abnormal protein should form one factor of clinical progression of neurodegenerative diseases and can be a therapeutic targets in future research.
PMID: 22013437
Dysregulation of iron metabolism in Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Dysregulation of iron metabolism has been observed in patients with neurodegenerative diseases (NDs).
Utilization of several importers and exporters for iron transport in brain cells helps maintain iron homeostasis.
Dysregulation of iron homeostasis leads to the production of neurotoxic substances and reactive oxygen species, resulting in iron-induced oxidative stress.
In Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD), circumstantial evidence has shown that dysregulation of brain iron homeostasis leads to abnormal iron accumulation.
Several genetic studies have revealed mutations in genes associated with increased iron uptake, increased oxidative stress, and an altered inflammatory response in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Here, we review the recent findings on brain iron metabolism in common NDs, such as AD, PD, and ALS.
We also summarize the conventional and novel types of iron chelators, which can successfully decrease excess iron accumulation in brain lesions.
For example, iron-chelating drugs have neuroprotective effects, preventing neural apoptosis, and activate cellular protective pathways against oxidative stress.
Glial cells also protect neurons by secreting antioxidants and antiapoptotic substances.
These new findings of experimental and clinical studies may provide a scientific foundation for advances in drug development for NDs.
PMID: 23286745
Non-invasive ventilation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Abstract   Non-invasive ventilation (NIV) is widely used to improve alveolar hypoventilation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Several studies indicate a better survival when NIV is used, certainly in patients with none to moderate bulbar dysfunction.
Data on quality of life (QoL) are rather disputable.
Overall QoL is shown to be equivalent in patients with or without NIV, although health-related QoL is shown to be increased in patients with none to moderate bulbar dysfunction.
NIV improves sleep quality, although patient-ventilator asynchronies are demonstrated.
FVC &lt; 50%, seated or supine, has been widely applied as threshold to initiate NIV.
Today, measurements of respiratory muscle strength, nocturnal gas exchange and symptomatic complaints are used as indicators to start NIV.
Being compliant with NIV therapy increases QoL and survival.
Cough augmentation has an important role in appropriate NIV.
Patients have today more technical options and patients with benefit from these advances are growing in number.
Tracheal ventilation needs to be discussed when NIV seems impossible or becomes insufficient.
PMID: 22886346
D-Amino acids in brain neurotransmission and synaptic plasticity.
Far from our initial view of D-amino acids as being limited to invertebrates, they are now considered active molecules at synapses of mammalian central and peripheral nervous systems, capable of modulating synaptic communication within neuronal networks.
In particular, experimental data accumulated in the last few decades show that through the regulation of glutamatergic neurotransmission, D-serine influences the functional plasticity of cerebral circuitry throughout life.
In addition, the modulation of NMDA-R-dependent signalling by D-aspartate has been demonstrated by pharmacological studies and after the targeted deletion of the D-aspartate-degrading enzyme.
Considering the major contribution of the glutamatergic system to a wide range of neurological disorders such as schizophrenia, Alzheimer's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, an improved understanding of the mechanisms of D-amino-acid-dependent neuromodulation will certainly offer new insights for the development of relevant strategies to treat these neurological diseases.
PMID: 23568995
[Immunotherapy targeting misfolded proteins in neurodegenerative disease].
Aberrant protein aggregation is closely linked to the molecular pathogeneses of most neurodegenerative diseases.
The major components of pathological aggregates have been characterized in various neurodegenerative diseases; for example, amyloid β-protein and phosphorylated tau in Alzheimer's disease, α-synuclein in Parkinson's disease, SOD1 or TDP-43 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and huntingtin in Huntington's disease.
These misfolded protein aggregates play a vital role in disease initiation and progression, and they have recently been shown to have prion-like spreading or seeded aggregation properties.
Immunotherapy with specific monoclonal antibodies is a promising approach to clear misfolded protein aggregates and treat various neurodegenerative diseases; it is planned for use in clinical trials in the near future.
PMID: 23104007
Inhibition of RNA lariat debranching enzyme suppresses TDP-43 toxicity in ALS disease models.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating neurodegenerative disease primarily affecting motor neurons.
Mutations in the gene encoding TDP-43 cause some forms of the disease, and cytoplasmic TDP-43 aggregates accumulate in degenerating neurons of most individuals with ALS.
Thus, strategies aimed at targeting the toxicity of cytoplasmic TDP-43 aggregates may be effective.
Here, we report results from two genome-wide loss-of-function TDP-43 toxicity suppressor screens in yeast.
The strongest suppressor of TDP-43 toxicity was deletion of DBR1, which encodes an RNA lariat debranching enzyme.
We show that, in the absence of Dbr1 enzymatic activity, intronic lariats accumulate in the cytoplasm and likely act as decoys to sequester TDP-43, preventing it from interfering with essential cellular RNAs and RNA-binding proteins.
Knockdown of Dbr1 in a human neuronal cell line or in primary rat neurons is also sufficient to rescue TDP-43 toxicity.
Our findings provide insight into TDP-43-mediated cytotoxicity and suggest that decreasing Dbr1 activity could be a potential therapeutic approach for ALS.
PMID: 22746022
[Anesthetic management for a patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; the neuromuscular monitoring was useful to determine appropriate dosages of rocuronium].
We experienced an anesthetic management with rocuronium and neurostimulator for a surgical patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
A 61-year-old man was scheduled for intrathecal baclofen pump implantation as treatment for his spasticity under general anesthesia.
After oxygenation and totally intravenous induction with propofol and remifentanil, we administered 10 mg of rocuronium repeatedly monitoring with neurostimulator.
When dosage of rocuronium reached 20 mg, train-of-four count reached 1 and his trachea was intubated without coughing or moving.
Anesthesia was maintained intravenously.
Train-of-four ratio recovered to 95%, 22 minutes after the first administration of rocuronium.
Operation was accomplished uneventfully with no additional rocuronium.
Bispectral index value recovered to 98 and the patient awoke and breathed spontaneously 19 minutes after termination of administration of anesthetic agents.
We could confirm his stable and adequate respiration and trachea was extubated without reversal of rocuronium.
In the postanesthesia care unit, he showed no discomfort and was returned to the ward.
His symptoms did not deteriorate postoperatively and he was discharged on the 36th postoperative day.
PMID: 23772376
Crystal structure of human angiogenin with an engineered loop exhibits conformational flexibility at the functional regions of the molecule.
Human angiogenin (ANG) is an angiogenic molecule and a ribonucleolytic enzyme with significant amino acid sequence identity to pancreatic RNase A, plays a critical role in the establishment and growth of tumours.
An association between ANG and cancer has been observed in more than 25 clinical studies to date.
In addition, ANG has now been shown to be implicated in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) and Parkinson's Disease (PD).
Structural and biochemical studies so far have showed several distinguishing features of ANG molecule compared to RNase A and provided details of the putative cell binding site, active site, nuclear translocation sequence and the roles of residues in binding and cleaving RNA.
A key finding elucidated from the structural study on ANG is the presence of a 'blocked' C-terminus (part of the active site apparatus) compared with RNase A.
Here we report the crystal structure of ANG with an 'engineered-loop' from eosinophil derived neurotoxin (a homologue of ANG) which has resulted with local perturbations (conformational flexibility) at the cell binding site and at the C-terminus of the molecule.
This experimental observation will now provide a new avenue to design compounds (potent inhibitors) through a structure guided drug design route.
PMID: 22013234
Effect of prolonged riluzole exposure on cultured motoneurons in a mouse model of ALS.
Riluzole is the only FDA-approved drug to treat amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, but its long-term effects on motoneurons are unknown.
Therefore, we treated primary mouse spinal cord cultures with 2 μM riluzole for 4-9 days and then used whole cell patch clamp to record the passive and active properties of both wild-type and SOD1(G93A) motoneurons.
At this concentration, riluzole blocks &gt;50% of the sodium component of a persistent inward current that plays a major role in determining motoneuron excitability.
Prolonged riluzole treatment significantly decreased the amplitude of the persistent inward current.
This effect was specific for SOD1(G93A) motoneurons, where the amplitude decreased by 55.4%.
In addition, prolonged treatment hyperpolarized the resting membrane potential as well as the voltage onset and voltage maximum of the persistent inward current (∼2-3 mV in each case).
These effects appeared to offset one another and resulted in no change in the firing properties.
In a subset of cells, acute reapplication of 2 μM riluzole during the recording decreased repetitive firing and the persistent inward current, which is consistent with the normal effects of riluzole.
The downregulation of the persistent inward current in response to prolonged riluzole administration is in contrast to the strong upregulation of this same current after descending neuromodulatory drive to the cord is lost following spinal injury.
This dichotomy suggests that decreased activation of G protein-coupled pathways can induce upregulation in the persistent inward current but that direct channel block is ineffective.
PMID: 21972798
Pain in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a population-based controlled study.
To assess the prevalence and characteristics of pain in an epidemiological series of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) compared to population-based controls.
Of the 183 patients with ALS resident in the province of Torino, Italy, 160 accepted to be interviewed.
Controls were randomly selected from the lists of general practitioners.
Pain was assessed using the Brief Pain Inventory.
Patients with ALS reported pain more frequently than controls [91 (56.9%) vs.
53 (33.1%); P = 0.001].
Pain frequency and intensity were correlated with a worse functional score and a longer disease duration.
In patients with ALS, pain was more frequently located at the extremities (P = 0.006).
Pain interfered with all areas of daily function, but patients reported a greater interference than controls in the domains of enjoyment of life and relation with other people.
Sixty-four patients (70.3% of those with pain) and 24 controls (45.3% of those with pain) (P = 0.003) were treated for pain, most frequently with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
ALS cases were also more frequently prescribed non-opioid analgesics and opioids than controls.
Our study indicates that pain is frequent in all stages of ALS, but that it often goes underrecognized and undertreated.
It is significantly more frequent in patients with ALS than in population-based controls.
Future studies need to clarify the mechanisms of pain in ALS and determine the most effective treatment strategy.
© 2011 The Author(s).
European Journal of Neurology © 2011 EFNS.
PMID: 23773350
[Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: update on etiological treatment].
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a rare neurodegenerative disease.
It is characterized by motoneurons progressive degeneration.
Associated with a paralysis of the legs, arms and the respiratory muscles, its evolution is lethal.
Riluzole is the only drug available with an marketing authorisation (autorisation de mise sur le marché [AMM]) in this indication.
In the beginning stages of the disease it demonstrated a modest efficacy by prolonging survival for a few months.
Although the physiopathological mechanisms of this disease have not been totally solved, the progression of knowledge in recent years in this area led to the development of a large number of neuroprotective agents which showed effective results in animal models of ALS and which could be good candidates for the treatment of ALS.
Several clinical trials have been conducted about antiglutamatergic, antioxidant, antiapoptotic agents and growing cell factors but they failed to demonstrate efficacy on survival or quality of life.
Therefore, clinical trials using innovative therapeutics and stem cells are ongoing and offer more distant hope.
© 2013 Société Française de Pharmacologie et de Thérapeutique.
PMID: 22221541
Elevated levels of IFNγ and LIGHT in the spinal cord of patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a paralytic and fatal neurodegenerative disorder caused by the gradual loss of both upper and lower motoneurons.
There is compelling evidence from ALS experimental models that neuroinflammation actively contributes to motoneuron damage.
We recently proposed that interferon gamma (IFNγ), a potent proinflammatory cytokine, induces motoneuron death by eliciting the activation of the lymphotoxin beta receptor (LT-βR) through its ligand LIGHT.
Here, we explore the pertinence of this non-cell-autonomous mechanism in human ALS.
The levels and expression pattern of IFNγ, LIGHT, and LT-βR were investigated by Western blot and immunohistochemical analysis in spinal cord of patients with sporadic ALS.
  We observed significant increased levels of IFNγ in human ALS spinal cords compared to control cases.
We found that large ventral horn neurons as well as glial cells were immunoreactive for IFNγ in sporadic ALS spinal cord.
We further observed that LIGHT and LT-βR were expressed mainly by motoneurons in both ALS and control cases, and while LT-βR levels remained constant between ALS and control cases, LIGHT levels were increased in human ALS spinal cords.
These findings in sporadic ALS cases, which are consistent with the observation made in ALS experimental models, propose that the IFNγ-triggered LIGHT/LT-βR-mediated death pathway may contribute to human ALS pathogenesis.
© 2012 INSERM.
European Journal of Neurology © 2012 EFNS.
PMID: 22491191
Corticomotoneuronal integrity and adaptation in spinal muscular atrophy.
To gain further insight into disease pathophysiologic process and potential adaptations through investigating whether cortical dysfunction or plasticity is a feature of spinal muscle atrophy (SMA).
Prospective, double-center study.
Outpatient clinics and research institute.
Clinical assessments, combined with threshold-tracking transcranial magnetic stimulation techniques, were completed in 11 genetically characterized patients with SMA.
Clinical, functional, and neurophysiologic variables were compared between the 11 patients with SMA types 2 and 3, 24 healthy control participants, and 81 patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) serving as disease controls.
Maximal motor-evoked potential amplitude as a percentage of the compound muscle action potential was significantly increased in patients with SMA compared with the healthy controls but was similar to that in ALS (SMA, mean [SE], 39.7% [4.0%]; ALS, 38.8% [2.8%]; controls, 20.3% [2.5%]; F = 10.1; P &lt; .001).
In contrast, short-interval intracortical inhibition (SMA, 14.4% [1.6%]; ALS, 4.3% [1.8%]; controls, 17.0% [2.3%]; F = 11.4; P &lt; .001) and cortical silent-period duration (SMA, 204.4 [9.8] milliseconds; ALS, 182.7 [5.2] milliseconds; controls, 208.8 [3.7] milliseconds; F = 4.8; P = .01), similar between SMA patients and healthy controls, were significantly larger when compared with the findings in ALS.
Of relevance, peripheral disease burden as measured by the compound muscle action potential amplitude (SMA, 6.3 [0.8] mV; ALS, 5.9 [0.4] mV; controls, 11.8 [0.5] mV; F = 35.5; P &lt; .001) and Neurophysiological Index (SMA, 0.7 [0.2]; ALS, 0.7 [0.1]; controls, 3.1 [0.2]; F = 108.2; P &lt; .001), were significantly reduced in both SMA and ALS patients when compared with healthy controls.
Taken together, findings from the present study suggest that despite spinal motoneuron degeneration there remains preservation of corticomotoneuronal function in SMA.
The greater corticomotoneuronal projections to surviving spinal motoneurons likely represent an adaptive response to spinal motoneuron degeneration in SMA.
PMID: 22538313
What's in the literature?
The neuromuscular literature over the past 3 months has been diverse, including useful information on the epidemiology of several disorders.
Our understanding of the genetics of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis continues to grow, and in the process, it makes the distinction between familial and sporadic forms of the disorder increasingly murky.
Some interesting articles about peripheral neuropathy provide insight into relationships with diabetes and with Parkinson disease and summarize the state of knowledge of the increasingly complex topic of hereditary neuropathies in children.
Epidemiology and electrodiagnosis of lateral femoral cutaneous neuropathy is nicely discussed in 2 articles.
Several muscle diseases, including Pompe disease, sporadic inclusion body myositis, and the congenital myopathies, receive attention in articles that provide very useful information for the clinician, and there is a treatment-oriented article on dystrophinopathies, which makes for excellent reading.
There are also discussions of several uncommon disorders, including a mitochondrial myopathy, periodic paralysis, and congenital myasthenic syndromes, which are helpful in providing information to clinicians who may see such disorders only infrequently.
PMID: 22934166
A Novel Mathematical Approach to Define the Genes/SNPs Conferring Risk or Protection in Sporadic Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Based on Auto Contractive Map Neural Networks and Graph Theory.
Background.
Complex diseases like amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) implicate phenotypic and genetic heterogeneity.
Therefore, multiple genetic traits may show differential association with the disease.
The Auto Contractive Map (AutoCM), belonging to the Artificial Neural Network (ANN) architecture, spatializes the correlation among variables by constructing a suitable embedding space where a visually transparent and cognitively natural notion such as closeness among variables reflects accurately their associations.
Results.
In this pilot case-control study single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in several genes has been evaluated with a novel data mining approach based on an AutoCM.
We have divided the ALS dataset into two dataset: Cases and Control dataset; we have applied to each one, independently, the AutoCM algorithm.
Six genetic variants were identified which differently contributed to the complexity of the system: three of the above genes/SNPs represent protective factors, APOA4, NOS3, and LPL, since their contribution to the whole complexity resulted to be as high as 0.17.
On the other hand ADRB3, LIPC, and MMP3, whose hub relevancies contribution resulted to be as high as 0.13, seem to represent susceptibility factors.
Conclusion.
The biological information available on these six polymorphisms is consistent with possible pathogenetic pathways related to ALS.
PMID: 21473668
Genome-wide association study of motor coordination problems in ADHD identifies genes for brain and muscle function.
Motor coordination problems are frequent in children with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
We performed a genome-wide association study to identify genes contributing to motor coordination problems, hypothesizing that the presence of such problems in children with ADHD may identify a sample of reduced genetic heterogeneity.
Children with ADHD from the International Multicentre ADHD Genetic (IMAGE) study were evaluated with the Parental Account of Children's Symptoms.
Genetic association testing was performed in PLINK on 890 probands with genome-wide genotyping data.
Bioinformatics enrichment-analysis was performed on highly ranked findings.
Further characterization of the findings was conducted in 313 Dutch IMAGE children using the Developmental Coordination Disorder Questionnaire (DCD-Q).
Although none of the findings reached genome-wide significance, bioinformatics analysis of the top-ranked findings revealed enrichment of genes for motor neuropathy and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Genes involved in neurite outgrowth and muscle function were also enriched.
Among the highest ranked genes were MAP2K5, involved in restless legs syndrome, and CHD6, causing motor coordination problems in mice.
Further characterization of these findings using DCD-Q subscales found nominal association for 15 SNPs.
Our findings provide clues about the aetiology of motor coordination problems, but replication studies in independent samples are necessary.
PMID: 23771489
Multiparametric MRI study of ALS stratified for the C9orf72 genotype.
To describe the patterns of cortical and subcortical changes in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) stratified for the C9orf72 genotype.
A prospective, single-center, single-protocol, gray and white matter magnetic resonance case-control imaging study was undertaken with 30 C9orf72-negative patients with ALS, 9 patients with ALS carrying the C9orf72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion, and 44 healthy controls.
Tract-based spatial statistics of multiple white matter diffusion parameters, cortical thickness measurements, and voxel-based morphometry analyses were carried out.
All patients underwent comprehensive genetic and neuropsychological profiling.
A congruent pattern of cortical and subcortical involvement was identified in those with the C9orf72 genotype, affecting fusiform, thalamic, supramarginal, and orbitofrontal regions and the Broca area.
White matter abnormalities in the C9orf72-negative group were relatively confined to corticospinal and cerebellar pathways with limited extramotor expansion.
The body of the corpus callosum and superior motor tracts were affected in both ALS genotypes.
Extensive cortical and subcortical frontotemporal involvement was identified in association with the C9orf72 genotype, compared to the relatively limited extramotor pathology in patients with C9orf72-negative ALS.
The distinctive, genotype-specific pathoanatomical patterns are consistent with the neuropsychological profile of the 2 ALS cohorts.
Our findings suggest that previously described extramotor changes in ALS could be largely driven by those with the C9orf72 genotype.
PMID: 22722621
Contribution of major amyotrophic lateral sclerosis genes to the etiology of sporadic disease.
To quantify the overall contribution of mutations in the currently known amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) genes in a large cohort of sporadic patients and to make genotype-phenotype correlations.
Screening for SOD1, TARDBP, FUS, ANG, ATXN2, OPTN, and C9ORF72 was carried out in 480 consecutive patients with sporadic ALS (SALS) and in 48 familial ALS (FALS) index patients admitted to a single Italian referral center.
Mutations were detected in 53 patients, with a cumulative frequency of 11.
Seven of them were novel.
The highest frequencies of positive cases were obtained in TARDBP (2.7%), C9ORF72 (2.5%), and SOD1 (2.1%).
The overall group of mutated patients was indistinguishable from that without mutations as no significant differences were observed with regard to age and site of onset, frequency of clinical phenotypes, and survival.
However, by separately evaluating genotype-phenotype correlation in single genes, clinical differences were observed among different genes.
Duration of disease was significantly shorter in patients harboring the C9ORF72 expansion and longer in the SOD1 group.
A high frequency of predominant upper motor neuron phenotype was observed among patients with TARDBP mutations.
Two patients, 1 with C9ORF72 and 1 with SOD1 mutation, had concurrent ANG mutations.
Mutations were detected in 43.7% of patients with FALS.
A considerable proportion of patients with SALS harbored mutations in major ALS genes.
This result has relevant implications in clinical practice, namely in genetic counseling.
The detection of double mutations in 2 patients raises the hypothesis that multiple mutations model may explain genetic architecture of SALS.
PMID: 22415942
Lumbar intraspinal injection of neural stem cells in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: results of a phase I trial in 12 patients.
Advances in stem cell biology have generated intense interest in the prospect of transplanting stem cells into the nervous system for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases.
Here, we report the results of an ongoing phase I trial of intraspinal injections of fetal-derived neural stems cells in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
This is a first-in-human clinical trial with the goal of assessing the safety and tolerability of the surgical procedure, the introduction of stem cells into the spinal cord, and the use of immunosuppressant drugs in this patient population.
Twelve patients received either five unilateral or five bilateral (10 total) injections into the lumbar spinal cord at a dose of 100,000 cells per injection.
All patients tolerated the treatment without any long-term complications related to either the surgical procedure or the implantation of stem cells.
Clinical assessments ranging from 6 to 18 months after transplantation demonstrated no evidence of acceleration of disease progression due to the intervention.
One patient has shown improvement in his clinical status, although these data must be interpreted with caution since this trial was neither designed nor powered to measure treatment efficacy.
These results allow us to report success in achieving the phase I goal of demonstrating safety of this therapeutic approach.
Based on these positive results, we can now advance this trial by testing intraspinal injections into the cervical spinal cord, with the goal of protecting motor neuron pools affecting respiratory function, which may prolong life for patients with ALS.
Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.
PMID: 22001453
Occurrence of cholelithiasis and cholecystitis in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients with long-term tracheostomy invasive ventilation.
We clarified the prevalence of cholelithiasis/cholecystitis in long-term tracheostomy invasive ventilation (TIV) patients in our hospital.
We investigated the occurrence of cholelithiasis/cholecystitis in twenty-seven TIV patients over the past eight years.
There were ten patients with cholelithiasis/cholecystitis.
The underlying disease was amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), except for 1 patient.
Mean age was 56.2 ± 4.7 years and the average period to the attack of cholelithiasis/cholecystitis from TIV was 57.6 ± 15.1 months.
Two patients of acute cholecystitis had acalculous cholecystitis.
Five of the ten patients developed a severe state of cholecystitis and needed aggressive therapy.
The prevalence of gallstones, symptom prevalence of asymptomatic cholelithiasis, the percentage of acalculous cholecystitis of acute cholecystitis in TIV patients was higher than in the general population.
Therefore, it may be possible that TIV is a risk for cholelithiasis/cholecystitis.
Some of the ALS patients with long-term TIV develop severe cholelithiasis/cholecystitis, and those facts should be considered in our daily clinical practice.
PMID: 22457769
Daf-2 signaling modifies mutant SOD1 toxicity in C. elegans.
The DAF-2 Insulin/IGF-1 signaling (IIS) pathway is a strong modifier of Caenorhabditis elegans longevity and healthspan.
As aging is the greatest risk factor for developing neurodegenerative diseases such as Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), we were interested in determining if DAF-2 signaling modifies disease pathology in mutant superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) expressing C. elegans.
Worms with pan-neuronal G85R SOD1 expression demonstrate significantly impaired locomotion as compared to WT SOD1 expressing controls and they develop insoluble SOD1 aggregates.
Reductions in DAF-2 signaling, either through a hypomorphic allele or neuronally targeted RNAi, decreases the abundance of aggregated SOD1 and results in improved locomotion in a DAF-16 dependant manner.
These results suggest that manipulation of the DAF-2 Insulin/IGF-1 signaling pathway may have therapeutic potential for the treatment of ALS.
PMID: 22975474
An organotypic spinal cord slice culture model to quantify neurodegeneration.
Activated microglia cells have been implicated in the neurodegenerative process of Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and multiple sclerosis; however, the precise roles of microglia in disease progression are unclear.
Despite these diseases having been described for more than a century, current FDA approved therapeutics are symptomatic in nature with little evidence to supporting a neuroprotective effect.
Furthermore, identifying novel therapeutics remains challenging due to undetermined etiology, a variable disease course, and the paucity of validated targets.
Here, we describe the use of a novel ex vivo spinal cord culture system that offers the ability to screen potential neuroprotective agents, while maintaining the complexity of the in vivo environment.
To this end, we treated spinal cord slice cultures with lipopolysaccharide and quantified neuron viability in culture using measurements of axon length and FluoroJadeC intensity.
To simulate a microglia-mediated response to cellular debris, antigens, or implanted materials/devices, we supplemented the culture media with increasing densities of microspheres, facilitating microglia-mediated phagocytosis of the particles, which demonstrated a direct correlation between the phagocytic activities of microglia and neuronal health.
To validate our model's capacity to accurately depict neuroprotection, cultures were treated with resveratrol, which demonstrated enhanced neuronal health.
Our results successfully demonstrate the use of this model to reproducibly quantify the extent of neurodegeneration through the measurement of axon length and FluoroJadeC intensity, and we suggest this model will allow for accurate, high-throughput screening, which could result in expedited success in translational efficacy of therapeutic agents to clinical trials.
Published by Elsevier B.V.
PMID: 22342397
Clinical aspects of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in Rio de Janeiro/Brazil.
The clinical and epidemiological profile of sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a chronic, degenerative, progressive motor neuron disease of unknown etiology, was described and evaluated in the city of Rio de Janeiro.
Patients with a diagnosis definite of ALS according to the revised criteria of the El Escorial World Federation of Neurology were included in this retrospective, descriptive study (n=227).
Demographic data, clinical variables, mortality and survival of these patients were assessed.
Of the 227 included cases, 143 (63%) were male and 84 (37%) were female, resulting in a male/female ratio of 1.7:1.
Mean age at onset of the disease was 53.6 ± 12.1 years, overall median survival time was 49 months (95%CI: 42.4-55.5) and the majority of patients (71.4%) were white, black patients 15.9% and mulattos 12.8%.
The most common forms of the disease were classic and bulbar ALS.
Taking classic and bulbar ALS together, the disease was more common in white, male patients of 50 to 70 years of age.
When analyzed separately, the bulbar form was more common in women and in older patients.
Survival of patients with bulbar ALS was shorter compared to that of patients with classic ALS.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22342395
Tongue's motor evoked potentials in the diagnosis of primary lateral sclerosis (PLS): preliminary report.
Primary Lateral Sclerosis (PLS) is an adult-onset neurodegenerative disorder due to a selective loss of precentral pyramidal neurons.
Our purpose was to evaluate preferential impairment of pyramidal tract to bulbar muscles in patients with PLS and identify a valuable electrophysiological method to help clinicians in the differential diagnosis from Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS).
We recorded Motor Evoked Potentials (MEPs) from tongue's and anterior tibialis muscles in six patients with PLS and compared the results, in terms of Central Motor Conduction Time (CMCT), amplitude of MEPs and duration of controlateral silent period (cSP), with those obtained both from ten age-matched healthy volunteers and ten patients affected by ALS.
For lower limbs, CMCT resulted significantly increased in PLS and ALS samples compared with healthy subjects (p&lt;0.01); we did not disclose any difference between ALS and PLS groups (p=0.417).
Instead for tongue's recordings, CMCT, absolute amplitude of MEPs and cSP were significantly altered in PLS patients towards both ALS patients and healthy volunteers.
We showed that tongue's MEPs are selectively impaired in PLS.
This technique could be helpful to differentiate patients with PLS from those affected by upper motor neuron-predominant variants of ALS.
Tongue's MEPs could represent an interesting electrodiagnostic test, potentially useful for the diagnosis of PLS.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23424178
CDC7 inhibition blocks pathological TDP-43 phosphorylation and neurodegeneration.
Kinase hyperactivity occurs in both neurodegenerative disease and cancer.
Lesions containing hyperphosphorylated aggregated TDP-43 characterize amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration with TDP-43 inclusions.
Dual phosphorylation of TDP-43 at serines 409/410 (S409/410) drives neurotoxicity in disease models; therefore, TDP-43-specific kinases are candidate targets for intervention.
To find therapeutic targets for the prevention of TDP-43 phosphorylation, we assembled and screened a comprehensive RNA interference library targeting kinases in TDP-43 transgenic Caenorhabditis elegans.
We show CDC7 robustly phosphorylates TDP-43 at pathological residues S409/410 in C. elegans, in vitro, and in human cell culture.
In frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD)-TDP cases, CDC7 immunostaining overlaps with the phospho-TDP-43 pathology found in frontal cortex.
Furthermore, PHA767491, a small molecule inhibitor of CDC7, reduces TDP-43 phosphorylation and prevents TDP-43-dependent neurodegeneration in TDP-43-transgenic animals.
Taken together, these data support CDC7 as a novel therapeutic target for TDP-43 proteinopathies, including FTLD-TDP and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Copyright © 2013 American Neurological Association.
PMID: 21920633
Mutational analysis of the VCP gene in Parkinson's disease.
Mutations in the valosin-containing protein gene (VCP) have been identified in neurological disorders (inclusion body myopathy--early Paget's disease of the bone--frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) and are thought to play a role in the clearance of abnormally folded proteins.
Parkinsonism has been noted in kindreds with VCP mutations.
Based on this, we hypothesized that mutations in VCP may also contribute to idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD).
We screened the coding region of the VCP gene in a large cohort of 768 late-onset PD cases (average age at onset, 70 years), both sporadic and with positive family history.
We identified a number of rare single nucleotide changes, including a variant previously described to be pathogenic, but no clear disease-causing variants.
We conclude that mutations in VCP are not a common cause for idiopathic PD.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
PMID: 22941524
Pseudobulbar affect: burden of illness in the USA.
Pseudobulbar affect (PBA) is characterized by involuntary and uncontrollable laughing and/or crying episodes, occurring secondary to neurological disease or injury.
The impact of PBA on social and occupational function, health status, quality of life (QOL), and quality of relationships (QOR) is not well studied.
This US survey conducted by Harris Interactive compared health status and daily function of patients with and without PBA.
Eligible respondents were Harris Panel Online registrants previously diagnosed with stroke, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, traumatic brain injury, or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or primary, nonpaid caregivers for such patients who were too debilitated to participate.
PBA was identified by a Center for Neurologic Study lability scale score of 13 or greater.
Measures included the 36-item short form health survey (SF-36), the work productivity and impairment (WPAI) questionnaire, visual analog scales (VAS) for impact of PBA symptoms on QOL and QOR, and customized questions related to burden and impact of involuntary laughing/crying episodes on patients' lives.
Survey responses were weighted to adjust for the relative proportion of the primary neurological conditions in the overall population and between group differences in patient age and gender.
PBA and non-PBA group responses were compared using two-tailed t tests adjusted for severity of the primary neurological conditions.
The 1,052 respondents included 399 PBA group participants and 653 controls.
The PBA group showed significantly worse scores versus non-PBA controls on component and summary SF-36 scores (P&lt;0.05 for all), VAS scores (P&lt;0.05 for both), and WPAI scores (P&lt;0.05).
Among PBA group respondents, PBA contributed a great deal to or was the main cause of patients becoming housebound for 24% and being moved to supervised living placement for 9% of respondents.
PBA is associated with considerable burden incremental to that of the underlying neurological conditions, affecting QOL, QOR, health status, and social and occupational functioning.
PMID: 22187232
Homozygous SMN2 deletion is a major risk factor among twenty-five Korean sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients.
The association between survivor motor neuron (SMN) gene deletion and spinal muscular atrophy suggests that sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (sALS) may be related to SMN deletion.
We examined the association between the SMN genotype and susceptibility to and severity of sALS.
We genotyped the copy number of SMN1 and SMN2 in 25 patients diagnosed with sporadic ALS and 100 healthy subjects in a Korean population.
Onset age and medical research council (MRC) scale were compared among patients according to SMN1 : SMN2 genotypes.
There was a significantly higher incidence of homozygous deletion of SMN2 (SMN1 : SMN2 genotype, 2 : 0) in sALS patients (20%) than in the normal controls (2%) (p&lt;0.001).
The onset age for patients with homozygous deletion of SMN2 (2 : 0) was significantly younger (34 ± 15.38 years) than that of patients with 2 : 1, 2 : 2 and 2 : 3 of the SMN1 : SMN2 genotype (59.5 ± 5.09; 52.69 ± 16.46 and 50 ± 0.00 years) (p=0.049).
The ratio of patients with an MRC scale above G4- was smaller in the 2 : 0 genotype (40%) than in the 2 : 1, 2 : 2 and 2 : 3 genotypes (83.3%, 100% and 100%) (p=0.02).
The homozygous SMN2 deletion (2 : 0) was statistically more frequent and associated with earlier onset age and lower MRC scale in Korean sALS patients.
These suggest that SMN2 deletion may be one of the factors associated with susceptibility to and severity of sALS in a Korean population.
PMID: 22133678
Epitope mapping of antibodies against TDP-43 and detection of protease-resistant fragments of pathological TDP-43 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration.
TAR DNA-binding protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43) is the major component of the intracellular inclusions in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD).
Here, we show that both monoclonal (60019-2-Ig) and polyclonal (10782-2-AP) anti-TDP-43 antibodies recognize amino acids 203-209 of human TDP-43.
The monoclonal antibody labeled human TDP-43 by recognizing Glu204, Asp205 and Arg208, but failed to react with mouse TDP-43.
The antibodies stained the abnormally phosphorylated C-terminal fragments of 24-26 kDa in addition to normal TDP-43 in ALS and FTLD brains.
Immunoblot analysis after protease treatment demonstrated that the epitope of the antibodies (residues 203-209) constitutes part of the protease-resistant domain of TDP-43 aggregates which determine a common characteristic of the pathological TDP-43 in both ALS and FTLD-TDP.
The antibodies and methods used in this study will be useful for the characterization of abnormal TDP-43 in human materials, as well as in vitro and animal models for TDP-43 proteinopathies.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22732955
[Enteral nutrition in neurological patients: is there enough vitamin D content in commonly used formulas?].
Vitamin D deficiency produces inadequate bone mineralization, proximal muscle weakness, abnormal gait and increased risk of falls and fractures.
Moreover, in epidemiological studies, has been associated with increased risk of cancer, autoimmune diseases, type 1 and 2 diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, infectious diseases, cardiovascular diseases and depression.
When synthesis through the skin by sun exposure is not possible and the patient can not eat by mouth, as in the advanced stages of various neurological diseases, the supply of vitamin D has to be done by enteral nutrition.
The aim of this study is to review the role of vitamin D in a common group of neurological conditions that often require artificial nutrition and analyze whether the vitamin D of different enteral nutrition formulas is adequate to meet the needs of this group of patients.
Numerous studies have shown the association between vitamin D deficiency and increased incidence of dementia, stroke and other neurodegenerative diseases.
Interventions aimed to increase levels of vit.
D and its effects on functional (falls, pain, quality of life) and cardiovascular goals (cardiovascular death, stroke, myocardial infarction, cardiovascular risk factors) have obtained as highlight data a clear reduction of falls and fractures, while the evidence for the other parameters studied is still limited and inconsistent.
The content of calcium and vitamin D of enteral formulas is legislated in our country.
The total amount of vitamin D for a daily intake of 1,500-2,000 kcal ranges between 300 and 1,600 IU/d (mean ± SD: 32.9 ± 8.5 mg/100 kcal) in the complete formulas for enteral nutrition most commonly used.
50% of the diets studied, for an intake of 2,000 kcal/d, and 90% for an intake of 1,500 kcal/d, provide less than 600 IU/d of vitamin D.
Some revised recently guidelines published recommendations of daily intake of vitamin D.
The document published by the U.S.
Institute of Medicine recommended for adults between 19 and 70 years, 600 IU/d and up from 70, proposes 800 IU/d of vitamin D.
These amounts are deemed insufficient by other scientific societies to state that to achieve blood levels of 25 (OH) D equal or greater than 30 ng/ml may be required a daily intake of 1,500-2,000 IU and a number two or three times higher if previous deficiency exists.
Further controlled studies are needed to ascertain which is the appropriate dose of vitamin D in advanced stages of neurological disease, where sun exposure is difficult and unlikely.
We suggest that the vitamin D content should probably be reconsidered in enteral nutrition formulas, which, in light of recent publications appear as clearly insufficient for standard energy intakes (1,500-2,000 kcal).
PMID: 21906595
Markedly reduced axonal potassium channel expression in human sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: an immunohistochemical study.
Fasciculations are characteristic features of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), suggesting abnormally increased excitability of motor axons.
Previous nerve excitability studies have shown reduced axonal potassium currents in ALS patients that may contribute to the hyperexcitability and thereby generation of fasciculations.
To clarify changes in axonal ion channel expression in motor axons of ALS, we performed immunohistochemistry of potassium and sodium channels in the C7 and L5 ventral/dorsal roots obtained from five autopsy cases of sporadic ALS.
Compared to controls, the immunoreactivity of potassium channels (Kv1.2) was markedly reduced in the ventral roots, but normal in the dorsal roots of all the ALS patients.
Nodal sodium channel expression was not significantly different in ALS patients and control subjects.
Our results show prominently reduced expression of axonal potassium channels, and provide the neuropathological and biological basis for decreased accommodative potassium currents in motor axons of ALS patients.
The axonal hyperexcitability would lead to generation of fasciculations, and possibly enhances motor neuron death in ALS.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22507827
CGG-repeat expansion in FMR1 is not associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Recently, repeat expansions in several genes have been shown to cause or be associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
It has been demonstrated that an intronic hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 is a major cause of both familial (approximately 40%) and sporadic (approximately 5%) ALS, as well as frontotemporal dementia (FTD).
In addition, a CAG-repeat expansion in exon 1 of ATXN2, otherwise known to cause spinocerebellar ataxia type 2, has been identified as a major risk factor for sporadic ALS.
Intermediate repeat expansions in the fragile X mental retardation 1 (FMR1) gene (55-200 repeats) are known to cause fragile X-associated premature ovarian insufficiency [(FX)POI; female carriers] or fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS; male carriers) by CGG-mediated RNA toxicity.
The present investigation involves screening FMR1 repeat length in 742 sporadic ALS patients and 792 matched controls.
Our conclusion is that FMR1 repeat expansions are not associated with ALS.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22484281
Implications of water channel proteins in selected neurological disorders: epilepsies, muscular dystrophies, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, neuromyelitis optica, Parkinson's disease, and spongiform encephalopathies.
The aim of this article is to describe the roles of water channel proteins (WCPs) in some neurological diseases in which the implications of these proteins became obvious in the decades after the discovery of WCPs of their presence in the CNS.
The diseases which were selected for this review include: epilepsies, muscular dystrophies, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, neuromyelitis optica, Parkinson's disease, and spongiform encephalopathies.
The priorities of Benga group from Cluj-Napoca, Romania, are mentioned, such as the idea of a generalized membrane defect affecting water permeability in epilepsy and in Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
Some of these neurological disorders discussed in this article appeared to be water channelopathies.
A typical example is neuromyelitis optica (NMO), in which the identification of the specific marker autoantibody against aquaporin 4 in the sera of patients was a milestone in the diagnosis.
This has aided understanding of the pathogenesis of NMO and led to better control of its treatment.
However, further studies are needed to characterize the function and regulation of WCPs in other neurological diseases, in particular to determine if modulation of WCP function may provide a novel approach to therapy in such diseases.
Copyright © 2012.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
PMID: 22121224
TDP-43 regulates global translational yield by splicing of exon junction complex component SKAR.
TDP-43 is linked to neurodegenerative diseases including frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Mostly localized in the nucleus, TDP-43 acts in conjunction with other ribonucleoproteins as a splicing co-factor.
Several RNA targets of TDP-43 have been identified so far, but its role(s) in pathogenesis remains unclear.
Using Affymetrix exon arrays, we have screened for the first time for splicing events upon TDP-43 knockdown.
We found alternative splicing of the ribosomal S6 kinase 1 (S6K1) Aly/REF-like target (SKAR) upon TDP-43 knockdown in non-neuronal and neuronal cell lines.
Alternative SKAR splicing depended on the first RNA recognition motif (RRM1) of TDP-43 and on 5'-GA-3' and 5'-UG-3' repeats within the SKAR pre-mRNA.
SKAR is a component of the exon junction complex, which recruits S6K1, thereby facilitating the pioneer round of translation and promoting cell growth.
Indeed, we found that expression of the alternatively spliced SKAR enhanced S6K1-dependent signaling pathways and the translational yield of a splice-dependent reporter.
Consistent with this, TDP-43 knockdown also increased translational yield and significantly increased cell size.
This indicates a novel mechanism of deregulated translational control upon TDP-43 deficiency, which might contribute to pathogenesis of the protein aggregation diseases frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
PMID: 23325907
Whole-brain magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging measures are related to disability in ALS.
To demonstrate the sensitivity of a recently developed whole-brain magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging (MRSI) sequence to cerebral pathology and disability in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and compare with measures derived from diffusion tensor imaging.
Whole-brain MRSI and diffusion tensor imaging were undertaken in 13 patients and 14 age-similar healthy controls.
Mean N-acetylaspartate (NAA), fractional anisotropy, and mean diffusivity were extracted from the corticospinal tract, compared between groups, and then in relation to disability in the patient group.
Significant reductions in NAA were found along the course of the corticospinal tracts on whole-brain MRSI.
There were also significant changes in fractional anisotropy (decreased) and mean diffusivity (increased) in the patient group, but only NAA showed a significant relationship with disability (r = 0.65, p = 0.01).
Whole-brain MRSI has potential as a quantifiable neuroimaging marker of disability in ALS.
It offers renewed hope for a neuroimaging outcome measure with the potential for harmonization across multiple sites in the context of a therapeutic trial.
PMID: 22196509
Significant neurological improvement in two patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis after 4 weeks of treatment with acupuncture injection point therapy using enercel.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive, uniformly fatal, degenerative disorder of the upper motor neurons that does not currently have an effective treatment regimen.
Here, we report two patients with ALS who were treated with 4 weeks of acupuncture injection point therapy using Enercel.
These patients were administered 0.25-0.5 cc Enercel Plus IM to specific acupuncture points for 5 days per week for 4 weeks.
Patient #1 presented with flaccid paralysis of all four extremities and impaired speech and swallowing.
By Week 4, she demonstrated significant improvement in her motor strength in all four extremities (R&gt;L) and improved speech and swallowing.
However, she did not continue to receive the Enercel acupoint injections, and she subsequently demonstrated a slow, progressive loss of neurological function during the ensuing 3 months, as shown on follow-up examinations.
Patient #2 had significantly impaired speech and mild motor loss in the upper extremities and the left leg.
After 4 weeks of treatment, his voice had significantly improved to the point where his speech was understandable and his motor functions had returned to normal.
He continued receiving Enercel acupoint injections during the 3-month follow-up period and his clinical improvements were maintained.
Thus, these two patients with ALS showed clinical improvements after 4 weeks of Enercel acupoint injection therapy.
Follow-up data suggests that ongoing therapy may be necessary in order to maintain these positive effects.
This preliminary study merits further study and confirmation.
Copyright © 2011.
Published by Elsevier B.V.
PMID: 22254894
Discriminative time-frequency kernels for gait analysis for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Many stochastic systems show certain trends which in turn govern their underlying non-stationary time varying behavior.
In order to facilitate efficient quantification of such signals, their analysis necessitates the use of robust tools for discerning between different classes of data.
Research show that, use of time-frequency techniques offer intelligible representations for non-stationary signals, along with facilitating computation of instantaneous parameters.
Further, in order to obtain efficient discrimination machine learning (ML) modules are often used alongside suitable representation techniques.
In this work, we exploit the concepts of ML-kernel functions directly by incorporating them in the ambiguity time-frequency (TF) space, thereby obtaining a one-step discrimination between different non-stationary patterns.
The proposed technique is evaluated for quantification applications for gait signal analysis.
An overall classification accuracy of 93.1% is reported for the neurological gait database consisting of signals from 16-control and 13-amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) subjects.
Results indicate that this scheme offers great potential in designing robust tools for time-varying signal analysis.
PMID: 22755265
Are environmental exposures to selenium, heavy metals, and pesticides risk factors for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis?
The etiology of sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), the most common form of this degenerative disease of the motor neurons, is still unknown, despite extensive investigation of several genetic and environmental potential risk factors.
We have reviewed laboratory and epidemiological studies assessing the role of exposure to neurotoxic chemicals (metalloid selenium; heavy metals mercury, cadmium, and lead; pesticides) in ALS etiology by summarizing the results of these investigations and examining their strengths and limitations.
Despite limitations in the exposure assessment methodologies typically used in human studies, we found suggestive epidemiological evidence and biologic plausibility for an association between ALS and antecedent overexposure to environmental selenium and pesticides.
The relation with mercury, cadmium, and lead appears weaker.
PMID: 22155983
Behaviour, physiology and experience of pathological laughing and crying in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Pathological laughing and crying is a disorder of emotional expression seen in a number of neurological diseases.
The aetiology is poorly understood, but clinical descriptions suggest a disorder of emotion regulation.
The goals of this study were: (i) to characterize the subjective, behavioural and physiological emotional reactions that occur during episodes of pathological laughing and crying; (ii) to compare responses during these episodes to those that occur when emotions are elicited under standard conditions (watching sad and amusing emotional films, being startled); and (iii) to examine the ability of patients with this disorder to regulate their emotions under standardized conditions.
Twenty-one patients with pathological laughing and crying due to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and 14 with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis but no pathological laughing and crying were studied.
Emotional measures included self-reported emotional experience, video recordings of facial reactivity and peripheral physiological responses (skin conductance, heart rate and somatic activity).
Nineteen of the 21 patients with histories of pathological laughing and crying had at least one episode in the laboratory that they agreed constituted pathological laughing or crying (a total of 56 episodes were documented).
Compared with viewing sad and amusing films, the episodes were associated with greater facial and physiological activation.
Contrary to many clinical descriptions, episodes were often induced by contextually appropriate stimuli and associated with strong experiences of emotion that were consistent with the display.
When instructed to regulate their facial responses to emotion-eliciting films, patients with pathological laughing and crying showed impairments compared with patients who did not have a history of this disorder.
These findings support the idea that pathological laughing and crying represents activation of all channels of emotional responding (i.e. behavioural, physiological and subjective).
Furthermore, they support previously advanced theories that, rather than being associated with general emotional hyperreactivity, this disorder may be due to dysfunction in frontal neural systems that support voluntary regulation of emotion.
PMID: 23053135
Tau pathology in frontotemporal lobar degeneration with C9ORF72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion.
An expanded GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat in C9ORF72 is the most common genetic cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration associated with TDP-43 pathology (FTLD-TDP).
In addition to TDP-43-positive neuronal and glial inclusions, C9ORF72-linked FTLD-TDP has characteristic TDP-43-negative neuronal cytoplasmic and intranuclear inclusions as well as dystrophic neurites in the hippocampus and cerebellum.
These lesions are immunopositive for ubiquitin and ubiquitin-binding proteins, such as sequestosome-1/p62 and ubiquilin-2.
Studies examining the frequency of the C9ORF72 mutation in clinically probable Alzheimer's disease (AD) have found a small proportion of AD cases with the mutation.
This prompted us to systematically explore the frequency of Alzheimer-type pathology in a series of 17 FTLD-TDP cases with mutations in C9ORF72 (FTLD-C9ORF72).
We identified four cases with sufficient Alzheimer-type pathology to meet criteria for intermediate-to-high-likelihood AD.
We compared AD pathology in the 17 FTLD-C9ORF72 to 13 cases of FTLD-TDP linked to mutations in the gene for progranulin (FTLD-GRN) and 36 cases of sporadic FTLD (sFTLD).
FTLD-C9ORF72 cases had higher Braak neurofibrillary tangle stage than FTLD-GRN.
Increased tau pathology in FTLD-C9ORF72 was assessed with thioflavin-S fluorescent microscopy-based neurofibrillary tangle counts and with image analysis of tau burden in temporal cortex and hippocampus.
FTLD-C9ORF72 had significantly more neurofibrillary tangles and higher tau burden compared with FTLD-GRN.
The differences were most marked in limbic regions.
On the other hand, sFTLD and FTLD-C9ORF72 had a similar burden of tau pathology.
These results suggest FTLD-C9ORF72 has increased propensity for tau pathology compared to FTLD-GRN, but not sFTLD.
The accumulation of tau as well as lesions immunoreactive for ubiquitin and ubiquitin-binding proteins (p62 and ubiquilin-2) suggests that mutations in C9ORF72 may involve disrupted protein degradation that favors accumulation of multiple different proteins.
PMID: 23053136
Mixed tau, TDP-43 and p62 pathology in FTLD associated with a C9ORF72 repeat expansion and p.Ala239Thr MAPT (tau) variant.
A massive intronic GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 has recently been identified as the most common cause of familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD).
We have previously demonstrated that C9ORF72 mutant cases have a specific pathological profile with abundant p62-positive, TDP-43-negative cytoplasmic and intranuclear inclusions within cerebellar granular cells of the cerebellum and pyramidal cells of the hippocampus in addition to classical TDP-43 pathology.
Here, we report mixed tau and TDP-43 pathology in a woman with behavioural variant FTLD who had the C9ORF72 mutation, and the p.Ala239Thr variant in MAPT (microtubule associated protein tau) gene not previously associated with tau pathology.
Two of her brothers, who carried the C9ORF72 mutation, but not the MAPT variant, developed classical ALS without symptomatic cognitive changes.
The dominant neuropathology in this woman with FTLD was a tauopathy with Pick's disease-like features.
TDP-43 labelling was mainly confined to Pick bodies, but p62-positive, TDP-43-negative inclusions, characteristic of C9ORF72 mutations, were present in the cerebellum and hippocampus.
Mixed pathology to this degree is unusual.
One might speculate that the presence of the C9ORF72 mutation might influence tau deposition in what was previously thought to be a benign variant in MAPT in addition to the aggregation of TDP-43 and other as yet unidentified proteins decorated with ubiquitin and p62.
PMID: 23629963
Stress granules as crucibles of ALS pathogenesis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal human neurodegenerative disease affecting primarily motor neurons.
Two RNA-binding proteins, TDP-43 and FUS, aggregate in the degenerating motor neurons of ALS patients, and mutations in the genes encoding these proteins cause some forms of ALS.
TDP-43 and FUS and several related RNA-binding proteins harbor aggregation-promoting prion-like domains that allow them to rapidly self-associate.
This property is critical for the formation and dynamics of cellular ribonucleoprotein granules, the crucibles of RNA metabolism and homeostasis.
Recent work connecting TDP-43 and FUS to stress granules has suggested how this cellular pathway, which involves protein aggregation as part of its normal function, might be coopted during disease pathogenesis.
PMID: 22143516
Neurodegeneration as a consequence of failed mitochondrial maintenance.
Maintaining the functional integrity of mitochondria is pivotal for cellular survival.
It appears that neuronal homeostasis depends on high-fidelity mitochondria, in particular.
Consequently, mitochondrial dysfunction is a fundamental problem associated with a significant number of neurological diseases, including Parkinson's disease (PD), Huntington's disease (HD), Alzheimer's disease (AD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and various peripheral neuropathies, as well as the normal aging process.
To ensure optimal mitochondrial function, diverse, evolutionarily conserved mitochondrial quality control mechanisms are in place, including the scavenging of toxic reactive oxygen species (ROS) and degradation of damaged mitochondrial proteins, but also turnover of whole organelles.
In this review we will discuss various mitochondria-associated conditions, focusing on the role of protein turnover in mitochondrial maintenance with special emphasis on neurodegenerative disorders.
PMID: 22961186
Inherited myelopathies.
Inherited myelopathies are a small, but important subset of diseases that cause dysfunction of the spinal cord.
Manifestations can include various combinations of signs and symptoms, including disturbance of gait, spasticity, paraplegia, amyotrophy, sensory loss, and urinary sphincter dysfunction.
These diseases can be divided into classes that include (1) distal axonopathies-exemplified by hereditary spastic paraplegia, (2) motor neuron diseases including familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and spinal muscular atrophy, (3) inborn errors of metabolism such as adrenomyeloneuropathy, and (4) other inherited diseases with myelopathy as part of their spectrum of manifestations.
Although the inherited myelopathies are relatively rare diseases, knowledge of them and their manifestations is important for the physician faced with a patient with myelopathy, particularly if there are similarly affected individuals in the patient's family.
In addition, understanding the pathophysiologic underpinnings of these diseases provides insight into the molecular biology of the nervous system and provides a gateway toward developing treatments for these diseases.
PMID: 23820084
Late onset GM2 gangliosidosis mimicking spinal muscular atrophy.
A case of late onset GM2 gangliosidodis with spinal muscular atrophy phenotype followed by cerebellar and extrapyramidal symptoms is presented.
Genetic analysis revealed compound heterozygous mutation in exon 10 of the HEXA gene.
Patient has normal intelligence and emotional reactivity.
Neuroimaging tests of the brain showed only cerebellar atrophy consistent with MR spectroscopy (MRS) abnormalities.
(18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (18)F-FDG PET/CT of the brain revealed glucose hypometabolism in cerebellum and in temporal and occipital lobes bilaterally.
© 2013 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22464355
Preemptive use of palliative sedation and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Patients in the advanced stages of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis often are faced with the dilemma of whether to use or continue to use mechanical ventilation.
Patients who elect to terminate ventilatory support may be subject to significant and even extreme respiratory symptoms.
Severe dyspnea and other symptoms are sometimes treated with palliative sedation, which is generally recommended as a last resort approach to refractory symptoms.
However, the preemptive use of palliative sedation is sometimes appropriate.
The preemptive use of palliative sedation is examined through a case-based analysis of a patient with advanced amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Copyright © 2012 U.S.
Cancer Pain Relief Committee.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22606355
Dihydrotestosterone ameliorates degeneration in muscle, axons and motoneurons and improves motor function in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis model mice.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a lethal disease characterized by a progressive loss of motoneurons.
The clinical symptoms include skeletal muscle weakness and atrophy, which impairs motor performance and eventually leads to respiratory failure.
We tested whether dihydrotestosterone (DHT), which has both anabolic effects on muscle and neuroprotective effects on axons and motoneurons, can ameliorate clinical symptoms in ALS.
A silastic tube containing DHT crystals was implanted subcutaneously in SOD1-G93A mice at early symptomatic age when decreases in body weight and grip-strength were observed as compared to wild-type mice.
DHT-treated SOD1-G93A mice demonstrated ameliorated muscle atrophy and increased body weight, which was associated with stronger grip-strength.
DHT treatment increased the expression of insulin-like growth factor-1 in muscle, which can exert myotrophic as well as neurotrophic effects through retrograde transport.
DHT treatment attenuated neuromuscular junction denervation, and axonal and motoneuron loss.
DHT-treated SOD1-G93A mice demonstrated improvement in motor behavior as assessed by rota-rod and gait analyses, and an increased lifespan.
Application of DHT is a relatively simple and non-invasive procedure, which may be translated into therapy to improve the quality of life for ALS patients.
PMID: 23116878
Parkinson disease is not associated with C9ORF72 repeat expansions.
Hexanucleotide expansions in the C9ORF72 gene are frequently found in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, frontotemporal dementia or both, some of whom exhibit concurrent extrapyramidal symptoms.
To determine if repeat expansions are a cause of Parkinson's disease (PD), we used repeat-primed polymerase chain reaction to investigate the frequency of C9ORF72 repeat expansions in a cohort of 478 patients with PD and 662 control subjects.
Three control subjects were found to be expansion carriers, and no expansions were found among patients, suggesting that C9ORF72 expansions are not a common cause of PD.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 22216008
CNS recruitment of CD8+ T lymphocytes specific for a peripheral virus infection triggers neuropathogenesis during polymicrobial challenge.
Although viruses have been implicated in central nervous system (CNS) diseases of unknown etiology, including multiple sclerosis and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, the reproducible identification of viral triggers in such diseases has been largely unsuccessful.
Here, we explore the hypothesis that viruses need not replicate in the tissue in which they cause disease; specifically, that a peripheral infection might trigger CNS pathology.
To test this idea, we utilized a transgenic mouse model in which we found that immune cells responding to a peripheral infection are recruited to the CNS, where they trigger neurological damage.
In this model, mice are infected with both CNS-restricted measles virus (MV) and peripherally restricted lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV).
While infection with either virus alone resulted in no illness, infection with both viruses caused disease in all mice, with ∼50% dying following seizures.
Co-infection resulted in a 12-fold increase in the number of CD8+ T cells in the brain as compared to MV infection alone.
Tetramer analysis revealed that a substantial proportion (&gt;35%) of these infiltrating CD8+ lymphocytes were LCMV-specific, despite no detectable LCMV in CNS tissues.
Mechanistically, CNS disease was due to edema, induced in a CD8-dependent but perforin-independent manner, and brain herniation, similar to that observed in mice challenged intracerebrally with LCMV.
These results indicate that T cell trafficking can be influenced by other ongoing immune challenges, and that CD8+ T cell recruitment to the brain can trigger CNS disease in the apparent absence of cognate antigen.
By extrapolation, human CNS diseases of unknown etiology need not be associated with infection with any particular agent; rather, a condition that compromises and activates the blood-brain barrier and adjacent brain parenchyma can render the CNS susceptible to pathogen-independent immune attack.
PMID: 22043906
Generalization of the prion hypothesis to other neurodegenerative diseases: an imperfect fit.
Protein misfolding diseases have been classically understood as diffuse errors in protein folding, with misfolded protein arising autonomously throughout a tissue due to a pathologic stressor.
The field of prion science has provided an alternative mechanism whereby a seed of pathologically misfolded protein, arising exogenously or through a rare endogenous structural fluctuation, yields a template to catalyze misfolding of the native protein.
The misfolded protein may then spread intercellularly to communicate the misfold to adjacent areas and ultimately infect a whole tissue.
Mounting evidence implicates a prion-like process in the propagation of several neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, Huntington's, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and the tauopathies.
However, the parallels between the events observed in these conditions and those in prion disease are often incomplete.
The aim of this review was to examine the current state of knowledge concerning the mechanisms of protein misfolding and aggregation for neurodegeneration-associated proteins.
In addition, possible methods of intercellular spread are described that focus on the hypothesis that released microvesicles function as misfolded protein delivery vehicles, and the therapeutic options enabled by viewing these diseases from the prion perspective.
PMID: 22125525
Amnesia in frontotemporal dementia with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, masquerading Alzheimer's disease.
A 68-year-old man with a clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) later developed amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), which was confirmed at autopsy at age 72 years.
Because neuronal loss and AD-type pathologies (Braak stage II for neurofibrillary tangles) were scant, TDP-43-positive intracytoplasmic inclusions in hippocampal dentate granular cells and in neurons in the subiculum and amygdala, even though small in amount, may represent the earliest lesions of ALS-related dementia and could be the cause of dementia in this patient.
Although the persistent elevation of creatine kinase from the onset could be a pointer to the presence of motor involvement, more accurate characterization of dementia, which may differentiate ALS-related dementia and AD, is necessary.
PMID: 21646421
Classifications of vocalic segments from articulatory kinematics: healthy controls and speakers with dysarthria.
In this study, the authors classified vocalic segments produced by control speakers (C) and speakers with dysarthria due to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) or Parkinson's disease (PD); classification was based on movement measures.
The researchers asked the following questions: (a) Can vowels be classified on the basis of selected measures of articulatory motions? and (b) Can classification models that are constructed from control productions classify vowels produced by speakers with dysarthria that is related to ALS and PD? Nineteen C, 7 PD, and 8 ALS speakers participated in this study.
The severity of dysarthria varied across individuals and between the 2 disorder groups.
The stimuli were 6 vowels produced in 10 words embedded into sentences read at a comfortable reading rate.
Movement data were collected using the x-ray microbeam.
Movement measures included distances traveled, durations, and average speeds of vowel-related movement strokes.
Vowels and words were classified by linear discriminant analysis with measures of articulatory motion as input variables.
The study showed that vocalic segments could be classified using articulatory movement characteristics with up to 80% accuracy.
The classification accuracy of the movement-based models depended largely on the number of articulators involved and, to a lesser extent, on the movement measure (e.g., distance, duration, speed).
Classification of PD vowels was similar to that of the C group, suggesting a simple scaling of gestures as an explanation of the movement deficit in this disease.
Classification performance for ALS vowels appeared to be different from that of C and PD productions.
Classification of vowels was possible on the basis of their articulatory motions.
ALS vowels appeared categorically different from those of C and PD speakers.
PMID: 23250124
Establishing a Canadian registry of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating cause of progressive weakness, respiratory failure and death.
To date there is no effective therapy to meaningfully extend survival but continuously emerging targets and putative treatments are studied in clinical trials.
Canadian epidemiological data on ALS is scarce and the socioeconomic impact of ALS on Canadian society is unclear.
The Canadian Neuromuscular Disease Registry (CNDR) is a national clinic-based registry of patients with neuromuscular diseases with the goal of facilitating the design and execution of clinical research.
We conducted a national stakeholder survey to assess interest for a Canadian ALS registry and an assessment of expected case ascertainment.
A dataset derivation meeting was held to establish the registry medical dataset.
We report the results of the national stakeholder survey, case ascertainment assessment, and the derived dataset that have resulted in the current implementation of a Canadian registry of patients with ALS.
The development of this long sought-after resource is a significant step forward for the Canadian ALS patient and research communities that will result in more efficient clinical trial recruitment and advancements in our understanding of ALS in Canada.
PMID: 22728481
Relationships between disease progression and serum levels of lipid, urate, creatinine and ferritin in Japanese patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a cross-sectional study.
Previous studies have reported distinct serological profiles of lipid, urate and ferritin in Western patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
We aimed to examine the levels of these serological factors and their relationship to disease progression in Japanese ALS patients.
Ninety-two patients with definite or probable ALS who fulfilled the revised El Escorial criteria were analyzed for clinical and serological variables.
Serological data at the time diagnosed with ALS were compared to those of 92 age/sex/body mass index-matched healthy controls.
Compared to controls, urate and creatinine (Cr) levels were decreased and ferritin levels were increased significantly in sera of male and female patients with ALS.
Significant increases of serum total cholesterol (TC), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and triglyceride levels were found in female ALS patients.
The annual decline of ALS Functional Rating Scale-Revised (ALS-FRS) and forced vital capacity (FVC) were inversely correlated with serum TC, LDL-C, Cr and urate levels, and were positively correlated with serum ferritin levels.
Multivariate analysis showed that the rapid worsening of annual ALS-FRS and FVC was associated with serum levels of TC, LDL-C, Cr, urate and ferritin.
The present study indicated that serum levels of TC, LDL-C, Cr, urate and ferritin were correlated with clinical deterioration in ALS patients.
These results are similar to those in Western patients.
Metabolic and nutritional conditions of lipid, urate and iron could contribute to disease progression in ALS patients.
Further studies investigating high nutrition diets and iron chelation for the treatment of ALS are warranted.
PMID: 22101998
Dietary treatment of epilepsy: rebirth of an ancient treatment.
Since its introduction in 1921, the ketogenic diet has been in continuous use for children with difficult-to-control epilepsy.
After decades of relative disuse, it is now both extremely popular and well studied, with approximately two-thirds of children demonstrating significant seizure reduction after 6 months.
It is being used for less intractable seizures in children as well as recently adults.
Modifications that help improve tolerability include the medium chain triglyceride diet, modified Atkins diet, and low glycemic index treatment.
Major side effects include acidosis, increased cholesterol, kidney stones, gastroesophageal reflux, and growth disturbance.
However, these side effects are usually treatable and nowadays often even preventable.
Future non-epilepsy indications such as Alzheimer disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, autism, and brain tumors are under active investigation.
This dietary treatment for epilepsy has undergone a rebirth.
Its widespread use in Poland and Europe is a welcome additional treatment for those with drug-resistant epilepsy.
PMID: 23155438
Genetic overlap between apparently sporadic motor neuron diseases.
Progressive muscular atrophy (PMA) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) are devastating motor neuron diseases (MNDs), which result in muscle weakness and/or spasticity.
We compared mutation frequencies in genes known to be associated with MNDs between patients with apparently sporadic PMA and ALS.
A total of 261 patients with adult-onset sporadic PMA, patients with sporadic ALS, and control subjects of Dutch descent were obtained at national referral centers for neuromuscular diseases in The Netherlands.
Sanger sequencing was used to screen these subjects for mutations in the coding regions of superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1), angiogenin (ANG), fused in sarcoma/translated in liposarcoma (FUS/TLS), TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TARDBP), and multivesicular body protein 2B (CHMP2B).
In our cohort of PMA patients we identified two SOD1 mutations (p.D90A, p.I113T), one ANG mutation (p.K17I), one FUS/TLS mutation (p.R521H), one TARDBP mutation (p.N352S), and one novel CHMP2B mutation (p.R69Q).
The mutation frequency of these genes was similar in sporadic PMA (2.7%) and ALS (2.0%) patients, and therefore, our findings demonstrate a genetic overlap between apparently sporadic PMA and ALS.
PMID: 22840558
Length of normal alleles of C9ORF72 GGGGCC repeat do not influence disease phenotype.
Expansions of the noncoding GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat in the Chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 (C9ORF72) gene cause frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
In this study we aimed to determine whether the length of the normal-unexpanded-allele of the GGGGCC repeat in C9ORF72 plays a role in the presentation of disease or affects age at onset in C9ORF72 mutation carriers.
We also studied whether the GGGGCC repeat length confers risk or affects age at onset in FTD and ALS patients without C9ORF72 repeat expansions.
C9ORF72 genotyping was performed in 580 FTD, 995 ALS, and 160 FTD-ALS patients, and 1444 controls, leading to the identification of 211 patients with pathogenic C9ORF72 repeat expansions.
No meaningful association between the repeat length of the normal alleles of the GGGGCC repeat in C9ORF72 and disease phenotype or age at onset was observed in C9ORF72 mutation carriers or nonmutation carriers.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PMID: 23449777
Loss of TDP-43 causes age-dependent progressive motor neuron degeneration.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a devastating, progressive neurodegenerative disease that affects upper and lower motor neurons.
Although several genes are identified as the cause of familial cases, the pathogeneses of sporadic forms, which account for 90% of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, have not been elucidated.
Transactive response DNA-binding protein 43 a nuclear protein regulating RNA processing, redistributes to the cytoplasm and forms aggregates, which are the histopathological hallmark of sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, in affected motor neurons, suggesting that loss-of-function of transactive response DNA-binding protein 43 is one of the causes of the neurodegeneration.
To test this hypothesis, we assessed the effects of knockout of transactive response DNA-binding protein 43 in mouse postnatal motor neurons using Cre/loxp system.
These mice developed progressive weight loss and motor impairment around the age of 60 weeks, and exhibited degeneration of large motor axon, grouped atrophy of the skeletal muscle, and denervation in the neuromuscular junction.
The spinal motor neurons lacking transactive response DNA-binding protein 43 were not affected for 1 year, but exhibited atrophy at the age of 100 weeks; whereas, extraocular motor neurons, that are essentially resistant in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, remained preserved even at the age of 100 weeks.
Additionally, ultra structural analysis revealed autolysosomes and autophagosomes in the cell bodies and axons of motor neurons of the 100-week-old knockout mice.
In summary, the mice in which transactive response DNA-binding protein 43 was knocked-out specifically in postnatal motor neurons exhibited an age-dependent progressive motor dysfunction accompanied by neuropathological alterations, which are common to sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
These findings suggest that transactive response DNA-binding protein 43 plays an essential role in the long term maintenance of motor neurons and that loss-of-function of this protein seems to contribute to the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
PMID: 22283411
Withdrawal of invasive home mechanical ventilation in patients with advanced amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: ten years of Danish experience.
Due to the growing use of home mechanical ventilation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), physicians are increasingly confronted with patients seeking discontinuation of therapy.
Yet there are few systematic investigations of the withdrawal of invasive home mechanical ventilation (IHMV).
This article aims to describe the medical and patient-related aspects of terminating IHMV in patients with advanced stage ALS.
A retrospective, descriptive study was made of all ALS patients cared for at our center from 2002 to 2009 who decided to withdraw their consent for IHMV.
All 12 ALS patients (4 females) received continuous IHMV.
They had a median age of 61 years (range, 39-69 years).
In all cases advance directives for end of life care, particularly concerning withdrawal of treatment, were discussed before the initiation of IHMV.
The median time from initiation of IHMV to the decision to terminate treatment was 22 months (range, 1-35 months).
The reasons for requests were for all patients a general loss of meaning in life.
Deep sedation was achieved with high dose morphine and diazepam before disconnecting the ventilator.
Patients' requests for the withdrawal of IHMV in advanced stage ALS was related to a perceived loss of meaning in life.
Termination of treatment was performed under deep sedation as a medically, legally, and ethically justified procedure.
PMID: 21470190
Coping strategies as related to medical and demographic data in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The aim of this study was to examine the coping strategies of 49 patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and their relationships with medical and demographic data.
A total of 49 subjects were asked to fill out a document that would provide their demographic and medical data.
Then, each one was asked to complete a questionnaire of coping strategies called the Brief COPE.
Regarding age groups, we noticed several significant differences concerning emotional support, venting, positive reframing, planning and humour.
All these strategies were used significantly more often by younger patients.
As for medical variables, the clinical form (bulbar vs spinal ALS), and participation or non-participation in a clinical trial proved to affect the coping style.
The correlation analysis showed that disease duration was positively and significantly related to acceptance, positive reframing and humour.
Only one significant correlation was observed between coping strategies and ALS Functional Rating Scale (ALSFRS) scores.
It concerned blame, which was negatively correlated with ALSFRS scores.
Our study clearly demonstrated the relationships between coping strategies and medical as well as demographic variables.
These results encourage us to develop further investigations to better understand these relationships and to offer better adapted psychological interventions for patients with ALS.
© 2011 John Wiley &amp; Sons A/S.
PMID: 23398327
TDP-43 associates with stalled ribosomes and contributes to cell survival during cellular stress.
TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) has emerged as an important contributor to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration.
To understand the physiological roles of TDP-43 in the complex translational regulation mechanisms, we exposed cultured cells to oxidative stress induced by sodium arsenite (ARS) for different periods of time, leading to non-lethal or sublethal injury.
Polysome profile analysis revealed that ARS-induced stress caused the association of TDP-43 with stalled ribosomes via binding to mRNA, which was not found under the steady-state condition.
When the cells were exposed to short-term/non-lethal stress, TDP-43 associating with ribosomes localized to stress granules (SGs); this association was transient because it was immediately dissolved by the removal of the stress.
In contrast, when the cells were exposed to long-term/sublethal stress, TDP-43 was excluded from SGs and shifted to the heavy fractions independent of any binding to mRNA.
In these severely stressed cells, biochemical alterations of TDP-43, such as increased insolubility and disulfide bond formation, were irreversible.
TDP-43 was finally phosphorylated via the ARS-induced c-jun N-terminal kinase pathway.
In TDP-43-silenced cells, stalled mRNA and poly (A)(+) RNA stability was disturbed and cytotoxicity increased under sublethal stress.
Thus, TDP-43 associates with stalled ribosomes and contributes to cell survival during cellular stress.
© 2013 International Society for Neurochemistry.
PMID: 21777015
Molecular imaging of brain lipid environment of lymphocytes in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis using magnetic resonance imaging and SECARS microscopy.
This paper highlights some of the key technologies of using two innovative molecular imaging modalites, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and nonlinear optical microscopy, for imaging intravenously injected ultra small paramagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles cross linked with antibodies (CLUSPIO) in the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) experimental model in vivo or ex vivo, respectively.
Intensive efforts have been made in investigating the causes of abnormalities in lipid metabolism, monitored in some neurodegenerative disorders systems.
It has been shown that an abnormal accumulation of some common lipids in motor nerve cells may play a critical role in the development of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The presented experiments were performed on brain specimens from the transgenic rat model expressing multiple copies of mutated (G93A) human SOD-1 gene, after CD4+ lymphocytes were magnetically labeled with i.v.i.
CLUSPIO antibodies.
In vivo MRI revealed marked signal intensity enhancements in specific pathological regions of the ALS rat brain as compared to the wild type.
Surface-enhanced coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering (SECARS) microscopy indicated cellular interactions based on lipids association to anti-CD4 CLUSPIO.
PMID: 23689920
Incidence and pathology of synucleinopathies and tauopathies related to parkinsonism.
The frequency and distribution of synucleinopathies and tauopathies manifesting with parkinsonism in the general population are poorly understood, thus affecting health care planning and research.
To investigate the incidence and distribution of specific types of parkinsonism and related proteinopathies.
We used the medical records-linkage system of the Rochester Epidemiology Project to identify all subjects who received a screening diagnostic code related to parkinsonism in Olmsted County, Minnesota, from January 1, 1991, through December 31, 2005 (15 years).
A movement disorders specialist reviewed the complete medical records of each subject who screened positive to determine the type of parkinsonism and the presumed proteinopathy using specified criteria.
Geographically defined population.
All residents of Olmsted County who provided authorization to use their data for medical records research (population-based sample).
Incidence of parkinsonism and specific proteinopathies.
Among 542 incident cases of parkinsonism, 409 (75.5%) were classified as proteinopathies.
Of the 389 patients with presumed synucleinopathies (71.8%), 264 had Parkinson disease (48.7% of all cases).
The incidence rate of synucleinopathies was 21.0 per 100 000 person-years overall and increased steeply with age.
The incidence rate of tauopathies was 1.1 overall (20 cases), and the most common tauopathy was progressive supranuclear palsy (16 cases).
Thirty-six subjects had drug-induced parkinsonism (6.6%), 11 had vascular parkinsonism (2.0%), 1 had amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in parkinsonism (0.2%), 1 had parkinsonism secondary to surgery (0.2%), and 84 remained unspecified (15.5%).
Men had a higher incidence than women for most types of parkinsonism.
Findings at brain autopsy confirmed the clinical diagnosis in 53 of 65 patients who underwent autopsy (81.5%).
The incidence of proteinopathies related to parkinsonism increases steeply with age and is consistently higher in men than women.
Clinically diagnosed synucleinopathies are much more common than tauopathies.
Findings at autopsy confirm the clinical diagnosis of presumed proteinopathy.
Our findings may guide health care planning and prompt new research directions.