PMID: 22377809
The tremor network targeted by successful VIM deep brain stimulation in humans.
OBJECTIVE:Deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the ventral intermediate nucleus of thalamus (VIM) is a treatment option in medically intractable tremor, such as essential tremor or tremor-dominant Parkinson disease (PD).
Although functional studies demonstrated modulation of remote regions, the structural network supporting this is as yet unknown.
In this observational study, we analyzed the network mediating clinical tremor modulation.
METHODS:We studied 12 patients undergoing VIM stimulation for debilitating tremor.
We initiated noninvasive diffusion tractography from tremor-suppressive VIM electrode contacts.
Moreover, we tested for the contribution of primary motor projections in this structural correlate of a functional tremor network, comparing the connectivity of effective DBS contacts with those of adjacent, but clinically ineffective, stimulation sites.
RESULTS:VIM stimulation resulted in decrease of tremor and improvement in quality of life.
Tractography initiated from the effective stimulation site reconstructed a highly reproducible network of structural connectivity comprising motor cortical, subcortical, and cerebellar sites and the brainstem, forming the anatomic basis for remote effects of VIM stimulation.
This network is congruent with functional imaging studies in humans and with thalamic projections found in the animal literature.
Connectivity to the primary motor cortex seemed to play a key role in successful stimulation.
CONCLUSIONS:Patients undergoing DBS provide a unique opportunity to assess an electrophysiologically defined seed region in human thalamus, a technique that is usually restricted to animal research.
In the future, preoperative tractography could aid with stereotactic planning of individual subcortical target points for stimulation in tremor and in other disease entities.
PMID: 22376158
Selection of Deep Brain Stimulation Candidates in Private Neurology Practices: Referral May Be Simpler than a Computerized Triage System.
Objective:  The objective of this study is to compare a computerized deep brain stimulation (DBS) screening module (Comparing Private Practice vs.
Academic Centers in Selection of DBS Candidates [COMPRESS], NeuroTrax Corp., Bellaire, TX, USA) with traditional triage by a movement disorders specialized neurologist as the gold standard.
Methods:  The COMPRESS consists of a combination of the Florida Surgical Questionnaire for Parkinson disease (FLASQ-PD), a cognitive assessment battery provided by MindStreams® (NeuroTrax Corp.), and the Geriatric Depression Scale and the Zung Anxiety Self-Assessment Scale.
COMPRESS resulted in the classification of patients into three categories: "optimal candidate,"probable candidate," and "not a good candidate." Similar categorical ratings made by a referring private practice neurologist and by a trained movement disorders specialist were compared with the ratings generated by COMPRESS.
Results:  A total of 19 subjects with Parkinson's disease were enrolled from five private neurological practices.
The clinical impressions of the private practice neurologist vs.
those of the movement disorders specialist were in agreement approximately half the time (10/19 cases).
The movement disorders specialist and COMPRESS agreed on 15/19 cases.
A further comparison between outcomes from the entire COMPRESS module and the FLASQ-PD questionnaire by itself resulted in high agreement (18/19 cases in agreement).
Conclusions:  The COMPRESS agreed with an in-person evaluation by a movement disorders neurologist approximately 80% of the time.
The computerized COMPRESS did not provide any screening advantage over the short FLASQ-PD paper questionnaire.
Larger studies will be needed to assess the utility and cost effectiveness of this computerized triage method for DBS.
PMID: 22371705
Non-gaussianity of low frequency heart rate variability and sympathetic activation: lack of increases in multiple system atrophy and Parkinson disease.
The correlates of indices of long-term ambulatory heart rate variability (HRV) of the autonomic nervous system have not been completely understood.
In this study, we evaluated conventional HRV indices, obtained from the daytime (12:00-18:00) Holter recording, and a recently proposed non-Gaussianity index (λ; Kiyono et al., 2008) in 12 patients with multiple system atrophy (MSA) and 10 patients with Parkinson disease (PD), known to have varying degrees of cardiac vagal and sympathetic dysfunction.
Compared with the age-matched healthy control group, the MSA patients showed significantly decreased HRV, most probably reflecting impaired vagal heart rate control, but the PD patients did not show such reduced variability.
In both MSA and PD patients, the low-to-high frequency (LF/HF) ratio and the short-term fractal exponent α(1), suggested to reflect the sympathovagal balance, were significantly decreased, as observed in congestive heart failure (CHF) patients with sympathetic overdrive.
In contrast, the analysis of the non-Gaussianity index λ showed that a marked increase in intermittent and non-Gaussian HRV observed in the CHF patients was not observed in the MSA and PD patients with sympathetic dysfunction.
These findings provide additional evidence for the relation between the non-Gaussian intermittency of HRV and increased sympathetic activity.
PMID: 22371611
Interregional Correlations in Parkinson Disease and Parkinson-related Dementia with Resting Functional MR Imaging.
Purpose:To apply a recently developed native-space (or native-surface) method to compare resting functional magnetic resonance (MR) imaging correlations (functional connectivity) measured in patients with Parkinson-related dementia (PRD) to those measured in cognitively unimpaired, age-matched control subjects with or without Parkinson disease (PD).Materials and Methods:The study was approved by the institutional review board and complied with HIPAA regulations.
Participants included cognitively unimpaired elderly individuals (n = 19), cognitively unimpaired patients with PD (n = 19), and patients with PRD (n = 18).
Resting functional MR data were assessed by calculating correlation coefficients between blood oxygen level-dependent time series of a seed region and of other regions of interest selected a priori.
Two seeds were used: a medial parietal region that contributes to the default network affected in Alzheimer disease and the caudate, which is affected by loss of dopaminergic inputs in PD.
Correlation analyses were performed in the native space of individual subjects to avoid confounds from transformation to an average brain.
Two-sample t tests were applied to data from each native-surface region of interest, and vertex-wise comparisons were made by using two-sample t tests at each vertex on the group surface; statistical results were corrected for multiple comparisons.
Cortical thickness and striatal volumes were also compared across groups for the regions of interest.Results:Corticostriatal functional correlations were decreased in PRD patients relative to elderly control subjects in bilateral prefrontal regions; largest difference was observed in the right caudal middle frontal region (r = 0.48 in PRD patients and 0.81 in elderly control subjects, uncorrected P = .001).
Conversely, there was no significant difference across groups in the strength of default-network correlations.
There was also no significant difference across groups in cortical thickness or striatal volume.Conclusion:PRD was associated with selective disruption of corticostriatal resting functional MR imaging correlations, which suggests that resting functional MR imaging analyzed in subject-native space may be a useful biomarker in this disease.
Additionally, at least in the present cohort, this technique was more sensitive to PRD changes than was quantitative structural MR imaging.© RSNA, 2012.
PMID: 22371415
Parkinson disease: the enteric nervous system spills its guts.
PMID: 22371284
Parkinson disease: Severe olfactory dysfunction may herald cognitive decline in Parkinson disease.
PMID: 22371282
Parkinson disease: Patients receiving duodenal levodopa infusion are at risk of vitamin B(12) deficiency.
PMID: 22367998
Seven-tesla magnetic resonance images of the substantia nigra in Parkinson disease.
To investigate anatomical changes in the substantia nigra (SN) of Parkinson disease (PD) patients with age-matched controls by using ultra-high field magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
We performed 7T MRI in 10 PD and 10 age-matched control subjects.
Magnetic resonance images of the SN were obtained from a 3-dimensional (3D) T(2) *-weighted gradient echo sequence.
Region of interest-based 3D shape analysis was performed to quantitatively compare images from the 2 groups.
The boundary between the SN and crus cerebri was not smooth in PD subjects.
Undulation in the lateral surface of the SN appeared more intense in the side contralateral to that with the more severe symptoms, and more prominent at the rostral level of the SN than at the intermediate or caudal levels.
In addition to the lateral surface, there was a striking difference in the dorsomedial aspects of the SN between PD and control subjects.
In control subjects, a brighter signal region was observed along the dorsomedial surface of the lateral portion of SN, whereas in PD subjects, this region was observed as a dark region containing a hypointense signal in T(2) *-weighted images.
The measurement of SN volumes, normalized to the intracranial volumes, showed higher values in PD subjects than in control subjects.
This study demonstrates that 3D 7T MRI can definitively visualize anatomical alterations occurring in the SN of PD subjects.
Further pathological studies are required to elucidate the nature of these anatomical alterations.
Ann Neurol 2012;71:267-277.
PMID: 22367997
Nigral pathology and parkinsonian signs in elders without Parkinson disease.
Motor symptoms such as mild parkinsonian signs are common in older persons, but little is known about their underlying neuropathology.
We tested the hypothesis that nigral pathology is related to parkinsonism in older persons without Parkinson disease (PD).
More than 2,500 persons participating in the Religious Orders Study or the Memory and Aging Project agreed to annual assessment of parkinsonism with a modified version of the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale and brain donation.
Brains from 744 deceased participants without PD were assessed for nigral neuronal loss and α-synuclein immunopositive Lewy bodies.
Mean age at death was 88.5 years.
Mean global parkinsonism was 18.6 (standard deviation, 11.90).
About ⅓ of cases had mild or more severe nigral neuronal loss, and about 17% had Lewy bodies.
In separate regression models that adjusted for age, sex, and education, nigral neuronal loss and Lewy bodies were both related to global parkinsonism (neuronal loss: estimate, 0.231; standard error [SE], 0.068; p < 0.001; Lewy bodies: estimate, 0.291; SE, 0.133; p = 0.029).
Employing a similar regression model that included both measures, neuronal loss remained associated with global parkinsonism (neuronal loss: estimate, 0.206; SE, 0.075; p = 0.006).
By contrast, the association between Lewy bodies and global parkinsonism was attenuated by >60% and was no longer significant (Lewy bodies: estimate, 0.112; SE, 0.148; p = 0.447), suggesting that neuronal loss may mediate the association of Lewy bodies with global parkinsonism.
Nigral pathology is common in persons without PD and may contribute to loss of motor function in old age.
Ann Neurol 2012;71:258-266.
PMID: 22367474
Serum Iron, Vitamin B12 and Folic Acid Levels in Parkinson's Disease.
We aimed to investigate possible associations between systemic iron metabolism deficiency and Parkinson's disease, and also to research any possible correlations between stage of the disease and vitamin B12 and folic acid levels.
33 male and 27 female patients diagnosed with idiopathic Parkinson's disease and 22 male and 20 female age- and sex-matched controls were enrolled in the study.
Having the diagnosis of secondary Parkinsonism or Parkinson plus syndromes, and for the females, not being in the menopausal stage were considered as exclusion criteria.
Recordings of blood samples of both groups collected after 8 h fasts were assessed in terms of serum iron, ferritin levels and iron-binding capacity, vitamin B12 and folic acid levels.
The Hoehn and Yahr scale was used to determine the stage of the disease.
No statistically significant difference was found with respect to mean serum iron, median serum ferritin levels and median serum iron-binding capacity between the groups.
A statistically significant but inverse correlation was found between symptoms' duration and serum iron and ferritin levels.
There was no statistically significant difference between the groups with respect to vitamin B12 and folic acid levels.
However, a statistically significant but inverse correlation was determined between the patients' vitamin B12 levels and the Hoehn and Yahr scores.
As Parkinson's disease progresses, serum iron, ferritin and vitamin B12 levels may decrease.
The lower levels of these parameters may be the cause of the progression or may be the result of it.
PMID: 22367436
Patterns of Focal Gray Matter Atrophy Are Associated With Bradykinesia and Gait Disturbances in Older Adults.
Objectives.Identify the neuroimaging correlates of parkinsonian signs in older adults living in the community.
METHODS: Magnetic resonance imaging was obtained in 307 adults (82.9 years, 55% women, 39% blacks) concurrently with the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating scale-motor part.
Magnetic resonance imaging measures included volume of whole-brain white matter hyperintensities and of gray matter for primary sensorimotor, supplementary motor, medial temporal areas, cerebellum, prefronto-parietal cortex, and basal ganglia.
RESULTS: About 25% of the participants had bradykinesia, 26% had gait disturbances, and 12% had tremor.
Compared with those without, adults with any one of these signs were older, walked more slowly, had worse scores on tests of cognition, mood and processing speed, and higher white matter hyperintensities volume (all p ≤ .002).
Gray matter volume of primary sensorimotor area was associated with bradykinesia (standardized odds ratio [95% confidence interval]: 0.46 [0.31, 0.68], p < .0001), and gray matter volume of medial temporal area was associated with gait disturbances (0.56 [0.42, 0.83], p < .0001), independent of white matter hyperintensities volume and age.
Further adjustment for measures of muscle strength, cardiovascular health factors, cognition, processing speed, and mood or for gait speed did not substantially change these results.
CONCLUSIONS: Atrophy within primary sensorimotor and medial temporal areas might be important for development of bradykinesia and of gait disturbances in community-dwelling elderly adults.
The pathways underlying these associations may not include changes in white matter hyperintensities volume, cognition, information processing speed, mood, or gait speed.
PMID: 22366797
Progressive neuronal inclusion formation and axonal degeneration in CHMP2B mutant transgenic mice.
Mutations in the charged multivesicular body protein 2B (CHMP2B) gene cause frontotemporal lobar degeneration.
The mutations lead to C-terminal truncation of the CHMP2B protein.
We generated Chmp2b knockout mice and transgenic mice expressing either wild-type or C-terminally truncated mutant CHMP2B.
The transgenic CHMP2B mutant mice have decreased survival and show progressive neurodegenerative changes including gliosis and increasing accumulation of p62- and ubiquitin-positive inclusions.
The inclusions are negative for the TAR DNA binding protein 43 and fused in sarcoma proteins, mimicking the inclusions observed in patients with CHMP2B mutation.
Mice transgenic for mutant CHMP2B also develop an early and progressive axonopathy characterized by numerous amyloid precursor protein-positive axonal swellings, implicating altered axonal function in disease pathogenesis.
These findings were not observed in Chmp2b knockout mice or in transgenic mice expressing wild-type CHMP2B, indicating that CHMP2B mutations induce degenerative changes through a gain of function mechanism.
These data describe the first mouse model of dementia caused by CHMP2B mutation and provide new insights into the mechanisms of CHMP2B-induced neurodegeneration.
PMID: 22366274
Dyskinetic patients show rebound worsening of affect after an acute L-dopa challenge.
BACKGROUND: Motor response complications that arise with repeated L-dopa administration for the treatment of Parkinson's disease are well understood but the relationship between motor response complications and affect are not.
We proposed that patients with dyskinesias would report rebound worsening in affect during wearing-off of L-dopa effect.
METHODS: Fifty Parkinson's disease patients with were assessed with the Purdue Pegboard test and rated Positive Affect and Negative Affect after overnight withdrawal of dopaminergic medications and half hourly for 6 h after a standard L-dopa challenge.
Patients were carefully classified into stable responder (n = 12), fluctuator (n = 15), and dyskinetic (n = 23) groups.
RESULTS: Positive Affect was improved by L-dopa in dyskinetics and to a lesser degree in fluctuators but not in stable responders.
At T = 4-6 h, Positive Affect rebounded below baseline in dyskinetics only.
On regression analysis, rebound worsening positively correlated with ratings of dyskinesia severity.
Negative Affect improved with L-dopa in all groups and tended to remain below baseline for 6 h after L-dopa challenge.
Peak effects of L-dopa on Positive Affect and Negative Affect occurred significantly earlier than effects on Purdue Pegboard test and were positively correlated with L-dopa equivalent daily dose.
CONCLUSION: There is a clinical dissociation between L-dopa effects on motor function, Positive Affect and Negative Affect.
Rebound worsening in Positive Affect occurred only in dyskinetic patients and the onset of rebound worsening occurred before the end of the motor benefit phase.
These observations could explain why some Parkinson patients report wearing-off symptoms despite the external impression of good motor control.
PMID: 22362921
Value of combined midbrain sonography, olfactory and motor function assessment in the differential diagnosis of early Parkinson's disease.
ObjectiveCharacteristic features of Parkinson's disease (PD) are asymmetric parkinsonian motor signs, hyposmia and substantia nigra (SN) hyperechogenicity on transcranial ultrasound.
However, each of these features has limited diagnostic value as they may be present, albeit less frequently, in other parkinsonian disorders.
Here, the diagnostic sensitivity and specificity of combined assessment of these three features are evaluated.Methods632 patients with parkinsonism (PD, vascular parkinsonism, atypical parkinsonian syndromes, essential tremor and major depressive disorder with motor slowing) were assessed on the Unified Parkinson's disease Rating Scale for motor asymmetry (right-left score difference ≥2), the 12 item Sniffin' Sticks test (SS-12) and transcranial ultrasound.
The derivation (validation) cohort consisted of 517 (115) subjects (193 (35) women; age 65.4±9.6 (62.3±10.3) years) of whom 385 (68) had PD and 132 (47) non-PD parkinsonism; another 21 (6) subjects were not included due to missing transcranial insonability.
Of the validation cohort, all patients had a disease duration ≤2 years and observers were blind to diagnoses.ResultsThe optimum cut-off values for discrimination of PD were SS-12 score <8 (hyposmia) and SN echogenic size ≥0.24 cm(2) (SN hyperechogenicity).
Sensitivity, specificity and positive predictive values for the diagnosis of PD were as follows, for the derivation cohort: motor asymmetry 88%, 54% and 85%; hyposmia 75%, 70% and 88%; SN hyperechogenicity 90%, 63% and 88%; two features present 96%, 72% and 91%; three features present 57%, 94% and 97%; and for the validation cohort: two features present 91%, 77% and 85%; three features present 49%, 98% and 97%.ConclusionThe combined assessment of motor asymmetry, hyposmia and SN hyperechogenicity improves diagnostic specificity and allows early diagnosis of PD.
PMID: 22361583
α-synuclein fate: Proteasome or autophagy?
The accumulation of α-synuclein is critical for the development of Parkinson disease (PD), and unraveling the mechanisms that regulate α-synuclein levels is key to understanding the pathophysiology of the disease.
We recently found that USP9X deubiquitinates α-synuclein, and that this process determines the partition of α-synuclein between the proteasomal and autophagy pathways.
By manipulating USP9X levels, we observed that monoubiquitinated α-synuclein is degraded by the proteasome, whereas deubiquitination of α-synuclein favors its degradation by autophagy.
As USP9X levels and activity are decreased in α-synucleinopathy brains, USP9X may now represent a novel target for PD.
PMID: 22361581
α-Synuclein levels affect autophagosome numbers in vivo and modulate Huntington disease pathology.
Huntington and Parkinson diseases (HD and PD) are two major neurodegenerative disorders pathologically characterized by the accumulation of the aggregate-prone proteins mutant huntingtin (in HD) and α-synuclein (in PD).
Mutant huntingtin is an autophagy substrate and autophagy modulators affect HD pathology both in vitro and in vivo.
In vitro, α-synuclein levels are able to modulate autophagy: α-synuclein overexpression inhibits autophagy, whereas downregulation promotes autophagy.
Here, we review our recent studies showing that α-synuclein levels modulate mutant huntingtin toxicity in mouse models.
This phenotypic modification is accompanied by the in vivo modulation of autophagosome numbers in mouse brains from both control and HD mice expressing different levels of α-synuclein.
PMID: 22359591
No Differential Regulation of Dopamine Transporter (DAT) and Vesicular Monoamine Transporter 2 (VMAT2) Binding in a Primate Model of Parkinson Disease.
Radioligands for DAT and VMAT2 are widely used presynaptic markers for assessing dopamine (DA) nerve terminals in Parkinson disease (PD).
Previous in vivo imaging and postmortem studies suggest that these transporter sites may be regulated as the numbers of nigrostriatal neurons change in pathologic conditions.
To investigate this issue, we used in vitro quantitative autoradioradiography to measure striatal DAT and VMAT2 specific binding in postmortem brain from 14 monkeys after unilateral internal carotid artery infusion of 1-Methyl-4-Phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) with doses varying from 0 to 0.31 mg/kg.
Quantitative estimates of the number of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)-immunoreactive (ir) neurons in substantia nigra (SN) were determined with unbiased stereology, and quantitative autoradiography was used to measure DAT and VMAT2 striatal specific binding.
Striatal VMAT2 and DAT binding correlated with striatal DA (r(s) = 0.83, r(s) = 0.80, respectively, both with n = 14, p<0.001) but only with nigra TH-ir cells when nigral cell loss was 50% or less (r = 0.93, n = 8, p = 0.001 and r = 0.91, n = 8, p = 0.002 respectively).
Reduction of VMAT2 and DAT striatal specific binding sites strongly correlated with each other (r = 0.93, n = 14, p<0.0005).
These similar changes in DAT and VMAT2 binding sites in the striatal terminal fields of the surviving nigrostriatal neurons demonstrate that there is no differential regulation of these two sites at 2 months after MPTP infusion.
PMID: 22357511
Intracellular transport of recombinant adeno-associated virus vectors.
Recombinant adeno-associated viral vectors (rAAVs) have been widely used for gene delivery in animal models, and are currently evaluated for human gene therapy after successful clinical trials in the treatment of inherited, degenerative or acquired diseases, such as Leber congenital amaurosis, Parkinson disease or heart failure.
However, limitations in vector tropism, such as limited tissue specificity and insufficient transduction efficiencies of particular tissues and cell types, still preclude therapeutic applications in certain tissues.
Wild-type adeno-associated viruses (AAVs) are defective viruses that require the presence of a helper virus to complete their life cycle.
On the one hand, this unique property makes AAV vectors one of the safest available viral vectors for gene delivery.
On the other, it also represents a potential obstacle because rAAV vectors have to overcome several biological barriers in the absence of a helper virus to transduce successfully a cell.
Consequently, a better understanding of the cellular roadblocks that limit rAAV gene delivery is crucial and, during the last 15 years, numerous studies resulted in an expanding body of knowledge of the intracellular trafficking pathways of rAAV vectors.
This review describes our current understanding of the mechanisms involved in rAAV attachment to target cells, endocytosis, intracellular trafficking, capsid processing, nuclear import and genome release with an emphasis on the most recent discoveries in the field and the emerging strategies used to improve the efficiency of AAV-derived vectors.Gene Therapy advance online publication, 23 February 2012; doi:10.1038/gt.2012.6.
PMID: 22354395
[Parkinson's disease : Perioperative management and anesthesia].
Approximately 10,000-15,000 Parkinson's disease (PD) patients per year undergo surgery in Germany.
The demographic developments along with further surgical progress and procedural refinements will lead to increasing numbers of PD patients in the operating theatre (OR).
There are several perioperative risk factors for PD patients, they more often require prolonged intensive care treatment and warrant particular anesthesiological attention with regard to the choice of drugs and equipment.
Careful evaluation of concomitant diseases, maintenance of oral Parkinson therapeutic drugs up to the time of surgery and continuous perioperative dopaminergic therapy are key factors for reducing postoperative morbidity in PD patients undergoing surgery.
PMID: 22354157
An FP-CIT PET Comparison of the Differences in Dopaminergic Neuronal Loss Between Idiopathic Parkinson Disease With Dementia and Without Dementia.
Previous studies have demonstrated a decreased density of dopamine transporters (DAT) in basal ganglia in patients with idiopathic Parkinson disease (IPD) using I-n-fluoropropyl-2b-carbomethoxy-3b-(4-iodophenyl) nortropane (FP-CIT), and the reductions in striatal DAT levels were inversely correlated with the severity of motor dysfunction in IPD.
However, there has been no study on the correlation of DAT levels between IPD patients with and without cognitive dysfunction.
Thus, we evaluated the differences in regional DAT density in the brain of patients with IPD without dementia and those with dementia using FP-CIT positron emission tomography.
We recruited 24 consecutive patients with IPD, including 7 with IPD without dementia and 17 with IPD with dementia, and 18 healthy controls.
FP-CIT positron emission tomography scans were acquired 90 and 210 minutes after the FP-CIT injection.
The DAT density did not differ in the caudate nucleus or the putamen between patients with IPD without dementia and those with dementia.
However, the DAT density between the 2 groups with IPD demonstrated a significantly decreased density compared with that of healthy controls in the putamen.
We cautiously suggest that there is no relationship between DAT density and cognitive severity because there were no significant differences in the DAT density between IPD with dementia and those without dementia.
PMID: 22354088
Mitochondrial processing peptidase regulates PINK1 processing, import and Parkin recruitment.
Mutations in phosphatase and tensin homologue-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) cause recessively inherited Parkinson's disease (PD), a neurodegenerative disorder linked to mitochondrial dysfunction.
In healthy mitochondria, PINK1 is rapidly degraded in a process involving both mitochondrial proteases and the proteasome.
However, when mitochondrial import is compromised by depolarization, PINK1 accumulates on the mitochondrial surface where it recruits the PD-linked E3 ubiquitin ligase Parkin from the cytosol, which in turn mediates the autophagic destruction of the dysfunctional organelles.
Using an unbiased RNA-mediated interference (RNAi)-based screen, we identified four mitochondrial proteases, mitochondrial processing peptidase (MPP), presenilin-associated rhomboid-like protease (PARL), m-AAA and ClpXP, involved in PINK1 degradation.
We find that PINK1 turnover is particularly sensitive to even modest reductions in MPP levels.
Moreover, PINK1 cleavage by MPP is coupled to import such that reducing MPP activity induces PINK1 accumulation at the mitochondrial surface, leading to Parkin recruitment and mitophagy.
These results highlight a new role for MPP in PINK1 import and mitochondrial quality control via the PINK1-Parkin pathway.
PMID: 22353987
A computerized algorithm for arousal detection in healthy adults and patients with Parkinson disease.
SUMMARY: Arousals occur from all sleep stages and can be identified as abrupt electroencephalogram (EEG) and electromyogram (EMG) changes.
Manual scoring of arousals is time consuming with low interscore agreement.
The aim of this study was to design an arousal detection algorithm capable of detecting arousals from non-rapid eye movement (REM) and REM sleep, independent of the subject's age and disease.
The proposed algorithm uses features from EEG, EMG, and the manual sleep stage scoring as input to a feed-forward artificial neural network (ANN).
The performance of the algorithm has been assessed using polysomnographic (PSG) recordings from a total of 24 subjects.
Eight of the subjects were diagnosed with Parkinson disease (PD) and the rest (16) were healthy adults in various ages.
The performance of the algorithm was validated in 3 settings: testing on the 8 patients with PD using the leave-one-out method, testing on the 16 healthy adults using the leave-one-out method, and finally testing on all 24 subjects using a 4-fold crossvalidation.
For these 3 validations, the sensitivities were 89.8%, 90.3%, and 89.4%, and the positive predictive values (PPVs) were 88.8%, 89.4%, and 86.1%.
These results are high compared with those of previously presented arousal detection algorithms and especially compared with the high interscore variability of manual scorings.
PMID: 22353727
Comparison of Personality Characteristics in Parkinson Disease Patients With and Without Impulse Control Disorders and in Healthy Volunteers.
OBJECTIVE:: We aimed to assess personality characteristics in patients with Parkinson disease (PD) with and without impulse control disorders (ICD).
METHODS:: We tested patients and controls with the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory-2 (MMPI-2) scales that have expected high sensitivity to apparent addictive behavior.
We recorded mean disease duration and mean levodopa dose in the PD groups.
RESULTS:: Of the 46 PD patients, 13 had ICD: hypersexuality, binge eating, or dopamine dysregulation.
The PD patients with ICD had a longer duration of disease (11 vs.
5 y) and were taking higher doses of levodopa (900 vs.
500 mg/d).
They scored above the pathologic threshold in 4 domains of the MMPI-2 Clinical Scales and in 8 Clinical Subscales and Content Scales.
The most significant abnormality was Alienation-Self and Others.
CONCLUSIONS:: ICDs in the general population have similarities to disorders of substance addiction.
In PD patients, some personality profiles could play a role in development of ICDs or dopamine dysregulation syndrome.
The MMPI-2 may be a useful test for PD patients in general, and for detecting ICD in particular.
PMID: 22351797
Discussions about treatment restrictions in chronic neurologic diseases: A structured review.
Many incurable neurologic diseases have predictable complications during their course or at their end stage.
Timely discussions of potential treatment restrictions may improve the quality of treatment decisions toward the end of life.
What is known about the actual practice of these discussions?.
We performed a literature search in MEDLINE, EMBASE, and CINAHL for empirical studies about discussions and decisions to restrict treatment in the course of 6 conditions: motor neuron disease (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [ALS]), primary malignant brain tumors, multiple sclerosis, stroke, Parkinson disease, and dementia (Alzheimer disease).
In 10 of 43 studies, the actual practice of decision-making was studied; in the remaining 33, caregivers were interviewed about this practice.
Three scenarios were described: 1) acute devastating disease (severe stroke); 2) stable severe neurologic deficit with complications (poststroke brain damage); and 3) chronic progressive disease with complications (dementia and ALS).
We found no studies concerning the other conditions.
In all 3 scenarios, discussions and decisions seemed to be mostly triggered by the occurrence of life-threatening situations, either caused by the disease itself (1), or complications (2 and 3, including many patients with ALS).
Some ALS studies showed that timely discussion of treatment options improved end-of-life decision-making.
The actual practice of discussions about treatment restrictions in chronic neurologic disease has hardly been studied.
The currently available empirical data suggest that discussions are mainly triggered by life-threatening situations, whereas anticipation of such situations may be beneficial for patients and their families.
PMID: 22350538
Mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson disease: heterogenous mechanisms.
Cognitive impairment is common in Parkinson disease (PD), with long-term longitudinal studies reporting that most PD patients develop dementia.
A high proportion of patients with PD and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) progress to dementia within a short time.
Impairments occur in a range of cognitive domains, but single-domain impairment is more common than multiple one, non-amnestic more common than amnestic impairment.
Although the term MCI applied to PD (PD-MCI) is not without controversy due to the lack of uniform diagnostic consensus criteria, the biological validity of PD-MCI is supported by many recent studies that show heterogenous mechanisms in the clinical presentation, neuropsychology, neuroimaging, biomarkers, and neuropathology, suggesting abnormal metabolic network activities involving several cortical and subcortical nervous systems.
Prospective studies using specific biomarkers, including amyloid imaging, and cerebro-spinal fluid biomarkers are warranted for an exact diagnosis and prognostic assessment of early cognitive deficits in PD patients.
PMID: 22349549
Parkinson disease: Constant-current deep brain stimulation improves symptoms in Parkinson disease.
PMID: 22344625
The possible price of auditory cueing: Influence on obstacle avoidance in Parkinson's disease.
BACKGROUND: Under carefully controlled conditions, rhythmic auditory cueing can improve gait in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD).
In complex environments, attention paid to cueing might adversely affect gait, for example when a simultaneous task-such as avoiding obstacles-has to be executed.
We primarily examined whether concurrent auditory cueing interferes with an obstacle avoidance task in patients with PD.
The secondary aim was to study differences between patients with and without freezing of gait.
METHODS: Nineteen patients with PD (8 with freezing) were examined on a treadmill in 4 conditions: normal walking; walking with auditory cueing; walking with an obstacle avoidance task; and walking with auditory cueing and obstacle avoidance.
Outcome measures included kinematic gait parameters and obstacle crossing parameters.
RESULTS: Auditory cueing improved gait in PD, without negative effects on concurrent obstacle avoidance.
Additionally, freezers avoided obstacles less efficiently than non-freezers.
CONCLUSIONS: PD patients are able to successfully execute an obstacle avoidance task, when auditory cueing is administered simultaneously.
The different obstacle avoidance behavior in freezers may contribute to their higher fall risk.
© 2012 Movement Disorder Society.
PMID: 22343151
Increased intestinal permeability and Parkinson disease patients: chicken or egg?
Gastrointestinal involvement is a frequent and early event in the course of Parkinson Disease (PD), and may have a prominent role in the early pathophysiology of the disease.
On the other hand, derangement in intestinal permeability could also result from the involvement of the gastrointestinal tract over the course of the disease.
Patients and methods: The intestinal permeability of 12 non-selected PD patients was studied using a validated, non-invasive test; these results were compared to predefined age-adjusted reference values.
Results: 4/12 PD patients had abnormal gastrointestinal permeability; two had both an abnormal lactulose/mannitol ratio and an abnormal sucrose concentration, and two an isolated abnormal result.
An increased lactulose/mannitol ratio is consistent with defect of either the enterocytes or the tight junctions between them.
Conclusion: Intestinal permeability is increased in a significant proportion of unselected PD patients with minimal gastrointestinal symptoms.
The significance of this finding needs to be further evaluated.
PMID: 22342763
Recovery of hypothalamic tuberoinfundibular dopamine neurons from acute toxicant exposure is dependent upon protein synthesis and associated with an increase in parkin and ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase-L1 expression.
Hypothalamic tuberoinfundibular dopamine (TIDA) neurons remain unaffected in Parkinson disease (PD) while there is significant degeneration of midbrain nigrostriatal dopamine (NSDA) neurons.
A similar pattern of susceptibility is observed in acute and chronic 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) mouse and rotenone rat models of degeneration.
It is not known if the resistance of TIDA neurons is a constitutive or induced cell-autonomous phenotype for this unique subset of DA neurons.
In the present study, treatment with a single injection of MPTP (20mg/kg; s.c.) was employed to examine the response of TIDA versus NSDA neurons to acute injury.
An acute single dose of MPTP caused an initial loss of DA from axon terminals of both TIDA and NSDA neurons, with recovery occurring solely in TIDA neurons by 16h post-treatment.
Initial loss of DA from axon terminals was dependent on a functional dopamine transporter (DAT) in NSDA neurons but DAT-independent in TIDA neurons.
The active metabolite of MPTP, 1-methyl, 4-phenylpyradinium (MPP+), reached higher concentration and was eliminated slower in TIDA compared to NSDA neurons, which indicates that impaired toxicant bioactivation or distribution is an unlikely explanation for the observed resistance of TIDA neurons to MPTP exposure.
Inhibition of protein synthesis prevented TIDA neuron recovery, suggesting that the ability to recover from injury was dependent on an induced, rather than a constitutive cellular mechanism.
Further, there were no changes in total tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) expression following MPTP, indicating that up-regulation of the rate-limiting enzyme in DA synthesis does not account for TIDA neuronal recovery.
Differential candidate gene expression analysis revealed a time-dependent increase in parkin and ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase-L1 (UCH-L1) expression (mRNA and protein) in TIDA neurons during recovery from injury.
Parkin expression was also found to increase with incremental doses of MPTP.
The increase in parkin expression occurred specifically within TIDA neurons, suggesting that these neurons have an intrinsic ability to up-regulate parkin in response to MPTP-induced injury.
These data suggest that TIDA neurons have a compensatory mechanism to deal with toxicant exposure and increased oxidative stress, and this unique TIDA neuron phenotype provides a platform for dissecting the mechanisms involved in the natural resistance of central DA neurons following toxic insult.
PMID: 22341818
Stem Cell Therapy Ameliorates Bladder Dysfunction in an Animal Model of Parkinson Disease.
PURPOSE: Different cell based therapies have been tested, focusing on motor function.
We evaluated the effect of human amniotic fluid stem cells and bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells (ALLCELLS, Emeryville, California) on bladder dysfunction in a rat model of Parkinson disease.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A nigrostriatal lesion was induced by 6-hydroxydopamine in 96 athymic nude female rats divided into 3 treatment groups.
After 2 weeks the groups were injected with human amniotic fluid stem cells, bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells and vehicle for sham treatment, respectively.
At 3, 7, 14 and 28 days the bladder function of 8 rats per group was analyzed by conscious cystometry.
Brains were extracted for immunostaining.
RESULTS: The nigrostriatal lesion caused bladder dysfunction, which was consistent in sham treated animals throughout the study.
Several cystometric parameters improved 14 days after human amniotic fluid stem cell or bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cell injection, concomitant with the presence of human stem cells in the brain.
At 14 days only a few cells were observed in a more caudal and lateral position.
At 28 days the functional improvement subsided and human stem cells were no longer seen.
Human stem cell injection improved the survival of dopaminergic neurons until 14 days.
Human stem cells expressed superoxide dismutase-2 and seemed to modulate the expression of interleukin-6 and glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor by host cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Cell therapy with human amniotic fluid stem cells and bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells temporarily ameliorated bladder dysfunction in a Parkinson disease model.
In contrast to integration, cells may act on the injured environment via cell signaling.
PMID: 22341622
Change in fatigue after bilateral subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation for Parkinson's disease.
BACKGROUND: Bilateral subthalamic nucleus (STN) deep brain stimulation (DBS) improves motor function in patients with medically intractable Parkinson's disease (PD), but the effects of STN DBS on fatigue are unknown.
The purpose of this study was to examine the effects of STN DBS on fatigue scores in patients with PD.
METHODS: Twenty PD patients underwent bilateral STN DBS surgery at our institution from 2007 to 2009.
Only data from the 17 patients who completed the Parkinson Fatigue Scale (PFS) and Unified PD Rating Scale (UPDRS) before and approximately 6 months after surgery were analyzed.
Other evaluations included the Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS), Apathy Evaluation Scale (AES), and Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS).
RESULTS: When the cohort was analyzed as a whole, there was no significant change in the mean or binary PFS score from baseline to the 6 month evaluation.
However, the fatigue response of individual subjects was variable.
Six of 12 subjects with fatigue before surgery were not fatigued post-operatively, while 3/5 subjects without fatigue before surgery became fatigued after DBS surgery.
Fatigue in 8 subjects remained unchanged.
Change in fatigue scores correlated significantly with change in the motor UPDRS, GDS and AES.
Improvement in PFS also correlated with a higher PFS baseline score and higher baseline UPDRS motor off score.
CONCLUSIONS: Changes in fatigue severity were not observed in our cohort as a whole, but there were changes in fatigue on an individual level.
These changes appear to be related to the effects of STN DBS on motor improvement and mood.
PMID: 22339293
Bioenergetics failure in neurodegenerative diseases: back to the future.
Neurodegenerative disease such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson and Huntington's are all characterized by dysfunctional neurons and loss of cognitive/motor functions.
Interestingly these three diseases involve overproduction, aggregation or abnormal degradation of a specific aberrant protein, which participates in disease pathogenesis.
The aggregated proteins may induce disease causing pathways such as high oxidative stress and reduced neuronal metabolism.
Several mechanisms are being considered as disease-causing and there is established and growing evidence that a breakdown in neuronal energy production may be an underlying cause in these diseases.
The specific risk factors and molecular drivers for each disease vary, yet there are common defective bioenergetics pathways, which may drive neuronal dysfunction.
While it has been appreciated that energy deficits can drive neuronal dysfunction and disease, it has for the most part been overlooked as a target pathway for designing novel disease modifying therapeutics.
This editorial reviews selected evidence supporting energy deficits as disease-causing and proposes targets for design of new therapeutics.
PMID: 22336720
Motor control in complex regional pain syndrome: A kinematic analysis.
This study evaluated movement velocity, frequency, and amplitude, as well as the number of arrests in three different subject groups, by kinematic analysis of repetitive movements during a finger tapping (FT) task.
The most affected hands of 80 patients with complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) were compared with the most affected hands of 60 patients with Parkinson disease (PD) as well as the nondominant hands of 75 healthy control (HC) subjects.
Fifteen seconds of FT with thumb and index finger were recorded by a 60-Hz camera, which allowed the whole movement cycle to be evaluated and the above mentioned movement parameters to be calculated.
We found that CRPS patients were slower and tapped with more arrests than the two other groups.
Moreover, in comparison with the hands of the HC subjects, the unaffected hands of the CRPS patients were also impaired in these domains.
Impairment was not related to pain.
Dystonic CRPS patients performed less well than CRPS patients without dystonia.
In conclusion, this study shows that voluntary motor control in CRPS patients is impaired at both the affected as well as the unaffected side, pointing at involvement of central motor processing circuits.
PMID: 22336192
Contribution of VPS35 genetic variability to LBD in the Flanders-Belgian population.
VPS35 was recently identified as a novel autosomal dominant gene for Parkinson disease.
In this study, we aimed to determine the contribution of simple and complex VPS35 variations to the genetic etiology of the spectrum of Lewy body disorders (LBD) in a Flanders-Belgian patient cohort (n = 677).
We identified 3 novel missense variations in addition to 1 silent and 1 intronic variation predicted to activate a cryptic splice site, but no copy number variations.
Despite the absence of these rare variations in the control group (n = 800), we could not attain convincing evidence for pathogenicity by segregation analysis or in silico predictions.
Hence, our data do not support a major role for VPS35 variations in the genetic etiology of Lewy body disorders in the Flanders-Belgian population.
PMID: 22334391
Inflammation during fetal and neonatal life: Implications for neurologic and neuropsychiatric disease in children and adults.
Inflammation is increasingly recognized as being of both physiological and pathological importance in the immature brain.
The rationale of this review is to present an update on this topic with focus on long-term consequences of inflammation during childhood and in adults.
The immature brain can be exposed to inflammation in connection with viral or bacterial infection during pregnancy or as a result of sterile central nervous system (CNS) insults.
Through efficient anti-inflammatory and reparative processes, inflammation may resolve without any harmful effects on the brain.
Alternatively, inflammation contributes to injury or enhances CNS vulnerability.
Acute inflammation can also be shifted to a chronic inflammatory state and/or adversely affect brain development.
Hypothetically, microglia are the main immunocompetent cells in the immature CNS, and depending on the stimulus, molecular context, and timing, these cells will acquire various phenotypes, which will be critical regarding the CNS consequences of inflammation.
Inflammation has long-term consequences and could speculatively modify the risk of a variety of neurological disorders, including cerebral palsy, autism spectrum disorders, schizophrenia, multiple sclerosis, cognitive impairment, and Parkinson disease.
So far, the picture is incomplete, and data mostly experimental.
Further studies are required to strengthen the associations in humans and to determine whether novel therapeutic interventions during the perinatal period can influence the occurrence of neurological disease later in life.
Ann Neurol 2012;.
PMID: 22334107
Use of cuban recombinant human erythropoietin in Parkinson's disease treatment.
INTRODUCTION Recombinant human erythropoietin is used primarily to treat anemia.
There is evidence of its neuroprotective capacity from preclinical studies in Parkinson's disease and other neurodegenerative diseases.
Recombinant human erythropoietin produced in Cuba (ior-EPOCIM) is registered and approved for use in humans in Cuba and in a number of other countries.
OBJECTIVE Assess safety and possible neuroprotective effect of ior-EPOCIM in a group of Parkinson's disease patients.
METHODS A three-phase exploratory study (proof of concept) was conducted from August 2008 to April 2009: preliminary assessment, treatment (weeks 1-5), and post-treatment (weeks 6-35).
Participants were 10 Parkinson's disease patients (8 men, 2 women) from the outpatient clinic at the International Neurological Restoration Center, all at least one year post onset, aged 47-65 years.
The ior-EPOCIM was administered subcutaneously in a once-weekly dose (60 IU/kg body weight) for five weeks.
Therapy with patients' antiparkinsonian drugs was maintained throughout the study, except during motor examination, conducted following a 12-hour withdrawal (OFF condition).
Safety was evaluated primarily by recording adverse events (by intensity and causality) from start of treatment until the study's completion.
Hematological parameters and blood pressure were also measured because of their direct relationship to the medication's action.
To evaluate possible neuroprotective activity, variables were included related to patients' motor function and cognitive and affective status, measured using internationally recognized scales.
All variables were evaluated before, during and after treatment.
Data were processed using a fixed-effects linear model, with a repeated-measures design (significance level p ≤ 0.05).
RESULTS Three patients experienced mild adverse events (precordial discomfort and hypertension in one; leg fatigue in another; renal colic in a third), with a possible causal relationship in the first two that was neither life threatening nor required hospitalization.
Hemoglobin was the only hematological parameter that showed a growing and significant increase (p < 0.001), but without reaching pathological levels.
The other variables presented clinically positive and statistically significant changes compared to pretreatment assessment: motor function (p < 0.001), cognitive status (p < 0.001) and mood (p = 0.013).
CONCLUSIONS At the dosage used, ior-EPOCIM was safe and well tolerated in these Parkinson's disease patients.
Further studies are needed to corroborate these results and evaluate the medication's possible neuroprotective effect.
KEYWORDS Parkinson disease, erythropoietin, recombinant proteins, neuroprotective agents, clinical trial, safety, ior-EPOCIM, Cuba.
PMID: 22333397
[Radiotherapy for sialorrhoea in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Parkinson's disease].
To determine whether sialorrhoea in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and in Parkinson's disease can be inhibited by irradiation with a relatively low dose to the major salivary glands.
Retrospective study.
Fifty-three patients who attended the Radiotherapy Department at the Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands, from January 1996-December 2008, were irradiated locally one or more times for sialorrhoea.
Forty-three of them had ALS and 10 had Parkinson's disease.
The irradiation dose was 12 Gy in two fractions.
The clinical response and side effects were scored according to predefined criteria.
After initial irradiation, a partial or complete response was achieved in 35 (66%) patients.
The mean survival rate after the first irradiation for all patients was 13.7 months, for ALS patients 11.6 months and for Parkinson's disease patients 26.8 months.
The mean duration of successful palliation was 6.9 months in ALS and 6.5 months in Parkinson's disease.
This indicates that the sialorrhoea of these critically ill patients was palliated for, on average, 50% and 25% of their residual life span, respectively.
The mean time until re-irradiation was 11.9 months.
The second irradiation session also resulted in a response in 21 of 26 patients (81%), but this was usually only a partial response (62%).
Ten patients temporarily experienced minor or moderate side effects, such as thick mucus, dry mouth or mild local pain.
In two-thirds of patients with ALS or Parkinson's disease, low-dose radiotherapy was an effective, simple and rapid palliative treatment for sialorrhoea, with minor toxicity.
PMID: 22333068
Neurorestoration therapeutics for neurodegenerative and psychiatric disease.
OBJECTIVE: Neurorestoration within the human central nervous system (CNS) is a concept that is barely a decade old.
Despite this, there is significant clinical activity in this area, although there has not been any attempt to systematically identify these trials and organize them by disease area and phase of development.
The objective of this investigation is to broadly review the current state of neurorestorative clinical trial activity ongoing worldwide.
METHODS: Iterative searches of the databases Clinical trilas.
Gov, EU Clinical Trials Register and ADIS Insight were used to locate clinical trials identified as involving neurorecovery/restoration strategies or stem cells for central nervous system diseases.
RESULTS: A wide range of neurorestorative clinical trials (N=106) are ongoing or planned.
Nearly threefourths of all clinical trials (75/106) are targeting one of four disease areas: multiple sclerosis, stroke, Parkinson?s disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Nearly two-thirds (63%) of 106 ongoing and planned clinical trials focus on cell-based therapy, although these are almost exclusively in phase 1 or 2 of development.
DISCUSSION: Neurorecovery is an emerging field that is currently focused on earlier stages of clinical development, primarily in four disease areas.
As the field matures, it is expected that there will be a greater balance of studies across a wider spectrum of CNS diseases as well as in late-stage development.
PMID: 22328094
REM Sleep Behavior Disorder and REM Sleep Without Atonia as an Early Manifestation of Degenerative Neurological Disease.
Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is a parasomnia characterized by repeated episodes of dream enactment behavior and REM sleep without atonia (RSWA) during polysomnography recording.
RSWA is characterized by increased phasic or tonic muscle activity seen on polysomnographic electromyogram channels.
RSWA is a requisite diagnostic feature of RBD, but may also be seen in patients without clinical symptoms or signs of dream enactment as an incidental finding in neurologically normal individuals, especially in patients receiving antidepressant therapy.
RBD may be idiopathic or symptomatic.
Patients with idiopathic RBD often later develop other neurological features including parkinsonism, orthostatic hypotension, anosmia, or cognitive impairment.
RSWA without clinical symptoms as well as clinically overt RBD also often occurs concomitantly with the α-synucleinopathy family of neurodegenerative disorders, which includes idiopathic Parkinson disease, Lewy body dementia, and multiple system atrophy.
This review article considers the epidemiology of RBD, clinical and polysomnographic diagnostic standards for both RBD and RSWA, previously reported associations of RSWA and RBD with neurodegenerative disorders and other potential causes, the pathophysiology of which brain structures and networks mediate dysregulation of REM sleep muscle atonia, and considerations for the effective and safe management of RBD.
PMID: 22324823
Clinical and Electrophysiologic Characteristics of Antidromic Tachycardia in Children with Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome.
Background: Antidromic reciprocating tachycardia (ART) is a rare form of wide complex tachycardia in children with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (WPW).
The incidence and electrophysiologic characteristics of ART in children with WPW have not been well described.
Methods: A multicenter retrospective analysis of all patients with WPW undergoing electrophysiology (EP) study from 1990 to 2009 was performed.
Patients with clinical or inducible ART were included.
Results: A total of 1,147 patients with WPW underwent EP study and 30 patients had ART (2.6%) and were the subject of this analysis.
The mean age was 16 ± 3 years, weight was 65 ± 16 kg, and tachycardia cycle length was 305 ± 55 ms.
There were two patients (7%) with congenital heart disease (both with Ebstein's anomaly).
Four patients (13%) had more than one accessory pathway (AP).
The location of the AP was left sided in 53% of patients and right sided in 47%, with septal location and left lateral pathways most commonly involved.
AP conduction was found to be high risk in 17 patients (57%).
Ablation was not attempted in two patients (7%) due to proximity to the HIS and risk of heart block.
Ablation was acutely successful in 93% of the patients in whom it was attempted.
Conclusions: ART is a rare finding in children undergoing EP study.
Over half of the patients with ART were found to be high risk and multiple AP were uncommon.
Unlike the adult population, ART occurred commonly with septal APs.
(PACE 2012;1-9).
PMID: 22323779
Subregional Patterns of Preferential Striatal Dopamine Transporter Loss Differ in Parkinson Disease, Progressive Supranuclear Palsy, and Multiple-System Atrophy.
Parkinson disease (PD), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), and multiple-system atrophy (MSA) are known to affect dopaminergic neurons of the brain stem and striatum with different preferential involvement.
Here we investigated differences in striatal subregional dopamine transporter loss in PD, PSP, and MSA and assessed the diagnostic value of (18)F-fluorinated-N-3-fluoropropyl-2-β-carboxymethoxy-3-β-(4-iodophenyl)nortropane ((18)F-FP-CIT) PET in differentiating PSP and MSA from PD.
METHODS: Forty-nine patients with PD, 19 patients with PSP, 24 patients with MSA, and 21 healthy people (healthy controls) were examined with (18)F-FP-CIT PET.
The PET images were spatially normalized and analyzed with 12 striatal subregional volume-of-interest (VOI) templates (bilateral ventral striatum [VS], anterior caudate [AC], posterior caudate, anterior putamen, posterior putamen [PP], and ventral putamen [VP]) and 1 occipital VOI template.
The nondisplaceable binding potential (BP(ND)) and intersubregional ratio (ISR; defined as the ratio of the BP(ND) of one striatal subregion to that of another striatal subregion) of subregional VOIs were calculated.
RESULTS: The BP(ND) of all VOIs in the PD, MSA, and PSP groups were significantly lower than those in the healthy controls (P < 0.05).
The BP(ND) of AC and the AC/VS ISR in the PSP group were significantly lower than those in the PD group.
The BP(ND) of VP was significantly lower, but the PP/VP ISR was significantly higher in the MSA group than in the PD group.
At the cutoff value for the AC/VS ISR (<0.7), the sensitivity and specificity for differentiating PSP from PD were 94% and 92%, respectively.
At the cutoff value for the PP/VP ISR (>0.65), the sensitivity and specificity for differentiating MSA from PD were 90% and 45%, respectively.
The diagnostic accuracy of visual analysis was similar to that of quantitative analysis for differentiating PSP from PD but was significantly higher for differentiating MSA from PD.
CONCLUSION: Compared with PD, PSP and MSA showed more prominent and earlier dopamine transporter loss in the AC and VP, respectively.
These findings could be useful for suggesting PSP or MSA in parkinsonian cases without characteristic atypical features.
PMID: 22323748
Role of DaTSCAN and clinical diagnosis in Parkinson disease.
OBJECTIVE:To assess the role of DaTSCAN in the diagnosis of Parkinson disease (PD).
METHODS:Using the sensitivity and specificity values obtained in the 2 studies that recently led the US Food and Drug Administration to approve the use of DaTSCAN for the diagnosis of PD, calculations were carried out to estimate the accuracy of the clinical diagnosis taking DaTSCAN findings as the standard of truth.
RESULTS:In early PD, a clinical diagnosis of "possible" or "probable" PD has a sensitivity of 98% and a specificity of 67%.
The specificity increases to 94% once the clinical diagnosis becomes established.
The overall accuracy of the clinical diagnosis is 84% in early PD and 98% at later stages.
The clinical diagnostic accuracy is mathematically identical to the diagnostic accuracy of DaTSCAN imaging.
CONCLUSIONS:In the absence of neuropathologic validation, the overall accuracy of a clinical diagnosis of PD is very high and mathematically identical to the accuracy of DaTSCAN imaging, which calls into question the use of radiotracer neuroimaging as a diagnostic tool in clinical practice.
PMID: 22323745
Parkinson disease, cancer, and LRRK2: Causation or association?
At a superficial level, Parkinson disease (PD) and cancer seem to be like the 2 sides of a coin: uncontrolled cell growth in cancer contrasting with untimely cell death in PD.
The underlying mechanisms could therefore be 2 opposite endpoints of those intracellular pathways that regulate the cell cycle, cell death, and cell survival.(1) Extrapolating this point, if there is a systemic difference in a person's tendency of cells to undergo programmed cell death, then an individual who has increased risk of PD would have a lower risk for cancer and vice versa.
PMID: 22323743
The LRRK2 G2019S mutation is associated with Parkinson disease and concomitant non-skin cancers.
OBJECTIVE:In view of the fact that cancer patterns in patients with Parkinson disease (PD) differ from the general population, we aimed to verify whether patients with PD with LRRK2 mutations have an increased risk for particular cancer types.
METHODS:In this cross-sectional study, eligible consenting Jewish patients with PD were genotyped for the predominant LRRK2 G2019S mutation.
Oncologic data were obtained by personal interview and reviewing patients' files.
Stepwise logistic regression was applied to model the probability of cancer occurrence in carriers vs noncarriers.
RESULTS:Overall, 79/490 (16.1%) genotyped patients carried the G2019S mutation.
Seventy-seven (16%) were diagnosed with cancer; of those, 67 (14%) with a non-skin cancer.
Eighteen (23%) carriers vs 49 (12%) noncarriers had a non-skin cancer (p = 0.01, odds ratio [OR] = 2.18, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.19-3.99).
A significant ethnicity effect was noted (p = 0.045, OR = 1.84, 95% CI 1.02-3.34).
Among Ashkenazi patients, age and LRRK2 emerged as significant using stepwise logistic regression including age, gender, and LRRK2 status as explanatory variables.
The OR for LRRK2 mutation carriers adjusted for age was 3.38 (95% CI 1.64-6.97, p = 0.0009).
CONCLUSIONS:Ashkenazi Jewish patients with PD who harbor the G2019S LRRK2 mutation are more likely to have a concomitant non-skin cancer than noncarriers.
PMID: 22321866
The development and validation of a quality of life measure for the carers of people with Parkinson's disease (the PDQ-Carer).
BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease (PD) can have substantial effects not only on the quality of life of those diagnosedwith the condition but also upon the informal carers who provide support and assistance to them.
However, to date no well-validated carer specific quality of life measure has been developed for carers of people with PD.
OBJECTIVE: This paper documents the development and validation of a PD specific carer quality of life scale.
METHODS: In depth interviews were undertaken with carers of people with PD.
The interviews were transcribed and analysed thematically to derive a pool of potential items for the questionnaire.
A pilot survey was used to refine the initial version of the questionnaire.
A developmental survey was undertaken and the results analysed to produce the final 29-item measure.
A validation survey was then undertaken to assess the construct validity and reliability of the measure.
RESULTS: Survey results suggest a 29-item questionnaire tapping four dimensions of quality of life (Social and Personal Activities, Anxiety and Depression, Self care, and Strain).
Internal consistency reliability was found to be high for all domains.
Data completeness was high.
Construct validity (assessed by correlations with a generic measure of quality of life) confirmed prior hypotheses.
CONCLUSION: The 29-item Parkinson Disease Questionnaire for Carers (PDQ-Carer) is a short, meaningful quality of life instrument, which taps areas of specific salience and concern to PD carers.
PMID: 22321864
Boxing and Parkinson disease: A link or a myth? An (18)F-FDOPA PET/CT study in retired Thai traditional boxers.
PMID: 22319547
The cortical and striatal gene expression profile of 100 hz electroacupuncture treatment in 6-hydroxydopamine-induced Parkinson's disease model.
Electroacupuncture (EA), especially high-frequency EA, has frequently been used as an alternative therapy for Parkinson disease (PD) and is reportedly effective for alleviating motor symptoms in patients and PD models.
However, the molecular mechanism underlying its effectiveness is not completely understood.
To implement a full-scale search for the targets of 100 Hz EA, we selected rat models treated with 6-hydroxydopamine into the unilateral MFB, which mimic end-stage PD.
High-throughput microarray analysis was then used to uncover the regulated targets in the cortex and striatum after 4-week EA treatment.
In the differentially regulated transcripts, the proportion of recovered expression profiles in the genes, the functional categories of targets in different profiles, and the affected pathways were analyzed.
Our results suggested that the recovery of homeostasis in the transcript network and many regulated functional clusters in the cortex and striatum after EA treatment may contribute to the behavioral improvement of PD rats.
PMID: 22316445
Tai chi and postural stability in patients with Parkinson's disease.
Patients with Parkinson's disease have substantially impaired balance, leading to diminished functional ability and an increased risk of falling.
Although exercise is routinely encouraged by health care providers, few programs have been proven effective.
We conducted a randomized, controlled trial to determine whether a tailored tai chi program could improve postural control in patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease.
We randomly assigned 195 patients with stage 1 to 4 disease on the Hoehn and Yahr staging scale (which ranges from 1 to 5, with higher stages indicating more severe disease) to one of three groups: tai chi, resistance training, or stretching.
The patients participated in 60-minute exercise sessions twice weekly for 24 weeks.
The primary outcomes were changes from baseline in the limits-of-stability test (maximum excursion and directional control; range, 0 to 100%).
Secondary outcomes included measures of gait and strength, scores on functional-reach and timed up-and-go tests, motor scores on the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale, and number of falls.
The tai chi group performed consistently better than the resistance-training and stretching groups in maximum excursion (between-group difference in the change from baseline, 5.55 percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.12 to 9.97; and 11.98 percentage points; 95% CI, 7.21 to 16.74, respectively) and in directional control (10.45 percentage points; 95% CI, 3.89 to 17.00; and 11.38 percentage points; 95% CI, 5.50 to 17.27, respectively).
The tai chi group also performed better than the stretching group in all secondary outcomes and outperformed the resistance-training group in stride length and functional reach.
Tai chi lowered the incidence of falls as compared with stretching but not as compared with resistance training.
The effects of tai chi training were maintained at 3 months after the intervention.
No serious adverse events were observed.
Tai chi training appears to reduce balance impairments in patients with mild-to-moderate Parkinson's disease, with additional benefits of improved functional capacity and reduced falls.
(Funded by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00611481.).
PMID: 22315971
Redox Proteomics Analyses of the Influence of Co-expression of Wild Type or Mutated LRRK2 and Tau on C. elegans Protein Expression and Oxidative Modification: Relevance to Parkinson Disease.
Aims: The human LRRK2 gene has been identified as the most common causative gene of autosomal-dominantly inherited and idiopathic Parkinson disease (PD).
The G2019S substitution is the most common mutation in LRRK2.
The R1441C mutation also occurs in cases of familial PD, but is not as prevalent.
Some cases of LRRK2-based PD exhibit tau pathology, which suggests that alterations on LRRK2 activity affect the pathophysiology of Tau.
To investigate how LRRK2 might affect tau and the pathophysiology of PD, we generated lines of C.
elegans expressing human LRRK2 [wild type (WT) or mutated (G2019S or R1441C)] with and without V337M Tau.
Expression and redox proteomics were used to identify the effects of LRRK2 (WT and mutant) on protein expression and oxidative modifications.
Results: Co-expression of WT LRRK2 and tau led to increased expression of numerous proteins, including several 60S ribosomal proteins, mitochondrial proteins and the V-type proton ATPase, which is associated with autophagy.
C.
elegans expressing mutant LRRK2 showed similar changes, but also showed increased protein oxidation and lipid peroxidation, the latter indexed as increased protein-bound 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (HNE).
Innovation: Our study brings new knowledge on the possible alterations induced by LRRK2 (WT and mutated) and tau interactions, suggesting the involvement of G2019S and R1441C in tau-dependent neurodegenerative processes.
Conclusion: These results suggest that changes in LRRK2 expression or activity lead to corresponding changes in mitochondrial function, autophagy and protein translation.
These findings are discussed with reference to the pathophysiology of PD.
PMID: 22315428
Impaired neurotransmission caused by overexpression of α-synuclein in nigral dopamine neurons.
We used in vivo amperometry to monitor changes in synaptic dopamine (DA) release in the striatum induced by overexpression of human wild-type α-synuclein in nigral DA neurons, induced by injection of an adeno-associated virus type 6 (AAV6)-α-synuclein vector unilaterally into the substantia nigra in adult rats.
Impairments in DA release evolved in parallel with the development of degenerative changes in the nigrostriatal axons and terminals.
The earliest change, seen 10 d after vector injection, was a marked, ≈50%, reduction in DA reuptake, consistent with an early dysfunction of the DA transporter that developed before any overt signs of axonal damage.
At 3 wk, when the first signs of axonal damage were observed, the amount of DA released after a KCl pulse was reduced by 70-80%, and peak DA concentration was delayed, indicating an impaired release mechanism.
At later time points, 8-16 wk, overall striatal innervation density was reduced by 60-80% and accompanied by abundant signs of axonal damage in the form of α-synuclein aggregates, axonal swellings, and dystrophic axonal profiles.
At this stage DA release and reuptake were profoundly reduced, by 80-90%.
The early changes in synaptic DA release induced by overexpression of human α-synuclein support the idea that early predegenerative changes in the handling of DA may initiate, and drive, a progressive degenerative process that hits the axons and terminals first.
Synaptic dysfunction and axonopathy would thus be the hallmark of presymptomatic and early-stage Parkinson disease, followed by neuronal degeneration and cell loss, characteristic of more advanced stages of the disease.
PMID: 22314796
Comparison of enrollees and decliners of Parkinson disease sham surgery trials.
Concerns have been raised that persons with serious illnesses participating in high-risk research, such as PD patients in sham surgery trials, have unrealistic expectations and are vulnerable to exploitation.
A comparison of enrollees and decliners of such research may provide insights about the adequacy of decision making by potential subjects.
We compared 61 enrollees and 10 decliners of two phase II neurosurgical intervention (i.e., cellular and gene transfer) trials for PD regarding their demographic and clinical status, perceptions and attitudes regarding research risks, potential direct benefit, and societal benefit, and perspectives on the various potential reasons for and against participation.
In addition to bivariate analyses, a logistic regression model examined variables regarding risks and benefits as predictors of participation status.
Enrollees perceived lower risk of harm while tolerating higher risk of harm and were more action oriented, but did not have more advanced disease.
Both groups rated hope for benefit as a strong reason to participate, whereas the fact that the study's purpose was not solely to benefit them was rated as "not a reason" against participation.
Hope for benefit and altruism were rated higher than expectation of benefit as reasons in favor of participation for both groups.
Enrollees and decliners are different in their views and attitudes toward risk.
Although both are attracted to research because of hopes of personal benefit, this hope is clearly distinguishable from an expectation of benefit and does not imply a failure to understand the main purpose of research.
© 2012 Movement Disorder Society.
PMID: 22314754
Motion Preservation and Clinical Outcome of PCM® Cervical Disc Arthroplasty.
BACKGROUND: Artificial cervical disc replacements are commonly used to treat radiculo-myelopathy caused by degenerative disc disease.
However, long-term disc mobility and an effect on adjacent segment disease have yet to be demonstrated.
We report improvements in clinical outcome after disc replacement but also demonstrate potential limitations.
OBJECTIVE: To review clinical and radiological outcomes after discectomy and disc replacement with the Porous Coated Motion (PCM®) artificial cervical disc.
METHODS: Retrospective review of consecutive patients who underwent one or two level PCM® disc replacements.
The following criteria were studied: arm pain, neck pain, Neck Disability Index and SF-36 questionnaires, and flexion-extension radiographs up to two years after surgery.
RESULTS: 80 PCM® artificial discs were implanted in 53 patients.
Only 17 discs (21%) maintained physiological movement, and complete fusion was seen in 18.8%.
One disc replacement was revised due to anterior displacement.
There were no complications of infection, CSF leak, dysphagia, or hoarse voice.
Arm and neck pain improved significantly after discectomy, but Neck Disability Index questionnaires demonstrated a slight improvement which was not sustained by 2 years.
SF-36 scores demonstrated a trend to better outcome with time, but this was only significant for the mental domain.
CONCLUSION: Clinical improvement was seen after PCM disc replacement, but adequate range of movement was sustained in only 21% of disc replacements over time.
Unclear long-term results of this and other disc replacements suggest caution in adopting these new devices as the gold standard.
PMID: 22310988
Parkinson disease: White matter hyperintensities in cholinergic pathways correlate with cognitive status in Parkinson disease.
PMID: 22308089
Prevalence of electrocardiographic abnormalities in an unselected young male multi-ethnic South-East Asian population undergoing pre-participation cardiovascular screening: results of the Singapore Armed Forces Electrocardiogram and Echocardiogram screening protocol.
AimsResting 12-lead electrocardiograms (ECGs) have been employed in the pre-participation evaluation of young asymptomatic subjects to detect pre-existing heart diseases.
Although the incorporation of routine ECG in pre-participation screening remains controversial, there is increasing evidence that cardiomyopathies and ion channelopathies have ECG changes as the initial manifestation.
The causes of sudden cardiac death in young people show significant geographical variation.
We aim to determine the prevalence and spectrum of ECG abnormalities in a young male South-East Asian population.Methods and resultsThe Singapore Armed Forces Electrocardiogram and Echocardiogram (SAFE) protocol is an ECG-based pre-participation cardiac screening programme modelled after the Italian system.
From October 2008 to May 2009, a total of 18 476 young male conscripts (mean age 19.5 years old, range 16-27) underwent mandatory pre-enlistment medical screening at a single medical facility.
Subjects with abnormal ECG findings were classified into two groups: Group A had ECG changes that fulfilled a pre-specified checklist to screen for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and were referred for transthoracic echocardiogram; Group B had other ECG abnormalities [such as Brugada pattern, Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) pattern, long QTc] and were referred for secondary screening at a tertiary institution.
Of the 18 476 subjects screened, 7.0% (n= 1285) had ECG abnormalities.
Of note, 19 (0.10%) had Brugada pattern, 25 (0.14%) had WPW pattern, and 31 (0.17%) had prolonged QT interval on ECG.
The prevalence of ECG abnormalities was significantly higher in Chinese than in South Asians (7.2 vs.
5.7%, P= 0.003).ConclusionThe prevalence of ECG abnormalities in a young, South-East Asian male population was 7.0%.
There were significant ethnic differences, with ECG abnormalities more prevalent in Chinese than in South Asians (7.2 vs.
5.7%, P= 0.003).
The inclusion of universal ECG, in addition to history and physical examination, may increase the sensitivity of a cardiovascular screening programme.
Knowledge of the spectrum and prevalence of ECG abnormalities and disease conditions would be pivotal in designing customized screening programmes.
PMID: 22307450
Treatment Options for Tauopathies.
OPINION STATEMENT: To date, there are no approved and established pharmacologic treatment options for tauopathies, a very heterogenous group of neuropsychiatric diseases often leading to dementia and clinically diagnosed as atypical Parkinson syndromes.
Among these so-called Parkinson plus syndromes are progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), also referred to as Steele-Richardson-Olszewski syndrome; frontotemporal dementia (FTD); and corticobasal degeneration (CBD).
Available treatment strategies are based mainly on small clinical trials, miscellaneous case reports, or small case-controlled studies.
The results of these studies and conclusions about the efficacy of the medication used are often contradictory.
Approved therapeutic agents for Alzheimer´s dementia, such as acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and memantine, have been used off-label to treat cognitive and behavioral symptoms in tauopathies, but the outcome has not been consistent.
Therapeutic agents for the symptomatic treatment of Parkinson's disease (levodopa or dopamine agonists) are used for motor symptoms in tauopathies.
For behavioral or psychopathological symptoms, treatment with antidepressants-especially selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors-could be helpful.
Antipsychotics are often not well tolerated because of their adverse effects, which are pronounced in tauopathies; these drugs should be given very carefully because of an increased risk of cerebrovascular events.
In addition to pharmacologic options, physical, occupational, or speech therapy can be applied to improve functional abilities.
Each pharmacologic or nonpharmacologic intervention should be fitted to the specific symptoms of the individual patient, and decisions about the type and duration of treatment should be based on its efficacy for the individual and the patient's tolerance.
Currently, no effective treatment is available that targets the cause of these diseases.
Current research focuses on targeting tau protein pathology, including pathologic aggregation or phosphorylation; these approaches seem to be very promising.
PMID: 22303740
[Neurology].
In 2011, new oral anticoagulants for atrial fibrillation are available and the ABCD3-I score predicting stroke after TIA updates the ABCD2 score.
New McDonald criteria allow faster MS diagnosis and the first oral treatment (fingolimod) for MS can be prescribed.
A new anti-antiepileptic drug (retigabine) is available and sodium valproate has long term neurological adverse effects after in utero exposure.
Among Parkinson disease treatments, deep brain stimulation is extending applications and dopamine agonists with extended release are as efficient and well tolerated as standard forms at long term scale.
Monoclonal antibodies and immunosuppressant agents are proposed as good alternatives in the treatment of chronic dysimmune polyneuropathies.
Gene therapy for the treatment of genetic myopathies is progressing.
PMID: 22301995
Alpha-synuclein's degradation in vivo: Opening a new (cranial) window on the roles of degradation pathways in Parkinson disease.
Progressive accumulation of α-synuclein is key to the pathology of many neurodegenerative diseases, including Parkinson disease and dementia with Lewy bodies.
Increased intracellular levels of α-synuclein may be caused by enhanced expression or alterations in protein degradation pathways.
Here we review our recent study showing that the ubiquitin-proteasome system and the autophagy-lysosomal pathway are differentially involved in α-synuclein's degradation in vivo.
We discuss the key findings obtained with our novel in vivo approach and also present a model for the progression of protein aggregation and dysfunctional degradation in Parkinson disease.
PMID: 22301561
Deep brain stimulation: What can patients expect from it?
Deep brain stimulation has largely replaced ablative procedures for the treatment of advanced Parkinson disease, essential tremor, and dystonia.
It is also approved for obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Although not curative, it improves symptoms and quality of life.
PMID: 22298861
Assessment of substantia nigra echogenicity in german and filipino populations using a portable ultrasound system.
Objectives- Transcranial sonography of the substantia nigra for diagnosing premotor stages of Parkinson disease has been attracting increasing interest.
Standard reference values defining an abnormal increased echogenic size (hyperechogenicity) of the substantia nigra have been established in several populations using high-end stationary ultrasound systems.
It is unknown whether a portable ultrasound system can be appropriately used and how the Filipino population would compare with the well-studied white population.
Methods- We prospectively studied substantia nigra echogenic sizes and third ventricle widths in 71 healthy adult German participants and 30 age- and sex-matched Filipino participants using both a well-established stationary ultrasound system (in the German cohort) and a recently distributed portable ultrasound system (in both ethnic cohorts).
Results- Mean substantia nigra echogenic sizes, cutoff values defining abnormal hyperechogenicity, and intra-rater reliability were similar with both systems and in both ethnic cohorts studied.
The Filipino and German participants did not differ with respect to the frequency of insufficient insonation conditions (each 3%) and substantia nigra hyperechogenicity (10% versus 9%; P = .80).
However, third ventricle widths were smaller in the Filipino than the German participants (mean ± SD, 1.6 ± 1.1 versus 2.4 ± 1.0 mm; P = .004).
Conclusions- The frequency of substantia nigra hyperechogenicity appears to be homogeneous in white and Asian populations.
Screening for this feature may well be performed with a present-day portable ultrasound system.
PMID: 22297542
Stress, Allostatic Load, Catecholamines, and Other Neurotransmitters in Neurodegenerative Diseases.
As populations age, the prevalence of geriatric neurodegenerative diseases will increase.
These diseases generally are multifactorial, arising from complex interactions among genes, environment, concurrent morbidities, treatments, and time.
This essay provides a concept for the pathogenesis of Lewy body diseases such as Parkinson disease, by considering them in the context of allostasis and allostatic load.
Allostasis reflects active, adaptive processes that maintain apparent steady states, via multiple, interacting effectors regulated by homeostatic comparators-"homeostats." Stress can be defined as a condition or state in which a sensed discrepancy between afferent information and a setpoint for response leads to activation of effectors, reducing the discrepancy.
"Allostatic load" refers to the consequences of sustained or repeated activation of mediators of allostasis.
From the analogy of an idling car, the revolutions per minute of the engine can be maintained at any of a variety of levels (allostatic states).
Just as allostatic load (cumulative wear and tear) reflects design and manufacturing variations, byproducts of combustion, and time, eventually leading to engine breakdown, allostatic load in catecholaminergic neurons might eventually lead to Lewy body diseases.
Central to the argument is that catecholaminergic neurons leak vesicular contents into the cytoplasm continuously during life and that catecholamines in the neuronal cytoplasm are autotoxic.
These neurons therefore depend on vesicular sequestration to limit autotoxicity of cytosolic transmitter.
Parkinson disease might be a disease of the elderly because of allostatic load, which depends on genetic predispositions, environmental exposures, repeated stress-related catecholamine release, and time.
PMID: 22296116
Sequestosome 1/p62: across diseases.
Sequestosome 1/p62 is a signal modulator or adaptor protein involved in receptor-mediated signal transduction.
Sequestosome 1/p62 is gaining attention as it is involved in several diseases including Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease, liver and breast cancer, Paget's disease of bone, obesity and insulin resistance.
In this review, we will focus on the most recent advances on the physiological function of p62 relevant to human diseases.
PMID: 22295119
Elevated Pontine and Putamenal GABA Levels in Mild-Moderate Parkinson Disease Detected by 7 Tesla Proton MRS.
Parkinson disease (PD) is characterized by the degeneration of nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons.
However, postmortem evidence indicates that the pathology of lower brainstem regions, such as the pons and medulla, precedes nigral involvement.
Consistently, pontomedullary damage was implicated by structural and PET imaging in early PD.
Neurochemical correlates of this early pathological involvement in PD are unknown.
To map biochemical alterations in the brains of individuals with mild-moderate PD we quantified neurochemical profiles of the pons, putamen and substantia nigra by 7 tesla (T) proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy.
Thirteen individuals with idiopathic PD (Hoehn & Yahr stage 2) and 12 age- and gender-matched healthy volunteers participated in the study.
γ-Aminobutyric acid (GABA) concentrations in the pons and putamen were significantly higher in patients (N = 11, off medications) than controls (N = 11, p<0.001 for pons and p<0.05 for putamen).
The GABA elevation was more pronounced in the pons (64%) than in the putamen (32%).
No other neurochemical differences were observed between patients and controls.
The GABA elevation in the putamen is consistent with prior postmortem findings in patients with PD, as well as with in vivo observations in a rodent model of PD, while the GABA finding in the pons is novel.
The more significant GABA elevation in the pons relative to the putamen is consistent with earlier pathological involvement of the lower brainstem.
This study provides in vivo evidence for an alteration in the GABAergic tone in the lower brainstem and striatum in early-moderate PD, which may underlie disease pathogenesis and may provide a biomarker for disease staging.
PMID: 22291041
Abnormalities and Cue Dependence of Rhythmical Upper-Limb Movements in Parkinson Patients With Freezing of Gait.
BACKGROUND: Freezing of gait (FOG) is a significant clinical problem in Parkinson disease (PD).
Similar freezing-like episodes occur during finger movements, but little is known about ongoing motor problems during repetitive hand movements.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate if the regulation of bimanual movements is impaired in those with FOG and if withdrawal of an auditory cue amplifies this problem.
METHODS: A total of 23 PD patients (11 with and 12 without FOG) and 11 controls (CTRLs) performed repetitive finger movements, either externally paced or following cue withdrawal.
Movement frequency, amplitude, and coordination pattern were manipulated.
The stability and accuracy of movement were evaluated after exclusion of freezing trials.
RESULTS: With auditory pacing present, movement performance was comparable between groups.
Following cue withdrawal, motor control deteriorated in those with FOG, resulting in smaller and less stable amplitudes, hastened and more variable frequency, and decreased coordination stability.
Conversely, the performance of those without FOG remained mostly similar to that of CTRLs.
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with those without FOG, those with FOG show greater continuous dyscontrol of bimanual movements, similar to the continuous timing and scaling difficulties during locomotion.
Those with FOG also benefit from auditory cueing during upper-limb movements, but these are highly cue dependent.
This implies that internal timekeeping functions are more disturbed in those with FOG, who may require rehabilitation strategies for repetitive upper-extremity tasks that include cueing and imagery.
PMID: 22287946
A role for locus coeruleus in Parkinson tremor.
We analyzed rest tremor, one of the etiologically most elusive hallmarks of Parkinson disease (PD), in 12 consecutive PD patients during a specific task activating the locus coeruleus (LC) to investigate a putative role of noradrenaline (NA) in tremor generation and suppression.
Clinical diagnosis was confirmed in all subjects by reduced dopamine reuptake transporter (DAT) binding values investigated by single photon computed tomography imaging (SPECT) with [(123)I] N-ω-fluoropropyl-2β-carbomethoxy-3β-(4-iodophenyl) tropane (FP-CIT).
The intensity of tremor (i.e., the power of Electromyography [EMG] signals), but not its frequency, significantly increased during the task.
In six subjects, tremor appeared selectively during the task.
In a second part of the study, we retrospectively reviewed SPECT with FP-CIT data and confirmed the lack of correlation between dopaminergic loss and tremor by comparing DAT binding values of 82 PD subjects with bilateral tremor (n = 27), unilateral tremor (n = 22), and no tremor (n = 33).
This study suggests a role of the LC in Parkinson tremor.
PMID: 22285116
Painful abdominal contractions in patients with Parkinson disease.
We hypothesized that the unusual and painful abdominal contractions in two of our patients with Parkinson disease (PD) were linked to abdominal muscle hypertrophy.
The abdominal pain was aggravated by sitting, standing, or walking, and was characterized by a powerful pulling sensation associated with palpable contractions of the rectus abdominis.
When the pain decreased, the camptocormia abated.
The thickness of the rectus abdominis and the relative muscle thickness ratio were greater in the two patients with abdominal contractions than in the control patients with PD without abdominal contractions.
Palpable painful abdominal contractions could be associated with the presence of hypertrophy of the rectus abdominis visible on CT scan.
The abdominal muscle contractions probably contribute to the development a stooped posture.
PMID: 22282650
Penetrance of Parkinson disease in glucocerebrosidase gene mutation carriers.
OBJECTIVE: Glucocerebrosidase (GBA) gene mutations represent a strong risk factor for Parkinson disease (PD).
PD penetrance in GBA mutation carriers, which represents a key issue for genetic counseling, especially for relatives of patients with Gaucher disease (GD), is unknown.
Our objective was to estimate PD penetrance in a familial study of GBA mutation carriers.
METHODS: Probands with familial PD were recruited through the French Parkinson Disease Genetic Study Group.
All GBA exons were sequenced in probands and their relatives.
To estimate the age-specific cumulative PD risk (i.e., penetrance) in GBA mutation carriers, we used the proband's phenotype exclusion likelihood method and corrected for selection of familial cases by considering the status of one affected relative per family as unknown.
RESULTS: Of 525 probands with familial PD, 24 (4.6%) were GBA mutation carriers.
Of their 256 relatives, 43 (16.8%) had PD and 26 of 32 affected relatives tested for GBA mutations were mutation carriers; 213 relatives did not have PD and 31 of 71 of unaffected relatives tested for GBA mutations were mutation carriers.
Under a dominant model, penetrance was estimated as 7.6%, 13.7%, 21.4%, and 29.7% at 50, 60, 70, and 80 years, respectively.
There was no significant difference in penetrance at 70 years between N370S carriers, L444P carriers, and carriers of rarer mutations.
CONCLUSION: The relatively high penetrance estimate in GBA carriers obtained in this study should lead to consideration of GBA as a dominant causal gene with reduced penetrance and should be taken into account for genetic counseling in relatives of patients with GD and patients with GBA-associated PD.
PMID: 22282641
Pattern of brain tissue loss associated with freezing of gait in Parkinson disease.
To investigate whether a specific pattern of gray matter (GM) tissue loss is associated with freezing of gait (FOG) in patients with Parkinson disease (PD).
Seventeen patients with PD with FOG (PD-FOG), 20 patients with PD with no FOG (PD-noFOG), and 34 healthy control subjects were recruited.
PD-FOG and PD-noFOG patients were matched on an individual basis for age, disease duration, and Hoehn and Yahr stage.
Patients were also administered a comprehensive neuropsychological battery focused on executive functions.
The extent and distribution of GM atrophy were assessed using voxel-based morphometry.
In patients with PD, the severity of FOG correlated with frontal executive deficits.
Compared with healthy control subjects, PD-FOG patients showed a distributed pattern of GM atrophy including the dorsolateral prefrontal, medial, and lateral temporal, inferior parietal, and occipital cortices.
PD-noFOG patients showed only small regions of GM atrophy in the bilateral frontal and temporal cortex.
The left inferior frontal gyrus, left precentral gyrus, and left inferior parietal gyrus were more atrophic in PD-FOG patients relative to both healthy control subjects and PD-noFOG patients.
In PD-FOG patients, the severity of FOG was associated with GM volumes of the frontal and parietal cortices bilaterally.
GM frontal and parietal atrophy occur in PD-FOG patients.
FOG in PD seems to share with executive dysfunction and perception deficits a common pattern of structural damage to the frontal and parietal cortices.
PMID: 22278219
Couples' Coping in Prodromal Huntington Disease: A Mixed Methods Study.
Huntington disease (HD) includes a prodromal phase with behavioral, cognitive, and motor function decline occurring up to 15 years prior to diagnosis.
This study used mixed methods to examine how people in the prodromal phase and their companions coped with noticed changes.
Twenty-three couples completed a semi-structured interview and Brief COPE.
Participants with prodromal HD used acceptance, emotional support, and planning most frequently; companions used acceptance, planning, and active coping.
Least frequently used coping strategies for each were denial, behavioral disengagement, and substance use.
Qualitative interviews revealed coping strategies not included in the Brief COPE.
Participants with prodromal HD used prescription medications, coping as a couple, hope, and self-monitoring; companions used hope and helping their partners.
Many of the coping procedures were rated as effective, especially when changes were not severe.
Couples may benefit from counseling that emphasizes using active coping strategies for changes that can be compensated for and acceptance for changes that cannot in prodromal HD.
Findings from this study may be helpful for counseling patients and significant others facing other neurodegenerative conditions with prodromal or early phases, such as Alzheimer disease and Parkinson disease.
PMID: 22278152
Malignant melanoma, breast cancer and other cancers in patients with parkinson disease.
Previous studies report an atypical cancer pattern among patients with Parkinson disease.
Here we evaluate the cancer pattern among people diagnosed with Parkinson disease in an extension of our previous cohort study.
For this Danish population based cohort study we identified 20,000 people with Parkinson disease diagnosed in 1977-2006, from the National Danish Hospital Register.
Cohort members were followed up for cancer in the Danish Cancer Registry until 31 December 2008, and their incidence rates of cancer were compared with age-, sex- and calendar period-specific rates in the general population as standardized incidence rate ratios (SIRs).
In sub analyses we estimated the risk for cancer among patients with early-onset Parkinson disease and also, we compared breast tumor characteristics among Parkinson disease women to that of a control group.
The overall cancer risk in our cohort was decreased (SIR, 0.86; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.83-0.90), as were those for smoking-related (SIR, 0.65; 95% CI, 0.60-0.70) and non-smoking related cancers (SIR, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.71-0.86).
The cohort had increased risks for malignant melanoma (SIR, 1.41; 95% CI, 1.09-1.80), non-melanoma skin cancer (1.29; 1.18-1.39) and female breast cancer (1.17; 1.02-1.34).
Among patients with early-onset Parkinson disease the risk for cancer was comparable to that of the general population.
Of breast tumor characteristics only grade of malignancy differed between Parkinson disease women and controls.
This study confirms a lower cancer risk among people with Parkinson disease.
Increased risks for malignant melanoma, non-melanoma skin cancer and breast cancer might be due to shared risk factors with Parkinson disease.
PMID: 22278003
Co-occurrence of parkinsonism and dementia in clinical practice: relevant differential diagnoses.
Co-occurrence of parkinsonism and dementia is commonly observed in the aging population.
This narrative review gives an overview of disorders regularly presenting with these symptoms, e.g., idiopathic Parkinson disease with dementia, dementia with Lewy bodies, progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration syndrome, vascular cognitive impairment, drug-induced parkinsonism, and normal-pressure hydrocephalus.
Both a thoroughly performed medical history and a comprehensive clinical examination can narrow down relevant differential diagnoses.
Characteristic clinical and neuropsychological features are highlighted, including cognitive screening strategies.
Neurophysiological and neuropathological aspects of the disorders are briefly discussed to give a better understanding of treatment options.
PMID: 22277522
Neuropathology.
This research is based on the brain bank project, which combines prospective clinical follow ups and retrospective neuropathological studies.
Pathology of idiopathic Parkinson disease (PD) can be summarized as a spectrum of Lewy body (LB) disease (LBD) comprising PD, dementia with LB (DLB) and pure autonomic failure (PAF).
Recently core protein component of LB is proved to be alpha-synuclein, which is truncated, phosphorylated and ubiquitinated.
Immunohistochemistry with anti-phosphorylated alpha-synuclein (psyn) antibody visualizes LB pathology with previously unattained high sensitivity and specificity, and enables pathological studies of peripheral autonomic nervous system as well as central nervous system.
Recently Braak et al proposed ascending extension hypothesis of LB pathology, based on consecutive autopsy cases of PD and normal controls without dementia.
However, not excluding demented cases, we found olfactory-amygdala extension pathway of LB pathology, which is independent from Braak's ascending pathway.
We propose that abnormal seeding and aggregation of alpha-synuclein could be formed in peripheral autonomic nervous system or olfactory bulb and extend via neural network and form clinical phenotype of LBD.
PMID: 22277493
Seed, aggregation and propagation of abnormal proteins could explain neurodegeneration?
Braak proposed propagation staging paradigm of Lewy- related alpha-synucleinopathy, which starts from medulla oblongata and extends rostrally to neocortex.
Since this propagation shares that of bovine spongiformic encephalopathy, alpha- synuclein- prionopathy hypothesis was presented and augumented by pathological reports of Lewy body pathology in fetal tansplants of midbrain to patients with Parkinson disease (PD).
The prionopathy hypothesis expanded to include tau and TDP- 43, is now receiving considerable attention world wide.
Laterality of clinical symptoms can be explained with this hypothesis in PD, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis- TDP43, frontotemoral lobar degeneration- semantic dementia- TDP43 and tauopathy including corticobasal degeneration and argyrophilic grain dementia.
Major cons of prionopathy hypothesis is how to explain cell to cell transmission of intracellular amyloid- like proteins.
Several clinical and experimental data are now accumulated to answer this question.
The difference in speed of spread between prion disease and neurodegenerative disease could be explained by aggregation size of abnormal proteins.
The hypothesis could also explain glinoneuronal interaction, which is receiving another hot topic of neurodeneration.
We propose that seed, aggregation propagation of abnormal protein should form one factor of clinical progression of neurodegenerative diseases and can be a therapeutic targets in future research.
PMID: 22277466
Several approaches for quality of life in intractable disease.
Life quality is various among patients.
In this article, it is shown that several progresses of both physical and psychological care for those patients during resent 15 years which we have had Japanese National Project for the quality of life in intractable diseases.
Of course total cure of the disease is the best for the patients, but the second best is continuous better patient care.
Total respiratory care of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis including non-invasive positive pressure ventilation and systematic approach of respiratory rehabilitation are good examples of better physical care.
The approach with SEIQoL-DW is another good trial to evaluate and maintain their psychological condition.
These should be also useful to another intractable diseases such as multi-system atrophy, spino-cerebellar atrophy or Parkinson disease.
Long term contribution of multi-disciplinary care team of individual patient has to be needed to make the better effort for the patient support now.
We should have more options of treatment, rehabilitation or social life support those with which the patients could decide to have their favorable life with intractable disease.
PMID: 22277445
Genetics of sporadic disease: insights from high-throughput sequencing -Parkinson disease-.
To identify susceptibility genes that account for the heritability seen for complex traits, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) employing common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have been conducted.
The theoretical framework for GWAS is the 'common disease-common variant hypothesis'.
Although GWAS have successfully revealed numerous susceptibility genes for common diseases, they generally account for only a small proportion of estimated heritability.
In contrast, the prominent role of rare variants in neurodegenerative disease is best highlighted by the recent discovery of the glucocerebrosidase gene (GBA) as a robust genetic risk factor for Parkinson disease.
Emerging new technology of next-generation sequencer will be a promising tool which enables an efficient search for remaining disease-relevant alleles.
PMID: 22277432
Researches for diagnostic neuroradiology focusing on signals and shapes.
MRI is one of essential tools for neurological diagnosis and useful for assessing contrast differences between lesions and normal tissues and for assessing morphological features of lesions.
Here, I introduce published neuroradiological researches conducted in my hospital, especially focusing on features of "signals" and "shapes" of lesions.
First, as regards "signals", putaminal T(1)-hyperintensity is helpful for diagnosing multiple system atrophy, and it is more useful for discriminating multiple system atrophy from Parkinson disease and progressive supranuclear palsy than putaminal T(2)-hyperintensity rim or putaminal T(2)-hypointensity.
Linear T(2)-hyperintensity along the medial margin of the globus pallidus is helpful for diagnosis Machado-Joseph disease.
Second, as regards "shapes", posterolateral putaminal linearization is a useful finding indicating putaminal atrophy which is a main feature of multiple system atrophy.
Flattened facial colliculus/fourth ventricular floor is helpful for differentiating Machado-Joseph disease from dentatorublopallidoluysian atrophy and SCA6.
A contrast enhancement pattern called "cloud-like enhancement" is specific for neuromyelitis optica comparing with multiple sclerosis.
In conclusion, all of these MRI features are easy to recognize and useful for diagnosing patients in daily clinical settings.
Careful but simple observation of lesions focusing on "signals" or "shapes" may lead to develop new MRI findings which improve our diagnostic abilities.
PMID: 22275429
Structures containing Atg9A and the ULK1 complex independently target depolarized mitochondria at initial stages of Parkin-mediated mitophagy.
Mitochondria can be degraded by autophagy; this process is termed mitophagy.
The Parkinson disease-associated ubiquitin ligase Parkin can trigger mitophagy of depolarized mitochondria.
However, how the autophagy machinery is involved in this specific type of autophagy remains to be determined.
It has been speculated that adaptor proteins such as p62 may mediate interaction between the autophagosomal LC3 family of proteins and ubiquitinated protein on mitochondria.
Here, we describe our systematic analysis of the recruitment of Atg proteins in Parkin-dependent mitophagy.
Structures containing upstream Atg proteins, including ULK1, Atg14, DFCP1, WIPI-1, and Atg16L1, can associate with depolarized mitochondria even in the absence of membrane-bound LC3.
Atg9A structures are also recruited to these damaged mitochondria as well as the autophagosome formation site during starvation-induced canonical autophagy.
At initial steps of Parkin-mediated mitophagy, the structures containing the ULK1 complex and Atg9A are independently recruited to depolarized mitochondria and both are required for further recruitment of downstream Atg proteins except LC3.
Autophagosomal LC3 is important for efficient incorporation of damaged mitochondria into the autophagosome at a later stage.
These findings suggest a process whereby the isolation membrane is generated de novo on damaged mitochondria as opposed to one where a preformed isolation membrane recognizes mitochondria.
PMID: 22275251
Probable rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder increases risk for mild cognitive impairment and Parkinson disease: a population-based study.
Rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is associated with neurodegenerative disease and particularly with the synucleinopathies.
Convenience samples involving subjects with idiopathic RBD have suggested an increased risk of incident mild cognitive impairment (MCI), dementia (usually dementia with Lewy bodies), and Parkinson disease (PD).
There are no data on such risks in a population-based sample.
Cognitively normal subjects aged 70 to 89 years in a population-based study of aging who screened positive for probable RBD using the Mayo Sleep Questionnaire were followed at 15-month intervals.
In a Cox proportional hazards model, we measured the risk of developing MCI, dementia, and PD among the exposed (probable RBD [pRBD](+)) and unexposed (pRBD(-)) cohorts.
Forty-four subjects with pRBD(+) status at enrollment (median duration of pRBD features was 7.5 years) and 607 pRBD(-) subjects were followed prospectively for a median of 3.8 years.
Fourteen of the pRBD(+) subjects developed MCI, and 1 developed PD (15/44 = 34% developed MCI/PD); none developed dementia.
After adjustment for age, sex, education, and medical comorbidity, pRBD(+) subjects were at increased risk of MCI/PD (hazard ratio [HR], 2.2; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.3-3.9; p = 0.005).
Inclusion of subjects who withdrew from the study produced similar results, as did exclusion of subjects with medication-associated RBD.
Duration of pRBD symptoms did not predict the development of MCI/PD (HR, 1.05 per 10 years; 95% CI, 0.84-1.3; p = 0.68).
In this population-based cohort study, we observed that pRBD confers a 2.2-fold increased risk of developing MCI/PD over 4 years.
PMID: 22275077
Toward a systems level view of the ecm and related proteins: A framework for the systematic definition and analysis of biological systems.
Advances in high throughput 'omic technologies are starting to provide unprecedented insights into how components of biological systems are organized and interact.
Key to exploiting these datasets is the definition of the components that comprise the system of interest.
Although a variety of knowledge bases exist that capture such information, a major challenge is determining how these resources may be best utilized.
Here we present a systematic curation strategy to define a systems-level view of the human extracellular matrix (ECM)-a three-dimensional meshwork of proteins and polysaccharides that impart structure and mechanical stability to tissues.
Employing our curation strategy we define a set of 357 proteins that represent core components of the ECM, together with an additional 524 genes that mediate related functional roles, and construct a map of their physical interactions.
Topological properties help identify modules of functionally related proteins, including those involved in cell adhesion, bone formation and blood clotting.
Because of its major role in cell adhesion, proliferation and morphogenesis, defects in the ECM have been implicated in cancer, atherosclerosis, asthma, fibrosis, and arthritis.
We use MeSH annotations to identify modules enriched for specific disease terms that aid to strengthen existing as well as predict novel gene-disease associations.
Mapping expression and conservation data onto the network reveal modules evolved in parallel to convey tissue-specific functionality on otherwise broadly expressed units.
In addition to demonstrating an effective workflow for defining biological systems, this study crystallizes our current knowledge surrounding the organization of the ECM.
Proteins 2012;.
© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PMID: 22273734
Alexithymia is a non-motor symptom of Parkinson disease.
: To investigate whether alexithymia is linked to the disease process or to psychopathology, particularly depression, in Parkinson disease (PD) patients.
: Cross-sectional study.
: Neuropsychiatry outpatient clinic.
: One hundred PD patients and 100 comparison subjects (CS).
: PD patients and CS underwent a clinical and neuropsychiatric evaluation.
Alexithymia was assessed with the 20-item Toronto Alexithymia Scale (TAS-20).
Severity of depressive symptoms was measured with the Beck Depression Inventory.
A structured psychiatric interview was used to diagnose major and minor depression.
Logistic regression analyses with 95% confidence intervals (CI) were used to assess the association between alexithymia and PD.
: Alexithymia occurred twice as often in PD patients (22%) as in CS (11%) and major depressive disorder occurred twice as often in CS (30%) than in PD (16%).
The frequency of minor depression was almost identical (about 40%) in the 2 groups.
Alexithymia was also associated with PD independently from depression.
Indeed, after adjustment for sociodemographic factors, antidepressant use and depression severity, PD patients had an almost fourfold higher risk of having alexithymia (OR: 3.9, 95% CI: 1.5-10.0) and 24 times increased odds of having high scores on the TAS-20 items assessing difficulty in identifying emotions than CS (OR: 23.7, 95% CI: 10.1-55.6).
: Our findings suggest that alexithymia is a depression-independent phenomenon in PD patients and may be associated with the disease process.
Alexithymia is an important nonmotor symptom of PD and should be considered in patient assessment and management.
PMID: 22272321
Host genetics and environmental factors regulate ecological succession of the mouse colon tissue-associated microbiota.
The integration of host genetics, environmental triggers and the microbiota is a recognised factor in the pathogenesis of barrier function diseases such as IBD.
In order to determine how these factors interact to regulate the host immune response and ecological succession of the colon tissue-associated microbiota, we investigated the temporal interaction between the microbiota and the host following disruption of the colonic epithelial barrier.
Oral administration of DSS was applied as a mechanistic model of environmental damage of the colon and the resulting inflammation characterized for various parameters over time in WT and Nod2 KO mice.
In WT mice, DSS damage exposed the host to the commensal flora and led to a migration of the tissue-associated bacteria from the epithelium to mucosal and submucosal layers correlating with changes in proinflammatory cytokine profiles and a progressive transition from acute to chronic inflammation of the colon.
Tissue-associated bacteria levels peaked at day 21 post-DSS and declined thereafter, correlating with recruitment of innate immune cells and development of the adaptive immune response.
Histological parameters, immune cell infiltration and cytokine biomarkers of inflammation were indistinguishable between Nod2 and WT littermates following DSS, however, Nod2 KO mice demonstrated significantly higher tissue-associated bacterial levels in the colon.
DSS damage and Nod2 genotype independently regulated the community structure of the colon microbiota.
The results of these experiments demonstrate the integration of environmental and genetic factors in the ecological succession of the commensal flora in mammalian tissue.
The association of Nod2 genotype (and other host polymorphisms) and environmental factors likely combine to influence the ecological succession of the tissue-associated microflora accounting in part for their association with the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel diseases.
PMID: 22271527
Evaluation of the Neurotoxic/Neuroprotective Role of Organoselenides Using Differentiated Human Neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y Cell Line Challenged with 6-Hydroxydopamine.
It is well established that oxidative stress plays a major role in several neurodegenerative conditions, like Parkinson disease (PD).
Hence, there is an enormous effort for the development of new antioxidants compounds with therapeutic potential for the management of PD, such as synthetic organoselenides molecules.
In this study, we selected between nine different synthetic organoselenides the most eligible ones for further neuroprotection assays, using the differentiated human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cell line as in vitro model.
Neuronal differentiation of exponentially growing human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells was triggered by cultivating cells with DMEM/F12 medium with 1% of fetal bovine serum (FBS) with the combination of 10 μM retinoic acid for 7 days.
Differentiated cells were further incubated with different concentrations of nine organoselenides (0.1, 0.3, 3, 10, and 30 μM) for 24 h and cell viability, neurites densities and the immunocontent of neuronal markers were evaluated.
Peroxyl radical scavenging potential of each compound was determined with TRAP assay.
Three organoselenides tested presented low cytotoxicity and high antioxidant properties.
Pre-treatment of cells with those compounds for 24 h lead to a significantly neuroprotection against 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) toxicity, which were directly related to their antioxidant properties.
Neuroprotective activity of all three organoselenides was compared to diphenyl diselenide (PhSe)(2), the simplest of the diaryl diselenides tested.
Our results demonstrate that differentiated human SH-SY5Y cells are suitable cellular model to evaluate neuroprotective/neurotoxic role of compounds, and support further evaluation of selected organoselenium molecules as potential pharmacological and therapeutic drugs in the treatment of PD.
PMID: 22271259
Targeting the brain: considerations in 332 consecutive patients treated by deep brain stimulation (DBS) for severe neurological diseases.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) extends the treatment of some severe neurological diseases beyond pharmacological and conservative therapy.
Our experience extends the field of DBS beyond the treatment of Parkinson disease and dystonia, including several other diseases such as cluster headache and disruptive behavior.
Since 1993, at the Istituto Nazionale Neurologico "Carlo Besta" in Milan, 580 deep brain electrodes were implanted in 332 patients.
The DBS targets include Stn, GPi, Voa, Vop, Vim, CM-pf, pHyp, cZi, Nacc, IC, PPN, and Brodmann areas 24 and 25.
Three hundred patients are still available for follow-up and therapeutic considerations.
DBS gave a new therapeutic chance to these patients affected by severe neurological diseases and in some cases controlled life-threatening pathological conditions, which would otherwise result in the death of the patient such as in status dystonicus, status epilepticus and post-stroke hemiballismus.
The balance of DBS in severe neurological disease is strongly positive even if further investigations and studies are needed to search for new applications and refine the selection criteria for the actual indications.
PMID: 22270024
Parkinson disease: The gut as a route of entry for α-synuclein in PD.
PMID: 22269801
A Mechanistic Study of Proteasome Inhibition-Induced Iron Misregulation in Dopamine Neuron Degeneration.
Ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS) impairment and iron misregulation have been implicated in dopamine (DA) neuron degeneration in Parkinson's disease.
As previously shown, proteasome inhibition in a rodent model can cause nigral neuron degeneration accompanied by iron accumulation.
To investigate the involvement of iron in DA neuron degeneration, we generated an in vitro model by applying proteasome inhibitor lactacystin in DAergic cell line MES23.5 culture.
We found that lactacystin caused marked increase in labile iron, reactive oxygen species and ubiquitin-conjugated protein aggregation prior to cell injury.
These effects were attenuated by iron chelators or antioxidants.
Furthermore, we demonstrated that the iron regulatory protein (IRP)/iron response element system contributed to UPS impairment-mediated DA neuron injury.
We documented that IRP2 disruption resulted in an increase in transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1), a decrease in ferritin heavy chain (H-Frt), and eventually cell death.
These findings provide insight into the mechanistic interplay between UPS impairment and iron misregulation and suggest that the disturbances in IRP2, TfR1 and H-Frt may contribute to DA neuron degeneration.
PMID: 22268009
Reverse total shoulder arthroplasty in patients with parkinson disease: a case series and review of the literature.
Parkinson disease (PD) is a chronic degenerative neurologic disorder with both motor and nonmotor facets.
The motor symptoms, including increased risk for falls, fractures, and stiffness, contribute to the morbidity of arthroplasty.
In this article, we report 3 cases of reverse total shoulder arthroplasty in patients with PD.
All patients achieved poor functional outcomes with mean (range) active forward flexion of 40° (20°-60°) at follow-up.
Although each patient obtained significant pain relief-mean (range) visual analog scale score was less than 1 (0-2)-range of motion was poor.
In addition, each patient developed significant glenoid notching, though no component loosening or migration was observed.
Mean (range) postoperative follow-up was 17 (4-32) months.
A patient who has PD and requires an inverse arthroplasty should be counseled that pain relief may be reliably achieved, while functional outcomes are poor.
PMID: 22265822
CHO cells expressing the human P(5)-ATPase ATP13A2 are more sensitive to the toxic effects of herbicide Paraquat.
P-ATPases are membrane transporters energized by ATP.
The subfamily of P(5)-ATPases is the least studied P-ATPases and the ion substrate specificity of the P(5) subfamily is not known.
Mutations of the human P(5)ATPase gene ATP13A2 has been shown to underlie a form of Parkinson disease (PD).
We investigated the link between ATP13A2 and environmental factors related to PD development.
Increasing concentrations of the synthetic polyamine analog paraquat induced a greater cytotoxic effect over CHO cells expressing ATP13A2.
Paraquat-toxicity was associated with increased production of cellular reactive oxygen species and this increment was reversed by the natural polyamine spermidine.
Acridine orange fluorescence intensity suggested that ATP13A2 induced the expansion of acidic vesicles that become more alkaline upon external addition of spermidine.
Polyamine uptake is proposed to be initiated by a plasma membrane carrier followed by sequestration into acidic vesicles of the late endocytic compartment through an unidentified active mechanism; because ATP13A2 is located in lysosomes and late endosomes, our results open the possibility that ATP13A2 could be one of those active transporters capable of transporting polyamines like spermidine as well as its toxic analog paraquat.
PMID: 22262745
Paradoxical worsening of gait with levodopa in Parkinson disease.
PMID: 22262741
"On" state freezing of gait in Parkinson disease: A paradoxical levodopa-induced complication.
To describe the phenotype of levodopa-induced "on" freezing of gait (FOG) in Parkinson disease (PD).
We present a diagnostic approach to separate "on" FOG (deterioration during the "on state") from other FOG forms.
Four patients with PD with suspected "on" FOG were examined in the "off state" (>12 hours after last medication intake), "on state" (peak effect of usual medication), and "supra-on" state (after intake of at least twice the usual dose).
Patients showed clear "on" FOG, which worsened in a dose-dependent fashion from the "on" to the "supra-on" state.
Two patients also demonstrated FOG during the "off state," of lesser magnitude than during "on." In addition, levodopa produced motor blocks in hand and feet movements, while other parkinsonian features improved.
None of the patients had cognitive impairment or a predating "off" FOG.
True "on" FOG exists as a rare phenotype in PD, unassociated with cognitive impairment or a predating "off" FOG.
Distinguishing the different FOG subtypes requires a comprehensive motor assessment in at least 3 medication states.
PMID: 22261609
Movement orientation switching with the eyes and lower limb in Parkinson disease.
Difficulty switching between motor programs is a proposed cause of motor blocks in Parkinson disease (PD).
Switching from one movement to another has been studied in the upper extremity and during postural control tasks, but not yet in the eyes and lower limb in PD.
The purpose of this study was to compare movement orientation switching ability between people with PD and age-matched controls (CON) and to determine if switching ability is correlated between the eyes and lower limb.
Twenty-six persons with PD and 19 age-matched controls participated.
Movement orientation switching was studied in a seated position with the head fixed in a chinrest.
In response to a randomly generated tone, participants switched from a continuous back-and-forth movement in either the horizontal or vertical orientation to the opposite orientation as quickly as possible.
Lower limb movements were performed with the great toe pointing back and forth between targets positioned on a 45° angled floor platform.
Eye movements were back and forth between the same targets.
Eye and lower limb switch time was reduced in PD (p<0.01), but after normalizing switch time to movement velocity, no differences existed between PD and CON.
Eye and lower limb switch times were correlated in PD (r=0.513, p<0.01) but not in CON.
In PD, switch time and movement velocity of the lower limb, but not the eyes, correlated with bradykinesia and postural instability/gait.
Our results suggest that individuals with PD experience movement-switching deficits with both the eyes and lower limb, perhaps driven by overall bradykinesia.
PMID: 22261172
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome and concentric left ventricular hypertrophy in a teenager: Danon disease.
PMID: 22260015
[Effects of bushenhuoxue granules on sleep quality in Parkinson's patients].
To study the effects of Bushenhuoxue Granules on Parkinson's disease sleep scale (PDSS) score in Parkinson's patients.
120 patients were enrolled and divided into two groups randomly,the control group were treated with placebo and treatment group with Bushenhuoxue Granules, both group based on Madopar treatment.
Double-blinded clinical trial was adopted in treatment period.
Follow-up period for 6 months, PDSS was adopted to measure sleep condition of PD patients at baseline time, after 3 months and after 9 months.
Bushenhuoxue Granules treatment group showed a higher efficacy than the placebo group in relieving the sleep disorders of Parkinson disease patients,both in treatment and follow-up period (P < 0.01).
No adverse effects were found in this trial.
Bushenhuoxue Granules can markedly improve sleep disorders in Parkinson's patients.
The effects are stable and obvious along with the process of treatment.
PMID: 22258155
Robot-Assisted Gait Training in Patients With Parkinson Disease: A Randomized Controlled Trial.
BACKGROUND: Gait impairment is a common cause of disability in Parkinson disease (PD).
Electromechanical devices to assist stepping have been suggested as a potential intervention.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate whether a rehabilitation program of robot-assisted gait training (RAGT) is more effective than conventional physiotherapy to improve walking.
METHODS: A total of 41 patients with PD were randomly assigned to 45-minute treatment sessions (12 in all), 3 days a week, for 4 consecutive weeks of either robotic stepper training (RST; n = 21) using the Gait Trainer or physiotherapy (PT; n = 20) with active joint mobilization and a modest amount of conventional gait training.
Participants were evaluated before, immediately after, and 1 month after treatment.
Primary outcomes were 10-m walking speed and distance walked in 6 minutes.
RESULTS: Baseline measures revealed no statistical differences between groups, but the PT group walked 0.12 m/s slower; 5 patients withdrew.
A statistically significant improvement was found in favor of the RST group (walking speed 1.22 ± 0.19 m/s [P = .035]; distance 366.06 ± 78.54 m [P < .001]) compared with the PT group (0.98 ± 0.32 m/s; 280.11 ± 106.61 m).
The RAGT mean speed increased by 0.13 m/s, which is probably not clinically important.
Improvements were maintained 1 month later.
CONCLUSIONS: RAGT may improve aspects of walking ability in patients with PD.
Future trials should compare robotic assistive training with treadmill or equal amounts of overground walking practice.
PMID: 22256772
[Mechanism of traditional Chinese medicine on animal model of Parkinson's disease].
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common degenerative disease of the central nervous system, but no drug has been found to be surely able to protect neurons so far, delay onset or slow progression of the disease.
Currently there are a variety of Chinese formulas, single herb medicines, active fractions and monomers showed prophylactic and therapeutic effect on PD animal models.
The mechanisms include protection of substantia nigra cells, improvement of neurotransmitter content, anti-oxidation, immune regulation, enhancement of Western medicine efficacy, reduction of side effects, etc.
All these mechanisms may play integrated effect and slow disease progression.
In particular, Chinese medicine compound may have some advantages in neuroprotective treatment of PD, because a variety of active ingredients can exert multi-links, multi-levels and multi-targets integrated regulation effect on human body.
However, the level and standard of Chinese medicine studies on PD animal still need to be improved.
PMID: 22255666
Capturing whole-body mobility of patients with Parkinson disease using inertial motion sensors: Expected challenges and rewards.
While many studies have reported on the use of kinematic analysis on well-controlled, in-laboratory mobility tasks, few studies have examined the challenges of recording dynamic mobility in home environments.
This preliminary study evaluated whole body mobility in eleven patients with Parkinson disease (H&Y 2-4).
Patients were recorded in their home environment during scripted and non-scripted mobility tasks while wearing a full-body kinematic recording system using 11 inertial motion sensors (IMU).
Data were analyzed with principal component analysis (PCA) in order to identify kinematic variables which best represent mobility tasks.
Results indicate that there was a large degree of variability within subjects for each task, across tasks for individual subjects, and between scripted and non-scripted tasks.
This study underscores the potential benefit of whole body multi-sensor kinematic recordings in understanding the variability in task performance across patients during daily activity which may have a significant impact on rehabilitation assessment and intervention.
PMID: 22254350
Variability of hand tremor in rest and in posture - A pilot study.
Previous, studies have demonstrated variability in the frequency and amplitude in tremor between subjects and between trials in both healthy individuals and those with disease states.
However, to date, few studies have examined the composition of tremor.
Efficacy of treatment for tremor using techniques such as Botulinum neurotoxin type A (BoNT A) injection may benefit from a better understanding of tremor variability, but more importantly, tremor composition.
In the present study, we evaluated tremor variability and composition in 8 participants with either essential tremor or Parkinson disease tremor using kinematic recording methods.
Our preliminary findings suggest that while individual patients may have more intra-trial and intra-task variability, overall, task effect was significant only for amplitude of tremor.
Composition of tremor varied among patients and the data suggest that tremor composition is complex involving multiple muscle groups.
These results may support the value of kinematic assessment methods and the improved understanding of tremor composition in the management of tremor.
PMID: 22254331
Distance estimation from acceleration for quantitative evaluation of Parkinson tremor.
The purpose of this paper is to assess Parkinson tremor estimating actual distance amplitude.
We propose a practical, useful and simple method for evaluating Parkinson tremor with distance value.
We measured resting tremor of 7 Parkinson Disease (PD) patients with triaxial accelerometer.
Resting tremor of participants was diagnosed by Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) by neurologist.
First, we segmented acceleration signal during 7 seconds from recorded data.
To estimate a displacement of tremor, we performed double integration from the acceleration.
Prior to double integration, moving average method was used to reduce an error of integral constant.
After estimation of displacement, we calculated tremor distance during 1s from segmented signal using Euclidean distance.
We evaluated the distance values compared with UPDRS.
Averaged moving distance during 1 second corresponding to UPDRS 1 was 11.52mm, that of UPDRS 2 was 33.58mm and tremor distance of UPDRS 3 was 382.22 mm.
Estimated moving distance during 1s was proportional to clinical rating scale - UPDRS.
PMID: 22253756
Reduction of mitoferrin results in abnormal development and extended lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans.
Iron is essential for organisms.
It is mainly utilized in mitochondria for biosynthesis of iron-sulfur clusters, hemes and other cofactors.
Mitoferrin 1 and mitoferrin 2, two homologues proteins belonging to the mitochondrial solute carrier family, are required for iron delivery into mitochondria.
Mitoferrin 1 is highly expressed in developing erythrocytes which consume a large amount of iron during hemoglobinization.
Mitoferrin 2 is ubiquitously expressed, whose functions are less known.
Zebrafish with mitoferrin 1 mutation show profound hypochromic anaemia and erythroid maturation arrests, and yeast with defects in MRS3/4, the counterparts of mitoferrin 1/2, has low mitochondrial iron levels and grows poorly by iron depletion.
Mitoferrin 1 expression is up-regulated in yeast and mouse models of Fiedreich's ataxia disease and in human cell culture models of Parkinson disease, suggesting its involvement in the pathogenesis of diseases with mitochondrial iron accumulation.
In this study we found that reduced mitoferrin levels in C.
elegans by RNAi treatment causes pleiotropic phenotypes such as small body size, reduced fecundity, slow movement and increased sensitivity to paraquat.
Despite these abnormities, lifespan was increased by 50% to 80% in N2 wild type strain, and in further studies using the RNAi sensitive strain eri-1, more than doubled lifespan was observed.
The pathways or mechanisms responsible for the lifespan extension and other phenotypes of mitoferrin RNAi worms are worth further study, which may contribute to our understanding of aging mechanisms and the pathogenesis of iron disorder related diseases.
PMID: 22251502
Deep brain stimulation and ethics: perspectives from a multisite qualitative study of Canadian neurosurgical centers.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is an approved neurosurgical intervention for motor disorders such as Parkinson disease.
The emergence of psychiatric uses for DBS combined with the fact that it is an invasive and expensive procedure creates important ethical and social challenges in the delivery of care that need further examination.
We endeavored to examine health care provider perspectives on ethical and social challenges encountered in DBS.
Health care providers working in Canadian DBS surgery programs participated in a semistructured interview to identify and characterize ethical and social challenges of DBS.
A content analysis of the interviews was conducted.
Several key ethical issues, such as patient screening and resource allocation, were identified by members of neurosurgical teams.
Providers described challenges in selecting patients for DBS on the basis of unclear evidence-based guidance regarding behavioral issues or cognitive criteria.
Varied contexts of resource allocation, including some very challenging schemas, were also reported.
In addition, the management of patients in the community was highlighted as a source of ethical and clinical complexity, given the need for coordinated long-term care.
This study provides insights into the complexity of ethical challenges that providers face in the use of DBS across different neurosurgical centers.
We propose actions for health care providers for the long-term care and postoperative monitoring of patients with DBS.
More data on patient perspectives in DBS would complement the understanding of key challenges, as well as contribute to best practices, for patient selection, management, and resource allocation.
PMID: 22245093
15-Deoxy-Δ12,14-prostaglandin J(2) modulates manganese-induced activation of the NF-κB, Nrf2, and PI3K pathways in astrocytes.
Excessive exposure to manganese (Mn) increases levels of oxidative stressors and proinflammatory mediators, such as cyclooxygenase-2 and prostaglandin E(2).
Mn also activates nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB), an important mediator of inflammation.
The signaling molecule 15-deoxy-Δ12,14-prostaglandin J(2) (15d-PGJ(2)) is an anti-inflammatory prostaglandin.
Here, we tested the hypothesis that 15d-PGJ(2) modulates Mn-induced activation of astrocytic intracellular signaling, including NF-κB and nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor (Nrf2), a master regulator of antioxidant transcriptional responses.
The results establish that 15d-PGJ(2) suppresses Mn-induced NF-κB activation by interacting with several signaling pathways.
The PI3K/Akt pathway, which is upstream of NF-κB, plays a role in this activation, because (i) pretreatment with 15d-PGJ(2) (10μM for 1h) significantly (p<0.01) inhibited Mn (500μM)-induced PI3K/Akt activation and (ii) inhibition of the PI3K/Akt pathway with LY29004 significantly (p<0.05) decreased NF-κB activation.
15d-PGJ(2) also significantly (p<0.05) attenuated Mn-induced astrocytic NF-κB activation by inhibiting the Mn-induced phosphorylation of IκB kinase and subsequent IκB-α degradation.
Because Mn-induced oxidative stress is also associated with Nrf2 activation, additional studies addressed the ability of 15d-PGJ(2) to modulate the Nrf2 pathway.
15d-PGJ(2) significantly (p<0.01) increased Nrf2 expression in whole-cell lysates.
Consistent with its pro-oxidant properties, Mn also increased Nrf2 expression.
Nevertheless, cotreatment of whole-cell lysates with both Mn and 15d-PGJ(2) partially suppressed (p<0.01) the 15d-PGJ(2)-induced increase in astrocytic Nrf2 protein expression.
Mn treatment also decreased (p<0.001) expression of DJ-1, a Parkinson disease-associated protein and a stabilizer of Nrf2, and 15d-PGJ(2) attenuated Mn-induced astrocytic inhibition of DJ-1 expression.
Collectively, these results demonstrate that 15d-PGJ(2) exerts a protective effect in astrocytes against Mn-induced inflammation and oxidative stress by modulating the activation of the NF-κB and Nrf2 signaling pathways.
PMID: 22245043
Developmental origins of adult diseases and neurotoxicity: Epidemiological and experimental studies.
To date, only a small number of commercial chemicals have been tested and documented as developmental neurotoxicants.
Moreover, an increasing number of epidemiological, clinical and experimental studies suggest an association between toxicant or drug exposure during the perinatal period and the development of metabolic-related diseases and neurotoxicity later in life.
The four speakers at this symposium presented their research results on different neurotoxic chemicals relating to the developmental origins of health and adult disease (DOHaD).
Philippe Grandjean presented epidemiological data on children exposed to inorganic mercury and methylmercury, and discussed the behavioral outcome measures as they relate to age and stage of brain development.
Donald A.
Fox presented data that low-dose human equivalent gestational lead exposure produces late-onset obesity only in male mice that is associated with neurodegeneration.
Didima de Groot presented results on prenatal exposure of rats to methylazoxymethanol and discussed the results in light of the etiology of western Pacific amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Parkinson-dementia complex.
Merle G.
Paule addressed the long-term changes in learning, motivation and short-term memory in aged Rhesus monkeys following acute 24h exposure to ketamine during early development.
Overall, these presentations addressed fundamental issues in the emerging areas of lifetime neurotoxicity testing, differential vulnerable periods of exposure, nonmonotonic dose-response effects and neurotoxic risk assessment.
The results indicate that developmental neurotoxicity results in permanent changes, thus emphasizing the need to prevent such toxicity.
PMID: 22242373
[Nutritional status of Parkinson disease patients living at home].
PMID: 22241380
White Matter Alteration of the Cingulum in Parkinson Disease with and without Dementia: Evaluation by Diffusion Tensor Tract-Specific Analysis.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE:In PD, the neurodegenerative process begins in the brain stem and extends to the limbic system and finally into the cerebral cortex.
We used diffusion tensor tractography to investigate the FA of the cingulate fiber tracts in patients with PD with and without dementia.MATERIALS AND METHODS:Fifteen patients with PD, 15 patients with PDD, and 15 age-matched healthy controls underwent diffusion tensor imaging with a 3T MR imager.
Diffusion tensor tractography images of the anterior and posterior cingulate fiber tracts were generated.
Mean diffusivity and FA were measured along the tractography of the anterior and posterior cingulate fiber tracts.
One-way ANOVA with the Scheffé post hoc test was used to compare results among the groups.RESULTS:FA was significantly lower in patients with PDD than in healthy controls in both the anterior and the posterior cingulate fiber tracts (P = .003, P = .015) and significantly lower in patients with PD than in healthy controls (P = .003) in the anterior cingulate fiber tract.
There were no significant mean diffusivity differences among the groups.
MMSE and FA values of the anterior cingulate fiber tracts in patients with PDD were significantly correlated (r = 0.633, P < .05).CONCLUSIONS:The reduced FA in patients with PD and PDD might reflect neuropathologic changes such as Lewy body pathology in the cingulate fibers.
This abnormality might contribute to the dementing process in PD.
PMID: 22240861
Dose-dependent impulse control disorders in piribedil overdose.
We describe a 73-year-old female patient with Parkinson disease who developed impulse control disorders (ICDs) and dopamine dysregulation syndrome (DDS) owing to piribedil overdose.
She was initially put on piribedil 150 mg; and owing to disease progression, levodopa was added 4 years later.
Three years later, piribedil was raised to 200 mg; but presumably owing to a misunderstanding, she took 400 mg/d, which was well tolerated and produced an improvement in her parkinsonian symptoms.However, over the next few weeks, she started shopping compulsively, buying unnecessary clothes and food.
In addition, she visited her dog's veterinarian several times a day with nonsense queries.
She began to have financial problems and family disruption.
During an examination, mild dyskinesia was evident.We diagnosed ICDs and most likely dopamine dysregulation syndrome DDS.
Piribedil doses were decreased to 200 mg/d and levodopa increased up to 750 mg/d, with a clear improvement in compulsive behavior without worsening of the dyskinesia.Our case shows that even in cases in which regular doses of dopamine agonists are harmless, dose increments can induce these unwanted effects.
PMID: 22239959
A Predictive Model Identifies Patients Most Likely to Have Inadequate Bowel Preparation for Colonoscopy.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: An inadequate level of bowel preparation can affect the efficacy and safety of colonoscopy.
Although some factors have been associated with outcome, there is no strategy to identify patients at high risk for inadequate preparation.
We searched for factors associated with an inadequate level of preparation and tested the validity of a predictive clinical rule based on these factors.
METHODS: We performed a prospective study of 2811 consecutive patients who underwent colonoscopy examinations at 18 medical centers; clinical and demographic data were collected before the colonoscopy.
Bowel preparation was classified as adequate or inadequate; 925 patients (33%) were found to have inadequate preparation.
Multivariate analysis was used to identify factors associated with inadequate preparation, which were expressed as odds ratio (OR) and used to build a predictive model.
RESULTS: Factors associated with inadequate bowel preparation included being overweight (OR, 1.5), male sex (OR, 1.2), a high body mass index (OR, 1.1), older age (OR, 1.01), previous colorectal surgery (OR, 1.6), cirrhosis (OR, 5), Parkinson disease (OR, 3.2), diabetes (OR, 1.8), and positive results in a fecal occult test (OR, 0.6).
These factors predicted which patients would have inadequate cleansing with 60% sensitivity, 59% specificity, 41% positive predictive value, and 76% negative predictive value; they had an under the receiver operating characteristic curve value of 0.63.
Assuming 100% efficacy of a hypothetical regimen to address patients predicted to be at risk of inadequate preparation, the rate would decrease from 33% to 13%.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified factors associated with inadequate bowel preparation for colonoscopy and used these to build an accurate predictive model.
PMID: 22238344
Microtubule affinity regulating kinase 2 (MARK2) turns PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) on at T313, a mutation site in Parkinson's disease: Effects on mitochondrial transport.
The kinase MARK2/Par-1 plays key roles in several cell processes, including neurodegeneration such as Alzheimer disease (AD) by phosphorylating tau and detaching it from microtubules.
In search for interaction partners of MARK2 we identified PINK1 (PTEN-induced kinase 1) which is important for the survival of neurons, and whose mutations are linked to familial Parkinson disease (PD).
MARK2 phosphorylates and activates the cleaved form of PINK1 (ΔN-PINK1: aa156-581).
Thr313 is the primary phosphorylation site, a residue mutated to a non-phosphorylatable form (T313M) in a frequent variant of PD.
Mutation of Thr313 to Met or Glu in PINK1 shows toxic effects with abnormal mitochondrial distribution in neurons.
MARK2 and PINK1 colocalize with mitochondria and regulate their transport.
ΔN-PINK1 promotes anterograde transport and increases the fraction of stationary mitochondria, whereas PINK1 full length promotes retrograde transport.
In both cases MARK2 enhances the effects.
The results identify MARK2 as an upstream regulator of PINK1 and ΔN-PINK1 and provide insights into the regulation of mitochondrial trafficking in neurons and neurodegeneration in PD.
PMID: 22237833
Impaired olfaction and other prodromal features in the Parkinson At-Risk Syndrome study.
To test the association between impaired olfaction and other prodromal features of PD in the Parkinson At-Risk Syndrome Study.
The onset of olfactory dysfunction in PD typically precedes motor features, suggesting that olfactory testing could be used as a screening test.
A combined strategy that uses other prodromal nonmotor features, along with olfactory testing, may be more efficient than hyposmia alone for detecting the risk of PD.
Individuals with no neurological diagnosis completed a mail survey, including the 40-item University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test, and questions on prodromal features of PD.
The frequency of reported nonmotor features was compared across individuals with and without hyposmia.
A total of 4,999 subjects completed and returned the survey and smell test.
Of these, 669 were at or below the 15th percentile based on age and gender, indicating hyposmia.
Hyposmics were significantly more likely to endorse nonmotor features, including anxiety and depression, constipation, and rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder symptoms, and to report changes in motor function.
Twenty-six percent of subjects with combinations of four or more nonmotor features were hyposmic, compared to 12% for those reporting three or fewer nonmotor features (P < 0.0001).
Hyposmia is associated with other nonmotor features of PD in undiagnosed individuals.
Further assessment of hyposmic subjects using more specific markers for degeneration, such as dopamine transporter imaging, will evaluate whether combining hyposmia and other nonmotor features is useful in assessing the risk of future neurodegeneration.
© 2012 Movement Disorder Society © 2012 Movement Disorder Society.
PMID: 22237722
The Effect of Surface Electrical Stimulation on Swallowing in Dysphagic Parkinson Patients.
Surface electrical stimulation has been applied on a large scale to treat oropharyngeal dysphagia.
Patients suffering from oropharyngeal dysphagia in the presence of Parkinson's disease have been treated with surface electrical stimulation.
Because of controversial reports on this treatment, a pilot study was set up.
This study describes the effects of a single session of surface electrical stimulation using different electrode positions in ten patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease (median Hoehn and Yahr score: II) and oropharyngeal dysphagia compared to ten age- and gender-matched healthy control subjects during videofluoroscopy of swallowing.
Three different electrode positions were applied in random order per subject.
For each electrode position, the electrical current was respectively turned "on" and "off" in random order.
Temporal, spatial, and visuoperceptual variables were scored by experienced raters who were blinded to the group, electrode position, and status (on/off) of the electrical current.
Interrater and interrater reliabilities were calculated.
Only a few significant effects of a single session of surface electrical stimulation using different electrode positions in dysphagic Parkinson patients could be observed in this study.
Furthermore, significant results for temporal and spatial variables were found regardless of the status of the electrical current in both groups suggesting placebo effects.
Following adjustment for electrical current status as well as electrode positions (both not significant, P > 0.05) in the statistical model, significant group differences between Parkinson patients and healthy control subjects emerged.
Further studies are necessary to evaluate the potential therapeutic effect and mechanism of electrical stimulation in dysphagic patients with Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 22234991
Efficacy and safety of deep brain stimulation as an adjunct to pharmacotherapy for the treatment of Parkinson disease.
To review the literature describing the efficacy and safety of deep brain stimulation (DBS) as an adjunct to pharmacotherapy and to determine the best treatment option for patients with Parkinson disease (PD).
Literature was obtained through MEDLINE/PubMed (1948-September, week 2, 2011) and a bibliographic review of relevant articles.
Key words included Parkinson disease, medication, pharmacotherapy, surgery, deep brain stimulation, and best medical therapy.
Five English-language studies that compared the efficacy of DBS as an adjunct to pharmacologic treatment versus pharmacologic treatment alone in patients with PD met our inclusion criteria and were selected for this review.
PD is a progressive neurodegenerative disease with limited treatment options, and levodopa is considered the pharmacologic gold standard.
However, long-term levodopa use leads to decreased efficacy and increased incidence of adverse effects.
Hence, DBS has been investigated as an adjunctive option for patients with PD both to overcome the adverse events of levodopa as well as to treat the disease.
DBS, when used in conjunction with pharmacologic therapy, has resulted in improved motor function and quality of life in several trials compared with medication alone.
Its benefit is limited by adverse events that are generally more frequent and severe than those with pharmacotherapy alone.
Study limitations included small patient population and/or weak design.
DBS may be an option as adjunct therapy in patients whose symptoms are no longer controlled with maximum pharmacologic therapy, but benefits of surgery must be weighed against the risks.
PMID: 22233685
Adult gaucher disease in southern Tunisia: report of three cases.
ABSTRACT:.
Gaucher disease (GD) is the most frequent lysosomal storage disorder; type 1 is by far the most common form.
It is characterized by variability in age of onset, clinical signs and progression.
It is usually diagnosed in the first or second decade of life with the appearance of bone pains, splenomegaly and thrombocytopenia, but the disease may be diagnosed at any age between 1 and 73 years.
In the present study, we report 3 cases with late onset of GD in whom the disease was a surprise finding including one patient with Parkinson disease.
This late onset is described as an adult form of Gaucher disease.
Molecular investigation showed mutational homogeneity in Tunisian adult patients suffering from GD.
Indeed, all patients carry the p.N370S mutation: two patients at a homozygous state and one patient at compound heterozygous state.
The p.N370S mutation presents a large variability in the onset of the disease and its clinical manifestation supporting the view that GD should be considered as a continuum phenotype rather than a predefined classification.
PMID: 22233331
Genetic bases and phenotypes of autosomal recessive Parkinson disease in a Turkish population.
Background and purpose:  To evaluate the phenotype and the frequencies of mutations in PRKN, DJ1 and PINK1 genes in patients with Parkinson disease (PD) in Turkey.
Methods:  Eighty-six patients from 77 PD families participated in the study.
Seventy-four families were originating from Turkey, two families from Greece and one family from Bulgaria.
All patients underwent detailed neurological examination.
PRKN, PINK1 and DJ1 genes were sequenced, and dosage analysis was performed by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification.
Results:  Sixteen patients with PD were found to carry homozygous (n = 14) or compound heterozygous (n = 2) PRKN mutations.
We identified exon rearrangements, three point mutations and one new point mutation in exon 2 (p.K27del).
In two families, two new PINK1 point mutations (L31X and P416L) were identified.
No pathogenic mutations were found in DJ1 gene.
Clinical phenotypes of PRKN patients were comparable to previously described features, but only in four of 13 families, the pedigree structure was clearly consistent with an autosomal recessive (AR) mode of inheritance in comparison with nine families where also different pattern of transmission could have been possible.
Conclusions:  Our data suggest that the PRKN gene mutation is the most frequent form of ARPD in Turkey.
The proportion of mutations with regard to the age of onset in our population is in the range of those previously described, but our pedigrees are characterized by high rate of consanguinity, which might explain the high proportion of families with homozygous mutations and of patients in more than one generation.
Pathogenic DJ1 mutations do not seem to play a major role in Turkey.
PMID: 22233167
Using whole-body vibration training in patients affected with common neurological diseases: a systematic literature review.
This systematic review critically evaluates the effects of whole body vibration (WBV) exercises on gait, balance, proprioception, strength, and health-related quality of life in patients with common neurological diseases.
It specifically focuses on assessing the quality of reported studies and comparing quantitative results.
This is a systematic literature review.
A specific search strategy of 11 databases identified 13 published articles (5 studies of patients with Parkinson disease, 2 with cerebral palsy, 3 with multiple sclerosis, and 3 with stroke) that fulfilled the selection criteria.
The quality of the articles was evaluated using a Physiotherapy Evidence Database scale and Dutch Institute for Healthcare Improvement guidelines.
There is moderate evidence that one session of WBV has positive effects on strength, whereas there is a weak level of evidence that WBV could improve proprioception and health-related quality of life measures in neurological patients.
With respect to long-term effects of WBV, there is minor evidence from the studies with the best methodological quality that WBV improves strength, proprioception, gait, and balance.
Further research on the intervention is strongly needed.
PMID: 22232350
Association of sequence alterations in the putative promoter of RAB7L1 with a reduced parkinson disease risk.
To examine whether PARK16, which was recently identified as a protective locus for Parkinson disease (PD) in Asian, white, and South American populations, is also associated with PD in the genetically homogeneous Ashkenazi Jewish population.
Case-control study.
A medical center affiliated with a university.
Subjects  Five single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located between RAB7L1 and SLC41A1 were analyzed in 720 patients with PD and 642 controls, all of Ashkenazi Jewish origin.
Haplotypes were defined and risk estimates were determined for each SNP and haplotype.
Bioinformatic analysis defined the putative promoter region of RAB7L1 and the transcription factor binding sites that are potentially affected by 2 of the tested SNPs.
All tested SNPs were significantly associated with PD (odds ratios = 0.64-0.76; P = .0002-.014).
Two of them, rs1572931 and rs823144, were localized to the putative promoter region of RAB7L1 and their sequence variations altered the predicted transcription factor binding sites of CdxA, p300, GATA-1, Sp1, and c-Ets-1.
Only 0.4% of patients were homozygous for the protective rs1572931 genotype (T/T), compared with 3.0% among controls (P = 5 × 10(-5)).
This SNP was included in a haplotype that reduced the risk for PD by 10- to 12-fold (P = .002-.01) in all patients with PD and in a subgroup of patients who do not carry the Ashkenazi founder mutations in the GBA or LRRK2 genes.
Our data demonstrate that specific SNP variations and haplotypes in the PARK16 locus are associated with reduced risk for PD in Ashkenazim.
Although it is possible that alterations in the putative promoter of RAB7L1 are associated with this effect, the role of other genes in this locus cannot be ruled out.
PMID: 22229124
The history of Parkinson's disease: early clinical descriptions and neurological therapies.
Although components of possible Parkinson's disease can be found in very early documents, the first clear medical description was written in 1817 by James Parkinson.
In the mid-1800s, Jean-Martin Charcot was particularly influential in refining and expanding this early description and in disseminating information internationally about Parkinson's disease.
He separated Parkinson's disease from multiple sclerosis and other disorders characterized by tremor, and he recognized cases that later would likely be classified among the Parkinsonism-plus syndromes.
Early treatments of Parkinson's disease were based on empirical observation, and anticholinergic drugs were used as early as the nineteenth century.
The discovery of dopaminergic deficits in Parkinson's disease and the synthetic pathway of dopamine led to the first human trials of levodopa.
Further historically important anatomical, biochemical, and physiological studies identified additional pharmacological and neurosurgical targets for Parkinson's disease and allow modern clinicians to offer an array of therapies aimed at improving function in this still incurable disease.
PMID: 22228827
Telephone-based cognitive-behavioral therapy for depression in Parkinson disease.
Although face-to-face cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) was found to be beneficial for the treatment of depression in Parkinson disease (dPD) in a recent randomized-controlled trial, access to care was identified as a critical issue that needs to be addressed in order to improve the management of this nonmotor complication in PD.
The purpose of this study was to examine the feasibility and effect of telephone-based CBT for dPD.
Twenty-one depressed people with PD participated in a National Institutes of Health-sponsored uncontrolled pilot trial of telephone-based CBT in an academic medical center from October 2009 to February 2011.
The Hamilton Depression Rating Scale was the primary outcome.
Treatment was provided to people with PD for 10 weeks, modified for delivery over the phone, and supplemented with 4 separate phone-based caregiver educational sessions.
Assessments were completed at baseline and 5 (midpoint), 10 (end-of-treatment), and 14 weeks (follow-up) post-enrollment.
Twenty (95%) people with PD completed the study treatment.
Phone-based CBT was associated with significant improvements in depression, anxiety, negative thoughts, and coping.
Mean Hamilton Depression Rating Scale change from baseline to week 10 was 7.91 points (P < .001, Cohen d = 1.21).
Telephone-based CBT may be a feasible and helpful approach for treating dPD and warrants further exploration in randomized-controlled trials.
Results were comparable to those observed in the few in-person cognitive-behavioral treatment studies for dPD conducted to date.
PMID: 22228826
Depressive symptoms in Parkinson disease: degree of association and rate of agreement of clinician-based and self-report measures.
Depression in Parkinson disease (PD) is associated with faster disease progression, lower activities of daily living, and more severe cognitive impairment.
Even mild symptoms of depression may impact outcomes in patients with PD.
Nevertheless, a low rate of agreement has been reported between patient and clinician ratings of depression, suggesting that clinicians may underestimate depression in patients with PD.
However, to accurately compare the rates of agreement, comparable estimates are needed so that patient and clinician ratings have similar meaning (eg, mild, moderate, severe, etc).
The purpose of this study was to examine this question by investigating the degree of association and rate of agreement of levels of symptom severity among self-report and clinician ratings using established cutoffs that correspond to more comparable estimates of these levels for both patient and clinician.
Our findings suggest that patient's self-report of depressive symptoms was significantly correlated with clinician-based report irrespective of the stage of disease.
Moreover, patients demonstrated a 72% rate of agreement with clinicians in classifying symptoms as asymptomatic, mildly symptomatic, or fully symptomatic, a rate significantly higher than the rate of 35% previously reported.
This difference in rate of agreement may be accounted for using varying criteria for severity levels across the studies.
Findings suggest that clinician and patient reports show a high rate of agreement across a range of depressive symptoms and that self-report measures may provide a relatively efficient means of detecting depressive symptoms especially if patients are disinclined to initiate their report.
PMID: 22228096
LRRK2 regulates mitochondrial dynamics and function through direct interaction with DLP1.
The leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) mutations are the most common cause of autosomal-dominant Parkinson disease (PD).
Mitochondrial dysfunction represents a critical event in the pathogenesis of PD.
We demonstrated that wild-type (WT) LRRK2 expression caused mitochondrial fragmentation along with increased mitochondrial dynamin-like protein (DLP1, also known as DRP1), a fission protein, which was further exacerbated by expression of PD-associated mutants (R1441C or G2019S) in both SH-SY5Y and differentiated primary cortical neurons.
We also found that LRRK2 interacted with DLP1, and LRRK2-DLP1 interaction was enhanced by PD-associated mutations that probably results in increased mitochondrial DLP1 levels.
Co-expression of dominant-negative DLP1 K38A or WT Mfn2 blocked LRRK2-induced mitochondrial fragmentation, mitochondrial dysfunction and neuronal toxicity.
Importantly, mitochondrial fragmentation and dysfunction were not observed in cells expressing either GTP-binding deficient mutant LRRK2 K1347A or kinase-dead mutant D1994A which has minimal interaction with DLP1 and did not increase the mitochondrial DLP1 level.
We concluded that LRRK2 regulates mitochondrial dynamics by increasing mitochondrial DLP1 through its direct interaction with DLP1, and LRRK2 kinase activity plays a critical role in this process.
PMID: 22227451
Use of viral vectors to create animal models for Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra.
While sporadic in the majority of cases, PD-linked dominant mutations in the α-synuclein and LRRK-2 genes, and recessive mutations in the parkin, DJ-1 and PINK-1 genes have been identified in PD families in recent years.
In this review we describe viral animal models for PD, i.e.
models that are based on PD-associated mutations, and have been generated by viral delivery of the respective disease genes to the substantia nigra of rodents and non-human primates.
To date, viral PD models comprise α-synuclein and LRRK-2-based overexpression models, as well as models that mimic parkin loss of function by overexpression of the parkin substrates Pael-R, CDCrel-1, p38/JTV or synphilin-1.
These viral models provide valuable insights into Parkinson disease mechanisms, help to identify therapeutic targets and may contribute to the development of therapeutic approaches.
PMID: 22222634
Perampanel in Parkinson disease fluctuations: a double-blind randomized trial with placebo and entacapone.
Perampanel is a selective and noncompetitive α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole propionic acid-type glutamate receptor antagonist that improves motor symptoms in animal models of Parkinson disease (PD).
The aim of this study was to assess the efficacy and tolerability of perampanel in L-dopa-treated patients with moderately severe PD and motor fluctuations using an active comparator study design.
This was a prospective, randomized, double-blind, 3-arm, parallel-group, controlled study assessing the effects of perampanel (4 mg/d), placebo, or entacapone (200 mg with each dose of L-dopa) in 723 L-dopa-treated patients with PD with "OFF" problems.
The primary outcome measure was the change from baseline in mean total daily OFF time based on diaries.
Secondary end points included change from baseline in Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale part II while OFF, Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale part III while "ON," and mean total daily ON time without dyskinesias or with nontroublesome dyskinesias.
In total, 480 patients (66.4%) completed the study, which was terminated early after negative results of 2 other large placebo-controlled studies became available.
Perampanel was not superior to placebo on any efficacy end point, whereas entacapone was superior to placebo on the primary end point (P = 0.034) and most secondary outcomes.
Perampanel was generally well tolerated.
Perampanel (4 mg/d) was well tolerated but did not have a clinically significant effect in improving motor symptoms of L-dopa-treated patients with moderately advanced PD and motor fluctuations.
These patients did respond to the active comparator, entacapone, confirming the validity of the findings despite the early termination of the study.
PMID: 22220437
Voice quality in Parkinson's disease in the Croatian language speakers.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is well known to cause voice impairments.
The aim of this study is to evaluate subjective and objective changes in voice quality in patients with PD in Croatian language speakers.
Twenty one patients (11 male and 10 female) with PD and twenty one age-matched (10 male and 11 female) of the control group were assessed.
Voice impairment was scored according to Voice Handicap Index (VHI).
Patient's perceptual voice analysis was assessed using GRBAS scale including Grade of Dysphonia, Roughness, Breathiness, Asthenia and Strain items.
The analysed objective voice parametars were: fundamental frequency, highest frequency, lowest frequency, voice range, jitter, shimmer, maximum phonation time and s/z ratio.
In all patients we performed videolaryngostroboscopic examination.
Compared with the control group we found the significant differences in VHI, in GRBAS scale (p < 0.05 in all items except asthenia).
On videostroboscopic examination, laryngeal tremor was present only in PD group (6 patients), abnormalities of the mucosal wave was found more frequent in PD group (17 versus 8 patients) and also non-closure glottis pattern (11 versus 6 patients).
There was no significant difference in the objective voice parametars except in maximum phonation time which was shorter in PD group (15.8 seconds and 23 seconds, p = 0.014) and voice range, which was shorter in PD group (111 Hz versus 147 Hz, p = 0.0465).
No one of patients with PD was included in any form of speech therapy.
The voice disability in PD is generally well known, but very often underestimated.
In this study we found which components of voice were more affected.
The voice quality has a significant impact on life quality and potential in assessment for severity of disease state and for the efficacy of treatment.
PMID: 22219231
Updates in the medical management of Parkinson disease.
Most, if not all, currently available drugs for Parkinson disease address dopaminergic loss and relieve symptoms.
However, their adverse effects can be limiting and they do not address disease progression.
Moreover, nonmotor features of Parkinson disease such as depression, dementia, and psychosis are now recognized as important and disabling.
A cure remains elusive.
However, promising interventions and agents are emerging.
As an example, people who exercise regularly are less likely to develop Parkinson disease, and if they develop it, they tend to have slower progression.
PMID: 22219196
Glutathione s-transferase omega 1 activity is sufficient to suppress neurodegeneration in a Drosophila model of Parkinson disease.
A loss-of-function mutation in the gene parkin causes a common neurodegenerative disease that may be caused by mitochondrial dysfunction.
Glutathione S-transferase Omega (GSTO) is involved in cell defense mechanisms, but little is known about the role of GSTO in the progression of Parkinson disease.
Here, we report that restoration of Drosophila GSTO1 (DmGSTO1), which is down-regulated in parkin mutants, alleviates some of the parkin pathogenic phenotypes and that the loss of DmGSTO1 function enhances parkin mutant phenotypes.
We further identified the ATP synthase β subunit as a novel in vivo target of DmGSTO1.
We found that glutathionylation of the ATP synthase β subunit is rescued by DmGSTO1 and that the expression of DmGSTO1 partially restores the activity and assembly of the mitochondrial F(1)F(0)-ATP synthase in parkin mutants.
Our results suggest a novel mechanism for the protective role of DmGSTO1 in parkin mutants, through the regulation of ATP synthase activity, and provide insight into potential therapies for Parkinson disease neurodegeneration.
PMID: 22218995
Molecular mechanism underlying the cerebral effect of Gly-Pro-Glu tripeptide bound to L: -dopa in a Parkinson's animal model.
Oxidative stress is a critical contributing factor to neurodegenerative disorders.
Therefore, the inhibition of ROS formation, responsible for chronic detrimental neuroinflammation, is an important strategy for preventing the neurodegenerative disease and for neuroprotective therapy.
Gly-Pro-Glu (GPE) is the N-terminal tripeptide of insulin-like growth factor-I, which is naturally cleaved in the plasma and brain tissues.
GPE has neuroprotective effects since it crosses the blood-CSF and the functional CSF-brain barriers and binds to glial cells.
It has been shown that GPE improves motor behaviour in rats after 6-OHDA lesion, although it does not rescue dopaminergic neurons.
Thus, we hypothesized that the GPE therapeutic efficacy in a Parkinson model might be improved by combining GPE to L: -dopa.
Here, we used an animal model that represents a progressive chronic Parkinson's disease (PD) model, characterized by high levels of oxidative stress and inflammation.
We showed that the co-drug, in which L: -dopa is covalently linked to the GPE tripeptide, by down-regulating the expression of inflammatory genes, decreases the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-induced inflammatory response and, by up-regulating tyrosine hydroxylase, reduces MPTP-induced neurotoxicity.
Furthermore, by determining the nuclear translocation/activation of Nrf2 and NF-κB, we showed that systemic administration of the co-drug activates Nrf2-induced antioxidant response while suppressing NF-κB inflammatory pathway.
Data suggest that the binding of L: -dopa to GPE tripeptide might represent a promising strategy to supply L: -dopa to parkinsonian patients.
PMID: 22217609
Nonmotor manifestations in Parkinson disease.
Although the diagnosis of Parkinson disease (PD) still relies mainly on the appearance of its classical motor features of resting tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia, and postural instability, nonmotor manifestations in PD are now recognized as an integral component of this multisystem disorder.
Nonmotor complications in PD occur commonly.
The current understanding of cognitive dysfunction; neuropsychiatric manifestations including psychosis, impulsive control, and compulsive disorders, depression, anxiety and apathy; autonomic complications such as hypotension, erectile dysfunction, and urinary complications; sleep disorders and other nonmotor manifestations are summarized in this review.
Nonmotor complications often carry a greater impact than motor features in PD.
Therefore, heightened awareness and proper recognition of these features are critical in improving a Parkinson patient's quality of life.
PMID: 22216802
Biomonitoring and biomarkers of organophosphate pesticides exposure - state of the art.
Human biomonitoring provides an efficient and cost-effective way to identify and quantify exposure to chemical substances, including those having deleterious eff ects on human organisms.
Once the risk of hazardous exposure has been identified and the mechanism of toxic eff ects has been elucidated, an ultimate decision about how to reduce exposure can be made.
A particularly high risk of exposure to hazardous chemicals is associated with the use of pesticides in agriculture, especially the use of organophosphorous pesticides (OP), which are the most widely and commonly used insecticides worldwide.
There is some strong evidence that chronic exposure to these compounds may have adverse eff ects on health.
Exposure to pesticides has been associated with an increase in the incidence of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, multiple myeloma, soft tissue sarcoma, lung sarcoma, and cancer of the pancreas, stomach, liver, bladder and gall bladder, Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease, and reproductive outcomes.
In view of these findings, the detection of populations at risk constitutes a very important topic.
The biomonitoring studies on individuals exposed to pesticides have shown an elevated level of indicators of DNA damage, such as chromosomal aberrations (CA), sister chromatid exchanges (SCE), micronuclei (MN), and recently, single cell gel electrophoresis (SCGE).
The cytogenetic markers of DNA damage have become very popular and useful in providing an analytical data for risk assessment, such as internal exposure doses and early biological eff ects of both occupational and environmental exposure to pesticides.
The article describes the usefulness and the limitations of these biomarkers in biomonitoring studies of populations exposed to pesticides, with regard to the main routes of uptake and different matrices, which can be used to monitor risk assessment in occupational settings.
The article also summarizes the latest reports about biomarkers of susceptibility, and mentions other biomarkers widely used in biomonitoring studies, such as pesticide or its metabolites level.
PMID: 22215547
Assay to measure oxidized and reduced forms of CoQ by LC-MS/MS.
The redox status of mitochondrial coenzyme Q (CoQ) is an important marker for oxidative stress associated with several disorders such as Parkinson disease and Alzheimer disease.
Altered redox status may be present in mitochondrial electron transport complex disorders.
Intracellular CoQ levels reflect the functional status of the mitochondrial electron transport complex better than plasma levels.
Here, we describe the method to determine the reduced and oxidized form of CoQ in white blood cells using LC-MS/MS.
PMID: 22215534
Gestational Restraint Stress and the Developing Dopaminergic System: An Overview.
Prenatal stress exerts a strong impact on fetal brain development in rats impairing adaptation to stressful conditions, subsequent vulnerability to anxiety, altered sexual function, and enhanced propensity to self-administer drugs.
Most of these alterations have been attributed to changes in the neurotransmitter dopamine (DA).
In humans; dysfunction of dopaminergic system is associated with development of several neurological disorders, such as Parkinson disease, schizophrenia, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, and depression.
Evidences provided by animal research, as well as retrospective studies in humans, pointed out that exposure to adverse events in early life can alter adult behaviors and neurochemical indicators of midbrain DA activity, suggesting that the development of the DA system is sensitive to disruption by exposure to early stressors.
The purpose of this article is to provide a general overview of published studies and our own study related to the effect of prenatal insults on the development of DA metabolism and biology, focusing mainly in articles involving prenatal-restraint stress protocols in rats.
We will also attempt to make a correlation between theses alterations and DA-related pathological processes in humans.
PMID: 22215333
[Detection and management of non-motor symptoms in Parkinson's disease: impact on their prevalence].
Non-motor symptoms are common among patients with Parkinson disease and include cognitive, psychiatric, sleep and autonomic dysfunctions.
To determine if the detection of non-motor symptoms along with the appropriate referral to an specialist has an impact on their prevalence after one year follow-up.
We included 60 patients diagnosed with Parkinson's disease attending to the Movement Disorder Clinic.
The presence of non-motor symptoms was determined by the non-motor symptom questionnaire (NMSQuest).
The mean NMSQuest scores at baseline and at one year follow up were 12.6 ± 6.2 and 9.9 ± 5.6, respectively (p < 0.01).
The non-motor symptoms that showed a statistically significant differences in frequency between baseline and the final assessment, were constipation (p = 0.04), urinary urgency (p = 0.02), hallucinations (p = 0.04), dizziness (p = 0.02) and vivid dreams (p = 0.04).
Intentional search for non-motor symptoms in patients with Parkinson's disease along with a multidisciplinary approach has an impact on their prevalence.
The change in specific symptoms is probably related to adjustments in dopaminergic management.
PMID: 22213411
Predictors of Survival in Patients With Parkinson Disease.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the life expectancy of patients with Parkinson disease (PD) in the United States and identify demographic, geographic, and clinical factors that influence survival.
DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study of 138 000 Medicare beneficiaries with incident PD who were identified in 2002 and followed up through 2008.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Confounder-adjusted 6-year risk of death as influenced by 3 groups of factors: (1) race, sex, and age at diagnosis; (2) geography and environmental factors; and (3) clinical conditions.
We examined hospitalization diagnoses in patients with terminal PD and compared PD mortality with that of other common diseases.
RESULTS: Thirty-five percent of patients with PD lived more than 6 years.
Sex and race significantly predicted survival; patients who were female (HR [hazard ratio], 0.74; 95% CI, 0.73-0.75), Hispanic (HR, 0.72; 95% CI, 0.65-0.80), or Asian (HR, 0.86; 95% CI, 0.82-0.91) had a lower adjusted risk of death than white men.
Dementia, diagnosed in 69.6% of cases and most often in African American patients (78.2%) and women (71.5%), was associated with a greater likelihood of death (HR, 1.72; 95% CI, 1.69-1.75).
Parkinson disease mortality was greater than that of many common life-threatening diseases.
Patients with terminal PD were hospitalized frequently for cardiovascular disease (18.5%) and infection (20.9%) but rarely for PD (1.0%).
Regional survival rates were similar but patients with PD living in urban high industrial metal emission areas had a slightly higher adjusted risk of death (HR, 1.19; 95% CI, 1.10-1.29).
CONCLUSIONS: Demographic and clinical factors impact PD survival.
Dementia is highly prevalent in patients with PD and is associated with a significant increase in mortality.
More research is needed to understand whether environmental exposures influence PD course or survival.
PMID: 22211740
Fluoxetine rescues impaired hippocampal neurogenesis in a transgenic A53T synuclein mouse model.
The accumulation of alpha-synuclein in Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites of different neuronal populations is one of the neuropathological hallmarks in Parkinson disease (PD).
Overexpression of human wildtype or mutant alpha-synuclein affects the generation of new neurons in the adult dentate gyrus (DG) of the hippocampus in models of PD.
Hippocampal dysfunction with reduced neurogenesis plays an important role in the pathogenesis of depression, an important non-motor symptom in PD.
Moreover, effective antidepressant treatment is still an unmet need in PD.
The present study explored if impaired hippocampal neurogenesis in the A53T transgenic animal model of PD may be restored by chronic oral application of the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) fluoxetine.
First, we determined the expression pattern of transgenic mutant A53T synuclein in developing DG neurons and showed early expression of the transgene linked to a severely impaired neurogenesis.
After chronic fluoxetine treatment we observed an increased adult neurogenesis in the hippocampus of more than threefold in treated A53T mice compared with controls.
The pro-neurogenic effect of chronic fluoxetine application is predominantly related to an increased proliferation of neural precursor cells in the DG, and to a lesser extent by induction of differentiation into mature neurons.
Analysis of the underlying mechanisms revealed an induction of brain-derived and glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor levels as a result of fluoxetine treatment.
This study underlines the large potential of SSRI-dependent mechanisms to stimulate adult hippocampal neurogenesis in alpha-synuclein models and may lead to novel means to improve neuropsychiatric symptoms in PD.
PMID: 22211687
Fermented Grape Marc (FGM): Immunomodulating Properties and its Potential Exploitation in the Treatment of Neurodegenerative Diseases.
The onset of neurodegenerative diseases has become more frequent than in the past also in relation to inappropriate dietary habits adopted in the western world.
Nutraceuticals are currently investigated in order to prevent or retard the outcome of the so-called diet-related diseases, even including neurodegenerative pathologies.
Here, we have in vitro studied the ability of fermented grape marc (FGM) from Negroamaro (N) and Koshu (K) Vitis vinifera to modulate the function of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs).
Actually, both FGMs were able to increase the release and the intracellular content of inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines, the induction of FoxP3 (a biomarker of T regulatory cells) and reduce the production of Granzyme B from PBMCs.
Since these FGM-induced effects tend to polarize the immune response toward an anti-inflammatory pathway, the potential use of FGMs may represent a valid therapeutic measure to mitigating neuroinflammation in pathologies such as Parkinson disease and Alzheimer disease.
PMID: 22211682
Immunopathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases: current therapeutic models of neuroprotection with special reference to natural products.
Parkinson disease (PD) and Alzheimer disease (AD) are neurodegenerative processes whose frequency is dramatically increasing in the western world.
Both diseases share a common pathogenic denominator characterized by an exaggerated activation of the systemic and cerebral immune system, respectively.
For instance, lipopolysaccharides in PD and amyloid beta in AD trigger microglia and astrocytes to release reactive oxygen species (ROS) and proinflammatory cytokines.
Infiltrating peripheral T cells once activated in the central nervous system also contribute to the neurodegenerative process.
Besides innovative biotherapy, nutraceuticals or functional foods are currently investigated for their neuroprotective activities.
Especially, vitamin D and polyphenols, seem to be promising therapeutic tools for inhibiting ROS formation and arresting cytokine-mediated neuroinflammation in PD and AD.
PMID: 22206150
Specialist nurses save money and improve care.
PMID: 22206149
Loss of Parkinson's role would 'cost NHS pound 42m'.
PMID: 22205345
New brain-specific beta-synuclein isoforms show expression ratio changes in Lewy body diseases.
Lewy body diseases (LBDs) include dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Parkinson disease (PD).
Alpha-synuclein (AS) aggregation is a key event in the pathogenesis of LBDs and beta-synuclein (BS) inhibits AS aggregation in vitro and in vivo.
Recently, BS has been shown to interact directly with AS regulating its functionality and preventing its oligomerization, and a molecular subgroup of pure DLB lacks BS in cortical regions.
In this study, we characterized four new BS transcript variants and analyzed their expression in neuronal and non-neuronal tissue, and their differential expression in frozen samples of three areas from brains of patients with pure Lewy body pathology (LBP), common LBP, Alzheimer pathology, and of controls.
Relative mRNA expression was determined by real-time PCR with neuron-specific enolase 2 and synaptophysin as housekeeping genes, and expression changes were evaluated by the ΔΔCt method.
Two main findings are in concordance with earlier studies.
First, all BS isoforms are drastically diminished in the cortex of patients with pure LBP that had presented clinically as DLB but not PD with dementia.
Second, an important shift of the isoform expression ratio was observed in the temporal cortex of all LBD cases, and the minor isoforms, normally absent in the midbrain, were detected in the caudate nucleus of all DLB samples.
Our results provide further evidence for the role of minor transcript variants in the development of complex diseases and provide new insights into the pathogenesis of LBDs that may be important for the understanding of molecular mechanisms involved in these complex diseases.
PMID: 22205172
Subsequent Risks of Parkinson Disease in Patients with Autoimmune and Related Disorders: A Nationwide Epidemiological Study from Sweden.
Objectives: To investigate associations between autoimmune disorders and Parkinson disease (PD), and to study whether the risk is associated with follow-up time and age.
Methods: Standardized incidence ratios (SIRs) were calculated for PD in patients with autoimmune disorders by comparing them to subjects without autoimmune disorders.
Results: Among 310,522 patients with a total of 33 conditions of autoimmune disorders, 932 patients developed subsequent PD, giving an overall SIR of 1.33 and 1.19 for PD diagnosed later than 1 year after follow-up.
Six types of autoimmune disorders showed an increased risk.
These conditions included: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Graves's disease/hyperthyroidism, Hashimoto's disease/hypothyroidism, multiple sclerosis, pernicious anemia, and polymyalgia rheumatica.
The risks depended on the age at hospitalization for PD.
Conclusions: A 33% overall excess risk of PD was noted among patients with an autoimmune disorder; the risk was increased during the first 10 years of follow-up after hospitalization of autoimmune disorders.
PMID: 22204027
Re: stereopsis in drug Naïve parkinson's disease patients.
PMID: 22202748
Pathophysiology of manganese-associated neurotoxicity.
Manganese (Mn) is a well established neurotoxin associated with specific damage to the basal ganglia in humans.
The phenotype associated with Mn neurotoxicity was first described in two workers with occupational exposure to Mn oxide (Couper, 1837).
Although the description did not use modern clinical terminology, a parkinsonian illness characterized by slowness of movement (bradykinesia), masked facies, and gait impairment (postural instability) appears to have predominated.
Nearly 100 years later an outbreak of an atypical parkinsonian illness in a Chilean Mn mine provided a phenotypic description of a fulminant neurologic disorder with parkinsonism, dystonia, and neuropsychiatric symptoms (Rodier, 1955).
Exposures associated with this syndrome were massive and an order of magnitude greater than modern exposures (Rodier, 1955; Hobson et al., 2011).
The clinical syndrome associated with Mn neurotoxicity has been called manganism.
Modern exposures to Mn occur primarily through occupations in the steel industry and welding.
These exposures are often chronic and varied, occurring over decades in the healthy workforce.
Although the severe neurologic disorder described by Rodier and Couper are no longer seen, several reports have suggested a possible increased risk of neurotoxicity in these workers (Racette et al., 2005b; Bowler et al., 2007; Harris et al., 2011).
Based upon limited prior imaging and pathologic investigations into the pathophysiology of neurotoxicity in Mn exposed workers (Huang et al., 2003), many investigators have concluded that the syndrome spares the dopamine system distinguishing manganism from Parkinson disease (PD), the most common cause of parkinsonism in the general population, and a disease with characteristic degenerative changes in the dopaminergic system (Jankovic, 2005).
The purpose of this symposium was to highlight recent advances in the understanding of the pathophysiology of Mn associated neurotoxicity from Caenorhabditis elegans to humans.
Dr.
Aschner's presentation discussed mechanisms of dopaminergic neuronal toxicity in C.
elegans and demonstrates a compelling potential role of Mn in dopaminergic degeneration.
Dr.
Guilarte's experimental, non-human primate model of Mn neurotoxicity suggests that Mn decreases dopamine release in the brain without loss of neuronal integrity markers, including dopamine.
Dr.
Racette's presentation demonstrates a unique pattern of dopaminergic dysfunction in active welders with chronic exposure to Mn containing welding fumes.
Finally, Dr.
Dydak presented novel magnetic resonance (MR) spectroscopy data in Mn exposed smelter workers and demonstrated abnormalities in the thalamus and frontal cortex for those workers.
This symposium provided some converging evidence of the potential neurotoxic impact of Mn on the dopaminergic system and challenged existing paradigms on the pathophysiology of Mn in the central nervous system.
PMID: 22198405
Depression in Parkinson disease--epidemiology, mechanisms and management.
Depression occurs in around 35% of patients with Parkinson disease (PD) and is often persistent.
Symptoms of depression can be evident in individuals at the time of diagnosis and might develop in the premotor stage of the disease.
The underlying mechanisms of depression in PD are not known in detail, but changes in brain structure, signaling by neurotransmitters, and levels of inflammatory and neurotrophic factors are all suggested to contribute to its development.
Psychosocial factors and pain could also have roles in depression.
Changes in dopaminergic, noradrenergic and serotonergic systems in patients with PD might help to explain the incidence of depression in these individuals.
Antidepressants that have dual serotonergic and noradrenergic effects are the drugs of choice for treating depression in PD.
However, antiparkinsonian drugs might have beneficial effects not only on the motor symptoms of disease, but also on a patient's mood.
Deep brain stimulation can worsen depression in some patients, but a preliminary study has suggested that transcranial magnetic stimulation could improve symptoms of depression.
This Review describes the frequency and course of depression in patients with PD.
The mechanisms that underlie depression in this disease are also discussed, and the management strategies for these patients are highlighted.
PMID: 22198404
Parkinson disease: the controversy of levodopa toxicity in Parkinson disease.
PMID: 22194359
Bioenergetic Origins of Complexity and Disease.
The organizing power of energy flow is hypothesized to be the origin of biological complexity and its decline the basis of "complex" diseases and aging.
Energy flow through organic systems creates nucleic acids, which store information, and the annual accumulation of information generates today's complexity.
Energy flow through our bodies is mediated by the mitochondria, symbiotic bacteria whose genomes encompass the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and more than 1000 nuclear genes.
Inherited and/or epigenomic variation of the mitochondrial genome determines our initial energetic capacity, but the age-related accumulation of somatic cell mtDNA mutations further erodes energy flow, leading to disease.
This bioenergetic perspective on disease provides a unifying pathophysiological and genetic mechanism for neuropsychiatric diseases such as Alzheimer and Parkinson Disease, metabolic diseases such as diabetes and obesity, autoimmune diseases, aging, and cancer.
PMID: 22193376
Mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease (PD) traditionally has been defined by its characteristic motor hallmarks, but non-motor features such as cognitive impairment and dementia are increasingly recognized as part of PD.
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is common in non-demented PD patients, occurring in about 20-50%.
Frequency estimates and clinical features of mild cognitive impairment in PD (PD-MCI), however, vary across studies due to methodological differences and lack of uniform diagnostic criteria for PD-MCI.
Overall, PD-MCI patients exhibit nonamnestic deficits in cognitive domains such as executive function, attention, and visuospatial function; however, the cognitive phenotype of PD-MCI is heterogeneous with some patients demonstrating greater amnestic deficits.
PD-MCI patients, particularly those with posterior cortical profiles, may be at high risk for developing dementia.
Various biomarkers studied in PD-MCI including cerebrospinal fluid, genetic analyses, and neuroimaging suggest that there may be distinct PD-MCI profiles.
Future studies using uniform PD-MCI diagnostic criteria and incorporating biomarkers and longitudinal follow-up of PD-MCI cohorts are needed to understand PD-MCI as a transitional state between normal cognition and dementia.
PMID: 22191069
Accuracy of fall prediction in Parkinson disease: six-month and 12-month prospective analyses.
Introduction.
We analyzed the ability of four balance assessments to predict falls in people with Parkinson Disease (PD) prospectively over six and 12 months.
Materials and Methods.
The BESTest, Mini-BESTest, Functional Gait Assessment (FGA), and Berg Balance Scale (BBS) were administered to 80 participants with idiopathic PD at baseline.
Falls were then tracked for 12 months.
Ability of each test to predict falls at six and 12 months was assessed using ROC curves and likelihood ratios (LR).
Results.
Twenty-seven percent of the sample had fallen at six months, and 32% of the sample had fallen at 12 months.
At six months, areas under the ROC curve (AUC) for the tests ranged from 0.8 (FGA) to 0.89 (BESTest) with LR+ of 3.4 (FGA) to 5.8 (BESTest).
At 12 months, AUCs ranged from 0.68 (BESTest, BBS) to 0.77 (Mini-BESTest) with LR+ of 1.8 (BESTest) to 2.4 (BBS, FGA).
Discussion.
The various balance tests were effective in predicting falls at six months.
All tests were relatively ineffective at 12 months.
Conclusion.
This pilot study suggests that people with PD should be assessed biannually for fall risk.
PMID: 22191067
Medication responsiveness of motor symptoms in a population-based study of Parkinson disease.
We assessed degree of Parkinson disease motor symptom improvement with medication among subjects enrolled in an ongoing, population-based study in Central California.
The motor section of the unified Parkinson disease rating scale (UPDRS) was performed on subjects in both OFF and ON medication states, and difference between these scores was used as an indicator of symptomatic benefit.
Higher OFF minus ON scores correlated with more severe baseline symptoms.
There was equivalent improvement on the motor UPDRS scale for subjects divided according to medication classes used: levodopa alone 7.3 points, levodopa plus other medications 8.5 points, and dopamine agonists but not levodopa 6.1 points.
In addition, there was no difference in the magnitude of improvement when subjects were divided according to Parkinson disease subtype, defined as tremor dominant, akinetic-rigid, or mixed.
In this community-based sample, these values are within the range of a clinically important difference as defined by previous studies.
PMID: 22191065
The possible clinical predictors of fatigue in Parkinson's disease: a study of 135 patients as part of international nonmotor scale validation project.
Fatigue is a common yet poorly understood and underresearched nonmotor symptom in Parkinson's disease.
Although fatigue is recognized to significantly affect health-related quality of life, it remains underrecognised and empirically treated.
In this paper, the prevalence of fatigue as measured by a validated visual analogue scale and the Parkinson's disease nonmotor symptoms scale (PDNMSS) was correlated with other motor and nonmotor comorbidities.
In a cohort of patients from a range of disease stages, occurrence of fatigue correlated closely with more advanced Parkinson's disease, as well as with depression, anxiety, and sleep disorders, hinting at a common underlying basis.
PMID: 22190368
Angiogenin variants in Parkinson disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Several studies have suggested an increased frequency of variants in the gene encoding angiogenin (ANG) in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Interestingly, a few ALS patients carrying ANG variants also showed signs of Parkinson disease (PD).
Furthermore, relatives of ALS patients have an increased risk to develop PD, and the prevalence of concomitant motor neuron disease in PD is higher than expected based on chance occurrence.
We therefore investigated whether ANG variants could predispose to both ALS and PD.
We reviewed all previous studies on ANG in ALS and performed sequence experiments on additional samples, which allowed us to analyze data from 6,471 ALS patients and 7,668 controls from 15 centers (13 from Europe and 2 from the USA).
We sequenced DNA samples from 3,146 PD patients from 6 centers (5 from Europe and 1 from the USA).
Statistical analysis was performed using the variable threshold test, and the Mantel-Haenszel procedure was used to estimate odds ratios.
Analysis of sequence data from 17,258 individuals demonstrated a significantly higher frequency of ANG variants in both ALS and PD patients compared to control subjects (p = 9.3 × 10(-6) for ALS and p = 4.3 × 10(-5) for PD).
The odds ratio for any ANG variant in patients versus controls was 9.2 for ALS and 6.7 for PD.
The data from this multicenter study demonstrate that there is a strong association between PD, ALS, and ANG variants.
ANG is a genetic link between ALS and PD.
PMID: 22190305
Do the motor manifestations of Parkinson disease alter motor axon excitability?
Axonal excitability is altered in common medical conditions such as stroke, multiple sclerosis, and spinal cord injury.
Given the motor neuron changes in the presence of rigidity and tremor in Parkinson disease, we examine whether there are also changes in motor axon excitability.
Axonal excitability studies were performed in 15 Parkinson subjects and 12 age-matched control subjects.
There was no significant difference in excitability indices between Parkinson subjects and control subjects.
It is unlikely that the lack of change in the excitability indices reflects a balance between the effects of bradykinesia ("underactivity") and the effects of rigidity and tremor ("overactivity") on the motoneuron and its axon.
It is more likely that plastic changes in motoneuron properties do not occur symmetrically with decreases and increases in activity, being more profound when activity levels are interrupted and less obvious when they are enhanced.
PMID: 22188655
Studies of protein aggregation in A53T α-synuclein transgenic, Tg2576 transgenic, and P246L presenilin-1 knock-in cross bred mice.
Synucleinopathies are a group of neurodegenerative disorders, including Parkinson disease, associated with neuronal amyloid inclusions comprised of the presynaptic protein α-synuclein (α-syn); however the biological events that initiate and lead to the formation of these inclusions are still poorly understood.
There is mounting evidence that intracellular α-syn aggregation may proceed via a seeding mechanism and could spread between neurons through a prion-like mechanism that may involve other amyloidogenic proteins.
Several lines of evidence suggest that Aβ peptides and/or extracellular Aβ deposits may directly or indirectly promote intracellular α-syn aggregation.
To assess the effects of Aβ peptides and extracellular Aβ deposits on α-syn aggregate formation, transgenic mice (line M83) expressing A53T human α-syn that are sensitive to developing α-syn pathological inclusions were cross bred to Tg2576 transgenic mice that generated elevated levels of Aβ peptides and develop abundant Aβ plaques.
In addition these mice were bred to mice with the P264L presenilin-1 knock-in mutation that further promotes Aβ plaque formation.
These mice demonstrated the expected formation of Aβ plaques; however despite the accumulation of hyperphosphorylated α-syn dystrophic neurites within or surrounding Aβ plaques, no additional α-syn pathologies were observed.
These studies show that Aβ amyloid deposits can cause the local aggregation of α-syn, but these did not lead to more extensive α-syn pathology.
PMID: 22188090
Safety and efficacy of rotigotine in individuals with Parkinson's disease aged 75 and older.
PMID: 22188082
Incidence of emergency intestinal pseudo-obstruction in Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 22187934
Autophagy, mitochondria and oxidative stress: cross-talk and redox signalling.
Reactive oxygen and nitrogen species change cellular responses through diverse mechanisms that are now being defined.
At low levels, they are signalling molecules, and at high levels, they damage organelles, particularly the mitochondria.
Oxidative damage and the associated mitochondrial dysfunction may result in energy depletion, accumulation of cytotoxic mediators and cell death.
Understanding the interface between stress adaptation and cell death then is important for understanding redox biology and disease pathogenesis.
Recent studies have found that one major sensor of redox signalling at this switch in cellular responses is autophagy.
Autophagic activities are mediated by a complex molecular machinery including more than 30 Atg (AuTophaGy-related) proteins and 50 lysosomal hydrolases.
Autophagosomes form membrane structures, sequester damaged, oxidized or dysfunctional intracellular components and organelles, and direct them to the lysosomes for degradation.
This autophagic process is the sole known mechanism for mitochondrial turnover.
It has been speculated that dysfunction of autophagy may result in abnormal mitochondrial function and oxidative or nitrative stress.
Emerging investigations have provided new understanding of how autophagy of mitochondria (also known as mitophagy) is controlled, and the impact of autophagic dysfunction on cellular oxidative stress.
The present review highlights recent studies on redox signalling in the regulation of autophagy, in the context of the basic mechanisms of mitophagy.
Furthermore, we discuss the impact of autophagy on mitochondrial function and accumulation of reactive species.
This is particularly relevant to degenerative diseases in which oxidative stress occurs over time, and dysfunction in both the mitochondrial and autophagic pathways play a role.
PMID: 22166466
Epidemiology, diagnosis and differential diagnosis in Parkinson's disease tremor.
The epidemiology of tremor in Parkinson's disease is not well examined.
The prevalence of Parkinson's disease is about 100-300 per 100,000, and the majority (70-100%) of these patients may develop tremor during the course of the disorder.
The expression of tremor is also influenced by the genetic background of selected patients.
On the other hand, Parkinson patients with a predominant tremor phenotype may have a more favourable prognosis in terms of mortality and the development of motor and non-motor complications.
The diagnosis of Parkinson tremor is based on a clinical diagnosis of both underlying Parkinson's disease and on the tremor itself.
Tremor is a rhythmical, involuntary oscillatory movement of a body part, and includes resting tremor, action tremor including postural and kinetic tremor.
The classical type is resting tremor, but other phenotypes may also occur.
Misdiagnoses between Parkinson tremor and essential tremor are relatively common.
Electrophysiological and functional imaging examinations can be useful in the distinction of the two, but both approaches suffer from some limitations.
In general, essential tremor and other tremor forms can be distinguished from Parkinson tremor by their frequency and their expression with different activation.
PMID: 22166457
Genetic variants in sporadic Parkinson's disease: East vs West.
A number of gene variants or single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have been shown to modulate the risk of Parkinson's disease (PD).
These variants are identified from genetic association studies of familial PD and candidate genes, and from genome wide association studies (GWAS).
These include REP1 dinucleotide repeat polymorphism within the promoter region of the SNCA gene, and SNPs within the vicinity of SNCA and LRRK2 genes.
A number of exonic variants of LRRK2 (G2385R, R1628P, S1647T, M1646T, A419V, R1398H, N551K, Y2189C) have been shown to influence PD risk in various ethnic populations.
Numerous GWAS linked loci including BST1 (bone marrow stromal cell antigen 1), PARK16 (parkinson disease 16 susceptibility), GAK (cyclin G associated kinase), and HLA (human leukocyte antigen) have also been identified.
The genetic variants have differential effect on PD risk in Eastern and Western populations.
Knowing the basis behind ethnic-specific variances would further our understanding of the pathophysiologic mechanisms and help planning of genetic testing programmes.
PMID: 22166446
Patterns of alpha-synuclein pathology in incidental cases and clinical subtypes of Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by a gradual accumulation of neuropathology that may begin many years before a clinical diagnosis can be made using currently accepted criteria.
Here, we first review the prevalence of alpha-synuclein neuropathology in elderly and discuss its clinical relevance in Parkinson patients.
Subsequently, the results of a retrospective study focussing on the distribution of neuropathology in Parkinson patients with a tremor-dominant (TD), non-tremordominant (NTD) or rapid disease progression (RDP) subtype are presented.
The study population recruited by the Netherlands Brain bank consisted of 149 non-neurological donors, 26 donors with incidental Lewy body disease (iLBD) and 111 Parkinson patients.
In total, 89% of these cases could be classified in accordance with the Braak staging when taking into account the severity of alpha-synuclein pathology and adding an amygdala-predominant category of synucleinopathy.
The pathological progression seemed to be non-linear.
Interestingly, a strong correlation between neuronal loss and alpha-synuclein pathology was observed in the substantia nigra in Braak stages 3-6 (P < 0.01).
However, there was no correlation between Hoehn & Yahr and Braak stages.
Neuropathological progression may, however, vary between subtypes as cortical Lewy body load and Braak stages were higher in patients with NTD compared to TD and Alzheimer pathology was more prevalent in RDP patients.
Recognition of clinical subtypes in neuropathological studies is essential to identify selective vulnerability to protein accumulation that may determine the clinical phenotype in PD.
PMID: 22166433
Is pre-motor diagnosis possible?--The European experience.
The increasing knowledge about an ongoing neurodegenerative process long before the diagnosis of Parkinson's disease (PD) can be made according to the current diagnostic criteria urges the need for an earlier diagnosis with the final aim of neuromodulatory and neuroprotective therapies.
A number of risk, pre-motor and early motor markers are being discussed as potential markers to identify individuals who will develop the full picture of clinical PD.
In Europe, studies like the PRIPS study (Prospective validation of Risk factors for the development of Parkinson Syndromes) are performed to determine the sensitivity and predictive value of markers.
In enriched risk cohorts like cohorts of individuals with RBD (Rem sleep Behaviour Disorder) or the TREND study (Tübinger evaluation of Risk factors for Early detection of NeuroDegeneration) specificity of markers is determined and further markers are evaluated.
Moreover, progression of markers in the pre-motor period is being evaluated in these studies; for example, in the PMPP study (Progression Markers in the suspected Pre-motor Phase) assessments are performed at shorter time intervals.
Establishing sensitivity, specificity, predictive value and progression of markers in yet healthy individuals are hoped to lay the basis for future interventional trials before the onset of motor-PD.
PMID: 22166425
Tandem deep brain stimulation--Challenging new structural targets for Parkinson's disease.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) targets for Parkinson's disease have been limited to neuronal regions wherein lesions have produced beneficial effects.
Improvements in imaging allow placement in small and novel targets.
Additionally, due to the ability of impulse generators to accommodate multiple electrodes, simultaneous stimulation in multiple neuronal regions is possible.
Given that the two most disabling clinical features of Parkinson's disease, namely postural instability and dementia, have evaded effective treatment, consideration for new structural targets is warranted.
Characteristics of dementia in parkinsonism include progressive deficits in attention and executive function.
Additionally, many patients experience pronounced variability in cognition with profound fluctuations/variability in attention and alertness.
Anecdotal and initial trial reports concerning DBS to the fornix/hypothalamus have been associated with improvement in memory function and reductions in expected cognitive decline in patients with early Alzheimer's disease.
The fornix constitutes the major inflow and output pathway from the hippocampus and medial temporal lobe.
I hypothesize that tandem DBS, targeting the STN/GPi and fornix/hypothalamus and/or hippocampus may have a positive impact on improving cognitive function and/or reducing risk for subsequent dementia with Lewy bodies/Parkinson dementia.
Such targets also pose potential negative ramifications.
Nevertheless, given the tremendous disability produced by dementia, new structural targets require systematic study.
PMID: 22166418
M30, a brain permeable multi target neurorestorative drug in post nigrostriatal dopamine neuron lesion of parkinsonism animal models.
The anti-Parkinson iron chelator brain selective monoamine oxidase (MAO) AB inhibitor M30 [5-(N-methyl-N-propargylaminomethyl)-8-hydroxyquinoline] was shown to possess neuroprotective activities in vitro and in vivo, against several insults applicable to several neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease (PD) and ALS.
We examined the effect of M30 on a pre-existing lesion induced by the parkinsonism-inducing toxin, MPTP (N-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine).
In this neurorescue/neurorestorative paradigm, M30 was orally administered to mice for 14 days (2.5-5 mg/kg/day) following post MPTP or lactacystin lesion and was shown to significantly elevate striatal dopamine, serotonin and noradrenaline levels, reduce their metabolism, and elevate tyrosine-hydroxylase protein levels.
Importantly, M30 elevated MPTP-reduced dopaminergic and transferrin receptor cell count in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc).
Finally, M30 was shown to decrease mitosis and elevate HIF (hypoxia induced factor) which regulates the neurotrophins BDNF, GDNF, VEGF and erythropoietin by elevating their brain levels, thus providing additional protection.
These findings indicates that brain-permeable M30 has neurorestorative activity, which may clearly be of clinical importance for the treatment of PD.
PMID: 22166402
The frontostriatal circuitry and behavioral complications in PD.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder traditionally associated with motor symptoms.
However, a number of reports have described also deficits across a range of cognitive functions and behavioral complications during the progression of the disease.
Here, we summarize recent observations that may help us to understand the underlying neuronal correlates of behavioral complications in PD.
We will report findings from cutting-edge imaging technology which in the last few years have provided the bulk of information on the neurobiological underpinnings of non-motor symptoms in PD.
PMID: 22187000
Control of autophagy as a therapy for neurodegenerative disease.
Autophagy is an intracellular degradation process that clears long-lived proteins and organelles from the cytoplasm.
It involves the formation of double-membraned structures called autophagosomes that can engulf portions of cytoplasm containing oligomeric protein complexes and organelles, such as mitochondria.
Autophagosomes fuse with lysosomes and their contents then are degraded.
Failure of autophagy in neurons can result in the accumulation of aggregate-prone proteins and neurodegeneration.
Pharmacological induction of autophagy can enhance the clearance of intracytoplasmic aggregate-prone proteins, such as mutant forms of huntingtin, and ameliorate pathology in cell and animal models of neurodegenerative diseases.
In this Review, the autophagic machinery and the signaling pathways that regulate the induction of autophagy are described.
The ways in which dysfunctions at multiple stages in the autophagic pathways contribute to numerous neurological disorders are highlighted through the use of examples of Mendelian and complex conditions, including Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease and forms of motor neuron disease.
The different ways in which autophagic pathways might be manipulated for the therapeutic benefit of patients with neurodegenerative disorders are also considered.
PMID: 22185909
GSM-900MHz at low dose temperature-dependently downregulates α-synuclein in cultured cerebral cells independently of chaperone-mediated-autophagy.
The expanding use of GSM devices has resulted in public concern.
Chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA) is a way for protein degradation in the lysosomes and increases under stress conditions as a cell defense response.
α-synuclein, a CMA substrate, is a component of Parkinson disease.
Since GSM might constitute a stress signal, we raised the possibility that GSM could alter the CMA process.
Here, we analyzed the effects of chronic exposure to a low GSM-900MHz dose on apoptosis and CMA.
Cultured cerebral cortical cells were sham-exposed or exposed to GSM-900MHz at specific absorption rate (SAR): 0.25W/kg for 24 h using a wire-patch cell.
Apoptosis was analyzed by DAPI stain of the nuclei and western blot of cleaved caspase-3.
The expression of proteins involved in CMA (HSC70, HSP40, HSP90 and LAMP-2A) and α-synuclein were analyzed by western blot.
CMA was also quantified in situ by analyzing the cell localization of active lysosomes.
24 h exposure to GSM-900MHz resulted in ∼0.5°C temperature rise.
It did not induce apoptosis but increased HSC70 by 26% and slightly decreased HSP90 (<10%).
It also decreased α-synuclein by 24% independently of CMA, since the localization of active lysosomes was not altered.
Comparable effects were observed in cells incubated at 37.5°C, a condition that mimics the GSM-generated temperature rise.
The GSM-induced changes in HSC70, HSP90 and α-synuclein are most likely linked to temperature rise.
We did not observe any immediate effect on cell viability.
However, the delayed and long term consequences (protective or deleterious) of these changes on cell fate should be examined.
PMID: 22185204
Application of in vivo micro-computed tomography in the temporal characterisation of subchondral bone architecture in a rat model of low-dose monosodium iodoacetate-induced osteoarthritis.
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Osteoarthritis (OA) is a complex, multifactorial joint disease affecting both the cartilage and the subchondral bone.
Animal models of OA aid in the understanding of the pathogenesis of OA and testing suitable drugs for OA treatment.
In this study we characterized the temporal changes in the tibial subchondral bone architecture in a rat model of low-dose monosodium iodoacetate (MIA)-induced OA using in vivo micro-computed tomography (CT).
METHODS: Male Wistar rats received a single intra-articular injection of low-dose MIA (0.2 mg) in the right knee joint and sterile saline in the left knee joint.
The animals were scanned in vivo by micro-CT at two, six, and ten weeks post-injection, analogous to early, intermediate, and advanced stages of OA, to assess architectural changes in the tibial subchondral bone.
The articular cartilage changes in the tibiae were assessed macroscopically and histologically at ten weeks post-injection.
RESULTS: Interestingly, tibiae of the MIA-injected knees showed significant bone loss at two weeks, followed by increased trabecular thickness and separation at six and ten weeks.
The trabecular number was decreased at all time points compared to control tibiae.
The tibial subchondral plate thickness of the MIA-injected knee was increased at two and six weeks and the plate porosity was increased at all time points compared to control.
At ten weeks, histology revealed loss of proteoglycans, chondrocyte necrosis, chondrocyte clusters, cartilage fibrillation, and delamination in the MIA-injected tibiae, whereas the control tibiae showed no changes.
Micro-CT images and histology showed the presence of subchondral bone sclerosis, cysts, and osteophytes.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate that the low-dose MIA rat model closely mimics the pathological features of progressive human OA.
The low-dose MIA rat model is therefore suitable to study the effect of therapeutic drugs on cartilage and bone in a non-trauma model of OA.
In vivo micro-CT is a non-destructive imaging technique that can track structural changes in the tibial subchondral bone in this animal model, and could also be used to track changes in bone in preclinical drug intervention studies for OA treatments.
PMID: 22180710
Diagnostic accuracy of tests for Helicobacter pylori in an Alaska Native population.
To evaluate the accuracy of two non-invasive tests in a population of Alaska Native persons.
High rates of Helicobacter pylori (H.
pylori) infection, H.
pylori treatment failure, and gastric cancer in this population necessitate documentation of infection status at multiple time points over a patient's life.
In 280 patients undergoing endoscopy, H.
pylori was diagnosed by culture, histology, rapid urease test, (13)C urea breath test (UBT), and immunoglobulin G antibodies to H.
pylori in serum.
The performances of (13)C-UBT and antibody test were compared to a gold standard defined by a positive H.
pylori test by culture or, in case of a negative culture result, by positive histology and a positive rapid urease test.
The sensitivity and specificity of the (13)C-UBT were 93% and 88%, respectively, relative to the gold standard.
The antibody test had an equivalent sensitivity of 93% with a reduced specificity of 68%.
The false positive results for the antibody test were associated with previous treatment for an H.
pylori infection [relative risk (RR) = 2.8].
High levels of antibodies to H.
pylori were associated with chronic gastritis and male gender, while high scores in the (13)C-UBT test were associated with older age and with the H.
pylori bacteria load on histological examination (RR = 4.4).
The (13)C-UBT outperformed the antibody test for H.
pylori and could be used when a non-invasive test is clinically necessary to document treatment outcome or when monitoring for reinfection.
PMID: 22180450
Services for people with neurological conditions are poor value for money.
PMID: 22180089
Parkinson disease drug screening based on the interaction between D(2) dopamine receptor and beta-arrestin 2 detected by capillary zone electrophoresis.
Parkinson's disease is the second most common neurodegenerative disease in the world.
Beta-arrestin-2 has been reported to be an important protein involved in D(2) dopamine receptor desensitization, which is essential to Parkinson's disease.
Moreover, the potential value of pharmacological inactivation of G protein-coupled receptor kinase or arrestin in the treatment of patients with Parkinson's disease has recently been shown.
We studied the interaction between D(2) dopamine receptor and beta-arrestin-2 and the pharmacological regulation of chemical compounds on such interaction using capillary zone electrophoresis.
The results from screening more than 40 compounds revealed three compounds that remarkably inhibit the beta-arrestin-2/D(2) dopamine receptor interaction among them.
These compounds are promising therapies for Parkinson's disease, and the method used in this study has great potential for application in large-scale drug screening and evaluation.
PMID: 22180013
G0/G1 phase arrest and apoptosis induced by manganese chloride on cultured rat astrocytes and protective effects of riluzole.
Occupational or environmental exposure to excessive Mn would cause manganism, which is resembled Parkinson disease.
However, the mechanism underlying manganism is still unknown.
It had been documented that astrocytes play important roles in physiological function in brain.
Therefore, in the present study, the cultured astrocytes were exposed to 0, 125, 250, and 500 μM MnCl(2), and cell viability, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) leakage, morphological change, cell cycle progression, and apoptosis were determined.
In addition, 100 μM riluzole (a glutamatergic modulator) was pretreated for 6 h before no MnCl(2) exposure or 500 μM MnCl(2) exposure.
The results showed that cell viability inhibited, LDH leakage elevated, morphology injured, G(0)/G(1) phase cell cycle arrested, and apoptosis rate increased in a concentration-dependent manner.
Further investigation indicated that riluzole pretreatment reversed cytotoxicity, cell cycle aberration, and apoptosis on astrocytes caused by MnCl(2).
These results suggested that MnCl(2) could cause cytotoxicity, cell cycle arrest, and apoptosis concentration-dependently; riluzole might antagonize Mn toxicity on astrocytes.
PMID: 22178471
Age-associated chronic diseases require age-old medicine: Role of chronic inflammation.
Most chronic diseases-such as cancer, cardiovascular disease (CVD), Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, arthritis, diabetes and obesity-are becoming leading causes of disability and death all over the world.
Some of the most common causes of these age-associated chronic diseases are lack of physical activity, poor nutrition, tobacco use, and excessive alcohol consumption.
All the risk factors linked to these chronic diseases have been shown to up-regulate inflammation.
Therefore, downregulation of inflammation-associated risk factors could prevent or delay these age-associated diseases.
Although modern science has developed several drugs for treating chronic diseases, most of these drugs are enormously expensive and are associated with serious side effects and morbidity.
In this review, we present evidence on how chronic inflammation leads to age-associated chronic disease.
Furthermore, we discuss diet and lifestyle as solutions for age-associated chronic disease.
PMID: 22173095
Reduced protein stability of human DJ-1/PARK7 L166P, linked to autosomal recessive Parkinson disease, is due to direct endoproteolytic cleavage by the proteasome.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by dopaminergic dysfunction and degeneration.
DJ-1/PARK7 mutations have been linked with a familial form of early onset PD.
In this study, we found that human DJ-1 wild type and the missense mutants M26I, R98Q, A104T and D149A were stable proteins in cells, only the L166P mutant was unstable.
In parallel, the former were not degraded and the L166P mutant was directly degraded in vitro by proteasome-mediated endoproteolytic cleavage.
Furthermore, genetic evidence in fission yeast showed the direct involvement of proteasome in the degradation of human DJ-1 L166P and the corresponding L169P mutant of SPAC22E12.03c, the human orthologue of DJ-1 in Schizosaccharomyces Pombe, as their protein levels were increased at restrictive temperature in fission yeast (mts4 and pts1-732) harboring temperature sensitive mutations in proteasomal subunits.
In total, our results provide evidence that direct proteasomal endoproteolytic cleavage of DJ-1 L166P is the mechanism of degradation contributing to the loss-of-function of the mutant protein, a property not shared by other DJ-1 missense mutants associated with PD.
PMID: 22172999
The riddle of psychiatric disorders in Parkinson disease: from phenomenology to treatment.
PMID: 22172611
Movement disorders: towards new therapies in Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 22171910
Evidence for the effectiveness of Alexander Technique lessons in medical and health-related conditions: a systematic review.
Complementary medicine and alternative approaches to chronic and intractable health conditions are increasingly being used, and require critical evaluation.
The aim of this review was to systematically evaluate available evidence for the effectiveness and safety of instruction in the Alexander Technique in health-related conditions.
PUBMED, EMBASE, PSYCHINFO, ISI Web-of-Knowledge, AMED, CINHAL-plus, Cochrane library and Evidence-based Medicine Reviews were searched to July 2011.
Inclusion criteria were prospective studies evaluating Alexander Technique instruction (individual lessons or group delivery) as an intervention for any medical indication/health-related condition.
Studies were categorised and data extracted on study population, randomisation method, nature of intervention and control, practitioner characteristics, validity and reliability of outcome measures, completeness of follow-up and statistical analyses.
Results:  Of 271 publications identified, 18 were selected: three randomised, controlled trials (RCTs), two controlled non-randomised studies, eight non-controlled studies, four qualitative analyses and one health economic analysis.
One well-designed, well-conducted RCT demonstrated that, compared with usual GP care, Alexander Technique lessons led to significant long-term reductions in back pain and incapacity caused by chronic back pain.
The results were broadly supported by a smaller, earlier RCT in chronic back pain.
The third RCT, a small, well-designed, well-conducted study in individuals with Parkinson's disease, showed a sustained increased ability to carry out everyday activities following Alexander lessons, compared with usual care.
The 15 non-RCT studies are also reviewed.
Strong evidence exists for the effectiveness of Alexander Technique lessons for chronic back pain and moderate evidence in Parkinson's-associated disability.
Preliminary evidence suggests that Alexander Technique lessons may lead to improvements in balance skills in the elderly, in general chronic pain, posture, respiratory function and stuttering, but there is insufficient evidence to support recommendations in these areas.
PMID: 22171907
Treatment effect modifiers for the patient education programme for Parkinson's disease.
A recent randomised controlled trial showed significant benefits for Parkinson's disease (PD) caregivers' psychosocial problems and need for help and a trend towards significant improvement of patients' quality of life after participation in the Patient Education Programme for Parkinson's disease (PEPP).
Large variations in change scores were found, indicating variation in benefit.
The aim of this study was to search for treatment effect modifiers.
Outcome measures were patients' quality of life [Parkinson's Disease Questionnaire (PDQ)-39] and caregivers' psychosocial burden [Belastungsfragebogen Parkinson Angehörigen kurzversion (BELA-A-k)].
Candidate treatment effect modifiers were participants' characteristics and baseline scores on psychological questionnaires (BELA-P/A-k, PDQ-39, EQ-5D, Self-rating Depression Scale) and patients' neuropsychological test scores (Mini Mental State Examination, National Adult Reading Test, Dutch version, Word Test, Behavioural Assessment of the Dysexecutive Syndrome rule shift, Trail Making Test, Stroop).
Secondary analyses of data from a randomised controlled trial with 64 patients and 46 caregivers were performed using regression analyses with treatment group interaction terms.
No significant modifiers were found for the patients.
In the caregiver group, a higher MMSE score of the patient at baseline was found to be a significant predictor of a lower BELA-A-k Bothered by score post-intervention of the caregiver.
A potential predictor of treatment benefit was found for caregivers of PD patients with better cognitive functioning.
This study did not find treatment effect modifiers for PD patients: demographics, disease stage and time of diagnosis, cognitive functioning, level of baseline psychosocial burden, participating with or without a caregiver, and caregiver changes did not influence treatment outcome.
The PEPP seems suitable for the majority of patients.
PMID: 22171055
Ceruloplasmin oxidation, a feature of Parkinson's disease CSF, inhibits ferroxidase activity and promotes cellular iron retention.
Parkinson's disease is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by oxidative stress and CNS iron deposition.
Ceruloplasmin is an extracellular ferroxidase that regulates cellular iron loading and export, and hence protects tissues from oxidative damage.
Using two-dimensional electrophoresis, we investigated ceruloplasmin patterns in the CSF of human Parkinson's disease patients.
Parkinson's disease ceruloplasmin profiles proved more acidic than those found in healthy controls and in other human neurological diseases (peripheral neuropathies, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and Alzheimer's disease); degrees of acidity correlated with patients' pathological grading.
Applying an unsupervised pattern recognition procedure to the two-dimensional electrophoresis images, we identified representative pathological clusters.
In vitro oxidation of CSF in two-dimensional electrophoresis generated a ceruloplasmin shift resembling that observed in Parkinson's disease and co-occurred with an increase in protein carbonylation.
Likewise, increased protein carbonylation was observed in Parkinson's disease CSF, and the same modification was directly identified in these samples on ceruloplasmin.
These results indicate that ceruloplasmin oxidation contributes to pattern modification in Parkinson's disease.
From the functional point of view, ceruloplasmin oxidation caused a decrease in ferroxidase activity, which in turn promotes intracellular iron retention in neuronal cell lines as well as in primary neurons, which are more sensitive to iron accumulation.
Accordingly, the presence of oxidized ceruloplasmin in Parkinson's disease CSF might be used as a marker for oxidative damage and might provide new insights into the underlying pathological mechanisms.
PMID: 22171009
Structure-based design of conformation- and sequence-specific antibodies against amyloid β.
Conformation-specific antibodies that recognize aggregated proteins associated with several conformational disorders (e.g., Parkinson and prion diseases) are invaluable for diagnostic and therapeutic applications.
However, no systematic strategy exists for generating conformation-specific antibodies that target linear sequence epitopes within misfolded proteins.
Here we report a strategy for designing conformation- and sequence-specific antibodies against misfolded proteins that is inspired by the molecular interactions governing protein aggregation.
We find that grafting small amyloidogenic peptides (6-10 residues) from the Aβ42 peptide associated with Alzheimer's disease into the complementarity determining regions of a domain (V(H)) antibody generates antibody variants that recognize Aβ soluble oligomers and amyloid fibrils with nanomolar affinity.
We refer to these antibodies as gammabodies for grafted amyloid-motif antibodies.
Gammabodies displaying the central amyloidogenic Aβ motif (18VFFA21) are reactive with Aβ fibrils, whereas those displaying the amyloidogenic C terminus (34LMVGGVVIA42) are reactive with Aβ fibrils and oligomers (and weakly reactive with Aβ monomers).
Importantly, we find that the grafted motifs target the corresponding peptide segments within misfolded Aβ conformers.
Aβ gammabodies fail to cross-react with other amyloidogenic proteins and scrambling their grafted sequences eliminates antibody reactivity.
Finally, gammabodies that recognize Aβ soluble oligomers and fibrils also neutralize the toxicity of each Aβ conformer.
We expect that our antibody design strategy is not limited to Aβ and can be used to readily generate gammabodies against other toxic misfolded proteins.
PMID: 22170881
Cerebrospinal fluid amyloid β and tau in LRRK2 mutation carriers.
The goal of the current investigation was to examine a cohort of symptomatic and asymptomatic LRRK2 mutation carriers, in order to address whether the reported alterations in amyloid β (Aβ) and tau species in the CSF of patients with sporadic Parkinson disease (PD) are a part of PD pathogenesis, the aging process, or a comorbid disease in patients with PD, and to explore the possibility of Aβ and tau as markers of early or presymptomatic PD.
CSF Aβ42, total tau, and phosphorylated tau were measured with Luminex assays in 26 LRRK2 mutation carriers, who were either asymptomatic (n = 18) or had a phenotype resembling sporadic PD (n = 8).
All patients also underwent PET scans with 18F-6-fluoro-l-dopa (FD), 11C-(±)-α-dihydrotetrabenazine (DTBZ), and 11C-d-threo-methylphenidate (MP) to measure dopaminergic function in the striatum.
The levels of CSF markers were then compared to each PET measurement.
Reduced CSF Aβ42 and tau levels correlated with lower striatal dopaminergic function as determined by all 3 PET tracers, with a significant association between Aβ42 and FD uptake.
When cases were restricted to carriers of the G2019S mutation, the most common LRRK2 variant in our cohort, significant correlations were also observed for tau.
The disposition of Aβ and tau is likely important in both LRRK2-related and sporadic PD, even during early phases of the disease.
A better understanding of their production, aggregation, and degradation, including changes in their CSF levels, may provide insights into the pathogenesis of PD and the potential utility of these proteins as biomarkers.
PMID: 22170277
Reversible Pisa syndrome in patients with Parkinson's disease on rasagiline therapy.
PMID: 22170276
Is improvement in the quality of life after subthalamic nucleus stimulation in Parkinson's disease predictable?
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the subthalamic nucleus (STN) significantly improves quality of life (QoL) in PD.
However, QoL fails to improve in a relevant proportion of patients.
We studied clinical baseline and progression parameters associated with improvement in QoL after DBS.
Data from a German randomized, controlled study comparing DBS (60 patients) with best medical treatment (59 patients) were analyzed.
Changes in patients' QoL were assessed using the Parkinson's Disease Questionnaire (PDQ-39) at baseline and at the 6-month follow-up.
For the STN-DBS patients, the changes in PDQ-39 were correlated with predefined clinical preoperative and progression parameters.
Scores for QoL improved after STN-DBS for 57% of the patients, and for 43% patients, they did not improve.
Patients with improvement in QoL showed significantly higher cumulative daily "off" time.
Changes in the PDQ-39 showed a significant positive correlation with the cumulative daily off time at baseline.
Logistic regression analysis revealed that 1 additional hour off time at baseline increases the odds for improvement on PDQ-39 by a factor of 1.33 (odds ratio).
In the postoperative course, changes in the PDQ-39 significantly correlated with the reduction of cumulative daily off time, an improvement on the UPDRS (UPDRS III off), and positive mood changes.
Among the baseline parameters, the cumulative daily off time is the strongest predictor for improvement in disease-related QoL after DBS.
Improvement in QoL after STN-DBS is also correlated with changes in motor functions and changes in depression and anxiety.
PMID: 22170275
Cognitive impairment in nondemented Parkinson's disease.
A substantial percentage of patients with newly diagnosed Parkinson's disease without dementia are reported to be affected by cognitive impairment (CI).
In practice, however, CI is underrecognized, as the signs may not be apparent in early-stage disease and many routine assessment tools lack the sensitivity to detect subtle cognitive dysfunction.
Patients with PD and mild CI (MCI) may have a higher risk of developing dementia than cognitively intact PD patients; however, it is not currently known which patients with CI are at increased risk of developing dementia.
This review summarizes current knowledge about CI in nondemented PD; it discusses the structural and functional changes associated with CI and addresses areas of unmet needs.
We focus on questions that should be addressed in future studies to achieve consensus on its characteristics and definition, pathophysiology, epidemiology, diagnosis and assessment, and treatment and management.
PMID: 22167981
[The surgeon James Parkinson named fossils too].
PMID: 22165370
Nasogastric medication for perioperative Parkinson's rigidity during anaesthesia emergence.
We present a case of severe rigidity during emergence from general anaesthesia in a 64-year-old man who had suffered from Parkinson's disease for nine years.
Controversy still exists over how to optimally manage these patients perioperatively.
We successfully managed his Parkinsonism with administration of crushed Sinemet" and amantadine via a nasogastric tube.
This case report serves as a reminder of the importance that patients receive their anti-Parkinsonian medications perioperatively, and highlights the potential benefits of inserting a gastric tube to continue anti-Parkinson's medication dosing during prolonged surgery.
PMID: 22165049
Livedo reticularis from amantadine.
A 70-year-old Caucasian man with a medical history of Parkinson's disease presented with a 3-month history of violaceous reticulated patches on his upper and lower extremities.
The lesions were asymptomatic.
The patient did not have a history of cardioembolic events or autoimmune disorders.
No new medications were started before the onset of the lesions.
Review of systems was unremarkable.
On examination, large erythematous to violaceous patches were present in a reticulated net-like pattern on the patient's upper and lower extremities (Figure 1 and Figure 2).
No edema, erosions, or ulcerations were noted.
An extensive workup for autoimmune, infectious, and hematologic causes of livedo reticularis was performed.
Complete blood cell count, anti-nuclear antibodies (ANAs), anti-Ro and anti-La antibodies, antiphospholipid antibodies, protein C and S levels, cryoglobulin screen, rheumatoid factor, and hepatitis screen were all within normal limits.
After these potential other causes were excluded, the patient was diagnosed with amantadine-induced livedo reticularis (LR), a medication he had been taking for 2 years for Parkinson's disease.
The patient's dose of amantadine was decreased from 100 mg to 50 mg twice daily and over the next few months, his lesions gradually faded.
Because his neurologic condition benefited from amantadine and his lesions were asymptomatic, his neurologist continued the medication.
PMID: 22164191
Management of sexual dysfunction in Parkinson's disease.
Nonmotor symptoms, among them sexual dysfunction, are common and underrecognized in patients with Parkinson disease; they play a major role in the deterioration of quality of life of patients and their partners.
Loss of desire and dissatisfaction with their sexual life is encountered in both genders.
Hypersexuality (HS), erectile dysfunction and problems with ejaculation are found in male patients, and loss of lubrication and involuntary urination during sex are found in female patients.
Tremor, hypomimia, muscle rigidity, bradykinesia, 'clumsiness' in fine motor control, dyskinesias, hypersalivation and sweating may interfere with sexual function.
Optimal dopaminergic treatment should facilitate sexual encounters of the couple.
Appropriate counselling diminishes some of the problems (reluctance to engage in sex, problems with ejaculation, lubrication and urinary incontinence).
Treatment of erectile dysfunction with sildenafil and apomorphine is evidence based.
HS or compulsive sexual behaviour are side effects of dopaminergic therapy, particularly by dopaminergic agonists, and should be treated primarily by diminishing their dose.
Neurologists should actively investigate sexual dysfunction in their Parkinsonian patients and offer treatment, optimally within a multidisciplinary team, where a dedicated professional would deal with sexual counselling.
PMID: 22162696
Bipolar affective disorder and Parkinson's disease.
Little is known about comorbidities of bipolar disorder such as Parkinson's disease.
A case history and a literature survey indicate that bipolar disorder is linked with or influences Parkinson's disease and vice versa.
Underlying mechanisms are poorly understood, and, more importantly, no treatment options are established in such double diagnoses.
The few data in comorbid Parkinson cases seem to point to a rapid cycling pattern of bipolar symptoms.
With regard to therapeutic intervention, the literature supports pramipexole for treatment of both Parkinson and depressive symptoms in bipolar depression.
Lithium, the mood stabilizer of choice for treating manic states, is problematical for use in Parkinson patients because of its side effects.
Valproate might be an alternative, especially for treatment of rapid cycling.
PMID: 22162533
Population Pharmacokinetic-Pharmacodynamic Analysis of Istradefylline in Patients With Parkinson Disease.
This model-based analysis quantifies the population pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic efficacy and safety/tolerability relationships of orally administered istradefylline, a selective adenosine A(2A) receptor antagonist, in healthy participants and patients with Parkinson disease.
Data from 6 phase 2/3 clinical trials comprised the population database, with 1760 and 1798 patients contributing to the efficacy and safety/tolerability analyses, respectively.
The relationship between istradefylline area under the curve at steady state and percentage OFF time was described by a nonlinear model (Emax) based on time for the disease progression/placebo response component and an Emax model for the effect of istradefylline.
The typical maximum decrease in percentage OFF time due to istradefylline exposure would be 5.79% (95% confidence interval = 4.09%-7.49%) with one-half of the maximum effect reached at an exposure of 1690 ng × hr/mL (95% confidence interval = 199-3180 ng × hr/mL).
The pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic relationships for dyskinesia and dizziness were described by an Emax model, and for nausea, a power model was used.
The probabilities of dyskinesia and dizziness are expected to plateau at a dose of 40 mg/d, and the probability of nausea is expected to continually rise as the dose is increased.
Collectively, these results support a starting istradefylline dose of 20 to 40 mg/d.
PMID: 22162144
Clinical validation of movement disorder society-recommended diagnostic criteria for Parkinson's disease with dementia.
The objective of this work was to evaluate the Movement Disorders Society (MDS) Task Force-proposed screening checklist for detecting Parkinson's disease dementia (PD-D) in relation to full neuropsychological testing.
An MDS Task Force has proposed diagnostic procedures for PD-D, which have not been fully validated against more extensive neuropsychological testing.
PD subjects were recruited from 2 specialty centers.
A neuropsychologist evaluated them for dementia as part of routine clinical care.
Independent clinical neurologists administered the MDS PD-D screening checklist.
Diagnosis of PD-D by the 2 methods was compared.
Ninety-one PD subjects had a mean age of 66.3 (SD = 9.7) years and a mean PD duration of 8.8 (SD = 6.1) years.
Seven subjects (7.7%) met all 8 screening checklist criteria from the MDS PD-D screening tool and were classified as probable PD-D.
Fifteen (16.5%) subjects were classified as PD-D by full neuropsychological assessment.
The screening checklist showed 100% specificity, but only 46.7% sensitivity, for diagnosing PD-D compared to the full neuropsychological assessment.
PD-D cases missed by the PD-D screening tool were largely due to 2 checklist items that were not endorsed (absence of depression and Mini-Mental State Examination [MMSE] scores <26).
There was moderate agreement between these 2 methods for determination of PD-D (kappa = 0.59, P < .001).
The MDS-PD-D screening checklist is highly accurate for detecting PD-D if all items are endorsed.
However, for cases that do not meet these criteria, full neuropsychological testing is needed to differentiate PD-D from milder cognitive impairment.
Revision of the checklist by altering or eliminating the 2 problematic checklist items may improve sensitivity.
© 2011 Movement Disorder Society.
PMID: 22161420
Coenzyme Q10 for Parkinson's disease.
A number of preclinical studies in both in vitro and in vivo models of Parkinson's disease have demonstrated that coenzyme Q10 can protect the nigrostriatal dopaminergic system.
Some clinical trials have looked at the neuroprotective effects of coenzyme Q10 in patients with early and midstage Parkinson's disease.
To assess the evidence from randomized controlled trials on the efficacy and safety of treatment with coenzyme Q10 compared to placebo in patients with early and midstage Parkinson's disease.
We searched the Cochrane Movment Disorders Group Trials Register, CENTRAL (The Cochrane Library 2009, Issue 4), MEDLINE (January 1966 to March 2011), and EMBASE (January 1985 to March 2011).
We handsearched the references quoted in the identified trials, congress reports from the most important neurological association and movement disorder societies in Europe and America (March 2011), checked reference lists of relevant studies and contacted other researchers.
We included randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that compared coenzyme Q10 to placebo for patients who suffered early and midstage primary Parkinson's disease.
Studies in which the method of randomization or concealment were unknown were included.
Cross-over studies were excluded.
Two review authors independently assessed trial quality and extracted data.
All disagreements were resolved by consensus between authors and were explained.
We attempted to contact the authors of studies for further details if any data were missing and to establish the characteristics of unpublished trials through correspondence with the trial coordinator or principal investigator.
Adverse effects information was collected from the trials.
Four randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials with a total of 452 patients met the inclusion criteria and were included in the review.
In overall, there were improvements in activities of daily living (ADL) UPDRS (WMD -3.12, 95% CI -5.88 to -0.36) and Schwab and England (WMD 4.43, 95% CI 0.05 to 8.81) for coenzyme Q10 at 1200 mg/d for 16 months versus placebo.In safety outcomes, only the risk ratios (RR) of pharyngitis (RR 1.04, 95% CI 0.18 to 5.89) and diarrhea (RR 1.39, 95% CI 0.62 to 3.16) are mild elevated between coenzyme Q10 therapy and placebo and there were no differences in the number of withdrawals due to adverse effects (RR 0.61, 95% CI 0.23 to 1.62).
Coenzyme Q10 therapy with 1200 mg/d for 16 months was well tolerated by patients with Parkinson's disease.
The improvements in ADL UPDRS and Schwab and England were positive, but it need to be further confirmed by larger sample.
For total and other subscores of UPDRS, the effects of coenzyme Q10 seemed to be less clear.
PMID: 22161166
[Psychiatric side effects of deep brain stimulation in Parkinson's disease].
Since the 1990 s deep brain stimulation (DBS) has provided an effective tool for the treatment of Parkinson's disease.
About fifty thousand Parkinson patients have been treated by DBS so far.
Although a relatively safe intervention, there are still some considerable side effects, psychiatric and non-psychiatric.
We conducted a structured search using PubMed and included publications from 1999 to February 2011 to provide an overview of the current data concerning psychiatric side effects of DBS in Parkinson's disease.
There was a tremendous variety and inconsistency concerning methods and results of the studies we included.
However, it became apparent that postoperatively increased attention should be paid concerning a potentially increased suicidality and affective alterations (particularly manic states).
We suggest frequent pre- and postoperative evaluations of Parkinson patients treated with DBS.
PMID: 22159100
Impaired endogenously evoked automated reaching in Parkinson's disease.
Intended reaches triggered by exogenous targets often coexist with spontaneous, automated movements that are endogenously activated.
It has been posited that Parkinson's disease (PD) primarily impairs automated movements, but it is unknown to what extent this may affect multijoint/limb control, particularly when patients are off their dopaminergic medications.
Here we tested nine human patients with PD while off dopaminergic medication versus nine age-matched normal controls (NCs).
Participants performed intentional reaches forward to a target in a dark room and then transitioned back to their initial posture.
Upon target flash, three forms of guidance were used: (1) memory with eyes closed, (2) continuous target vision only, and (3) vision of their moving finger only.
The trajectories of their arm joints were measured and their joint velocities decomposed into the (intended) task-relevant and the (spontaneous) task-incidental degrees of freedom (DOF).
We also measured the balance between these two subsets of DOF as these movements unfolded.
In PD patients we found that the incidental DOF values were abnormally variable during the retracting movements and prevailed over the task-relevant DOF values.
By contrast, their forward intentional motions were abnormally dominated by the task-relevant components.
Moreover, the patients abruptly transitioned between voluntary and automated modes of joint control, and, unlike NCs, the type of visual guidance differentially affected their postural trajectories.
These findings lend support to an emerging view that there is a loss of automated control in PD patients that contributes to impairments in voluntary control, and that basal ganglia-cortical circuits are critical for the maintenance and balance of multijoint control.
PMID: 22159068
Parkinson disease and vitamin D: an interplay between genes and the environment?
PMID: 22159053
Neurodegeneration across stages of cognitive decline in Parkinson disease.
To assess regions and patterns of brain atrophy in patients with Parkinson disease (PD) with normal cognition (PD-NC), mild cognitive impairment (PD-MCI), and dementia-level cognitive deficits (PDD).
Images were quantified using a region-of-interest approach and voxel-based morphometry analysis.
We used a high-dimensional pattern classification approach to delineate brain regions that collectively formed the Spatial Pattern of Abnormalities for Recognition of PDD.
The Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders Center at the University of Pennsylvania.
Eighty-four PD patients (61 PD-NC, 12 PD-MCI, and 11 PDD) and 23 healthy control subjects (HCs) underwent magnetic resonance imaging of the brain.
The PD-NC patients did not demonstrate significant brain atrophy compared with HCs.
Compared with PD-NC patients, PD-MCI patients had hippocampal atrophy (β = -0.37; P = .001), and PDD patients demonstrated hippocampal (β = -0.32; P = .004) and additional medial temporal lobe atrophy (β = -0.36; P = .003).
The PD-MCI patients had a different pattern of atrophy compared with PD-NC patients (P = .04) and a similar pattern to that of PDD patients (P = .81), characterized by hippocampal, prefrontal cortex gray and white matter, occipital lobe gray and white matter, and parietal lobe white matter atrophy.
In nondemented PD patients, there was a correlation between memory-encoding performance and hippocampal volume.
Hippocampal atrophy is a biomarker of initial cognitive decline in PD, including impaired memory encoding and storage, suggesting heterogeneity in the neural substrate of memory impairment.
Use of a pattern classification approach may allow identification of diffuse regions of cortical gray and white matter atrophy early in the course of cognitive decline.
PMID: 22157432
The effects of visual and auditory cues on freezing of gait in patients with Parkinson disease.
The aims of this study was to investigate the effects of visual and auditory cues on the freezing of gait in Parkinson disease patients (PDF) compared with Parkinson disease patients without freezing of gait (PDNF).
Fifteen PDF, 10 PDNF, and 10 age-matched healthy volunteers were recruited.
Subjects walked back and forth on a 7-m walkway under three different conditions: baseline condition without cues, with visual cues, and with auditory cues.
Visual cues consisted of white stripes located along the walkway.
For auditory cues, a metronome was used.
Gait was analyzed using three-dimensional computerized analysis.
In the PDF group, both visual and auditory cues significantly affected visuospatial and kinematic gait parameters.
PDF group benefited more from visual cues than auditory cues.
In the PDNF and healthy volunteer groups, visual cues significantly decreased patient velocity.
Auditory cues affected some kinematic parameters on PDNF group.
Compared among three groups, visual cues more positively affected the PDF group, and auditory cues more positively affected kinematic parameters in the PDNF group.
This study suggests that gait training using visual and auditory cues can improve PDF patient gait and that auditory cues enhance gait in PDNF patients with hypokinetic gait patterns.
PMID: 22157187
Prospects and challenges for the use of stem cell technologies to develop novel therapies for Parkinson disease.
PMID: 22157006
Structural and Mechanistic Insights into the Interaction of Cytochrome P4503A4 with Bromoergocryptine, a Type I Ligand.
Cytochrome P4503A4 (CYP3A4), a major human drug-metabolizing enzyme, is responsible for the oxidation and clearance of the majority of administered drugs.
One of the CYP3A4 substrates is bromoergocryptine (BEC), a dopamine receptor agonist prescribed for the inhibition of prolactin secretion and treatment of Parkinson disease, type 2 diabetes, and several other pathological conditions.
Here we present a 2.15 Å crystal structure of the CYP3A4-BEC complex in which the drug, a type I heme ligand, is bound in a productive mode.
The manner of BEC binding is consistent with the in vivo metabolite analysis and identifies the 8' and 9' carbons of the proline ring as the primary sites of oxidation.
The crystal structure predicts the importance of Arg(212) and Thr(224) for binding of the tripeptide and lysergic moieties of BEC, respectively, which we confirmed experimentally.
Our data support a three-step BEC binding model according to which the drug binds first at a peripheral site without perturbing the heme spectrum and then translocates into the active site cavity, where formation of a hydrogen bond between Thr(224) and the N1 atom of the lysergic moiety is followed by a slower conformational readjustment of the tripeptide group modulated by Arg(212).
PMID: 22152433
Alexithymia may modulate decision making in patients with de novo Parkinson's disease.
The aim of this study was to investigate whether and how alexithymia may influence decision making under conditions of uncertainty, assessed using the Iowa Gambling Task, in patients with newly diagnosed, untreated (de novo) Parkinson's disease, as previously reported for healthy subjects.
Twenty-four patients with de novo Parkinson's disease underwent a neuropsychological and neuropsychiatric assessment, including the Toronto Alexithymia Scale, the Geriatric Depression Scale Short Form, and the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT).
The assessment showed that 12 patients were alexithymic and 12 were non-alexithymic; seven patients were found to be mildly depressed and 17 non-depressed.
Alexithymic and non-alexithymic patients did not differ in the IGT total score; however, significant differences emerged across the third block of the IGT, in which the alexithymic patients outperformed the nonalexithymic patients.
Depression did not influence IGT performance.
Alexithymia may modulate decision making, as assessed with the IGT; alexithymia could be associated with faster learning to avoid risky choices and negative feedback, as previously reported in some studies conducted in anxious or depressed patients.
PMID: 22152432
Assessing self-awareness of dyskinesias in Parkinson's disease through movie materials.
The aim of our study was to determine self-awareness of dyskinesias and other core motor symptoms in Parkinson's disease (PD) through the use of movie presentations.
A scale based on 10 movies (five depicting dyskinesias and five showing core symptoms) and the Self-Assessment Parkinson's Disease Disability Scale were administered to 21 patients (all with a Mini-Mental State Examination - MMSE score ≥ 25).
Neurological assessment included the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale and the Hoehn-Yahr and Schwab-England scales.
In addition, the MMSE, Beck Depression Inventory and Stroop task were administered.
Overall, patient and caregiver ratings of dyskinesias and core PD symptoms were consistent.
Two patients (9%) completely denied dyskinesias, while four patients (19%) significantly underestimated their dyskinesias.
Our results confirm that poor self-awareness of symptoms in PD may be selective and that denial of dyskinesias affects only a minority of patients with normal cognitive status (MMSE ≥ 25).
Most patients are aware of the presence of dyskinesias.
Poor self-awareness of dyskinesias is associated with longer disease duration.
PMID: 22045323
Continuous dopaminergic stimulation: clinical aspects and experimental bases.
In patients with Parkinson disease, pulsatile administration of dopaminergic drugs is associated with motor fluctuations and dyskinesias.
By contrast, treatments that provide more continuous dopaminergic stimulation are associated with less intense motor complications.
This can be achieved by using drugs with longer half-lives, delayed release formulations, and routes of administration that permit continuous delivery.
The mechanisms by which different modes of dopaminergic treatment (pulsatile or continuous) determine the motor response are not fully understood.
However, the use of experimental models of parkinsonism has helped understand the motor complications associated with pulsatile dopamine replacement.
These studies have provided important insights into the biochemical and molecular changes in the basal ganglia in response to continuous stimulation.
In addition, these models have facilitated the development of new treatments that may stabilize the motor response and the biochemical alterations in the basal ganglia to provide more efficient forms of continuous dopaminergic stimulation in patients with Parkinson disease.
PMID: 22147682
Patients with idiopathic rapid-eye-movement sleep behavior disorder show normal gastric motility assessed by the 13C-octanoate breath test.
Delayed gastric emptying is a non-motor symptom of Parkinson's disease.
Few data exist on gastric emptying in early-stage Parkinson's disease.
In idiopathic rapid-eye-movement sleep behavior disorder, a presumable pre-motor stage of Parkinson's disease, gastric emptying has not yet been investigated.
Twenty healthy controls, 13 patients with idiopathic rapid-eye-movement sleep behavior disorder, and 39 patients with Parkinson's disease patients underwent standardized testing for gastric emptying with the (13)C-octanoate breath test.
Gastric emptying was significantly delayed in drug-naïve (P < .001) and in treated Parkinson's disease patients (P < .001), but normal in patients with idiopathic rapid-eye-movement sleep behavior disorder.
Our study confirms delayed gastric emptying in drug-naïve, early-stage Parkinson's disease.
Normal gastric emptying in idiopathic rapid-eye-movement sleep behavior disorder might be explained by the fact that neurodegenerative changes in structures modulating gastric motility are not severe enough to cause a functional deficit that can be detected by the (13)C-octanoate breath test.
PMID: 22146929
Methylphenidate for gait impairment in Parkinson disease: a randomized clinical trial.
PMID: 22143761
Open conformation of human DOPA decarboxylase reveals the mechanism of PLP addition to Group II decarboxylases.
DOPA decarboxylase, the dimeric enzyme responsible for the synthesis of neurotransmitters dopamine and serotonin, is involved in severe neurological diseases such as Parkinson disease, schizophrenia, and depression.
Binding of the pyridoxal-5'-phosphate (PLP) cofactor to the apoenzyme is thought to represent a central mechanism for the regulation of its activity.
We solved the structure of the human apoenzyme and found it exists in an unexpected open conformation: compared to the pig kidney holoenzyme, the dimer subunits move 20 Å apart and the two active sites become solvent exposed.
Moreover, by tuning the PLP concentration in the crystals, we obtained two more structures with different conformations of the active site.
Analysis of three-dimensional data coupled to a kinetic study allows to identify the structural determinants of the open/close conformational change occurring upon PLP binding and thereby propose a model for the preferential degradation of the apoenzymes of Group II decarboxylases.
PMID: 22143365
Parkinson disease: Twin study identifies an association between exposure to a solvent and risk of Parkinson disease.
PMID: 22142042
Transient improvement of acquired hepatocerebral degeneration with parkinsonian symptoms after failed liver transplant: case report and literature review.
Acquired (non-Wilsonian) hepato-cerebral degeneration is an infrequent neurologic disorder in patients with liver dysfunction and longstanding portal-systemic shunting.
The clinical manifestations include dysarthria, ataxia, tremor, and cognitive dysfunction.
Typically, patients with acquired hepatocerebral degeneration respond poorly to medical therapy as the underlying end-stage liver disease remains.
Information regarding the effect of orthotopic liver transplant on acquired hepatocerebral degeneration, however, is limited and conflicting.
We conducted a review of literature via a PubMed search to summarize the effect of orthotopic liver transplant on acquired hepatocerebral degeneration.
We present a 56-year-old man with compensated hepatitis C cirrhosis who developed acquired hepatocerebral degeneration with Parkinsonian symptoms refractory to conventional Parkinson medical therapy.
Orthotopic liver transplant led to marked clinical improvement of the acquired hepatocerebral degeneration.
However, the patient developed recurrence of acquired hepatocerebral degeneration 6-week postorthotopic liver transplant as he developed graft failure from aggressive progressive hepatitis C recurrence.
Our review found a heterogeneous group of case series, suggesting that the experience with orthotopic liver transplant is variable.
Our experience demonstrates that orthotopic liver transplant may lead to resolution of acquired hepatocerebral degeneration; however, acquired hepatocerebral degeneration may return with recurrent liver disease.
Future studies with long-term follow-up are needed.
PMID: 22141289
Left-sided hemihypomimia in Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease is known to present and mostly persist as an asymmetrical movement disorder in most cases.
The asymmetry is mainly described in motor features such as bradykinesia, rigidity and tremor in upper and lower limbs.
Unilateral hypomimia however, has only been reported in 14 patients, all of whom showed right-sided hemihypomimia.
In this case report we describe the symptoms of a 51-year-old man with predominant left-sided Parkinson's disease in whom we discovered a left-sided hemihypomimia.
We also briefly review the literature concerning hemihypomimia in Parkinson's disease.
We conclude that a larger case series needs to be studied to further elucidate the pathophysiology and clinical implications of this observation.
PMID: 22140196
Quadriceps Muscle Weakness, Activation Deficits, and Fatigue With Parkinson Disease.
BACKGROUND: .
People with Parkinson disease (PD) typically have complaints of weakness.
The mechanisms underlying this deficit have not been well established, although many factors may contribute.
OBJECTIVE: .
This investigation aimed to characterize quadriceps muscle weakness and activation failure in people with PD and explore whether these deficits were related to disease severity.
The authors further sought to examine quadriceps muscle fatigability.
METHODS: .
This was a cross-sectional comparison of 17 people with mild-severe PD and 17 healthy adults matched by age, sex, and body mass index (BMI).
The Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale motor score (UPDRS motor) ranged from 9.5 to 61.0.
Participants were divided into those with low-PD motor signs (UPDRS motor < 31.7) and high-PD motor signs (UPDRS motor ≥ 31.7).
MEASURES: of quadriceps performance included isometric torque, central activation using doublet interpolation, and an isokinetic fatigue test.
RESULTS: .
Participants with high-PD motor signs had significantly more quadriceps weakness and central activation deficits than those with low-PD motor signs or healthy controls.
Strength and activation deficits correlated strongly with UPDRS motor score.
Quadriceps muscle fatigue was present in healthy controls and in those with low-PD motor signs but not in those with high-PD motor signs.
CONCLUSIONS: .
These findings provide additional evidence for lower-extremity strength loss with PD; central activation deficits may account for some of the strength deficits, especially with increased PD motor signs.
Also, muscle fatigue did not occur in individuals with a greater degree of PD motor signs, most likely because of insufficient central activation to allow for muscle overload to induce metabolic fatigue.
PMID: 22139623
What factors influence motor complications in Parkinson disease?: a 10-year prospective study.
The causes and mechanism behind motor complications in Parkinson disease (PD) are still a subject of debate.
Several factors including age at onset, evolution in years, and initial medication can influence the onset and severity of motor complications in PD.We studied patients with recent diagnosis of PD who were followed up prospectively for 10 years.
Analysis included the progression of these patients, as measured by the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale scores and the presence of motor complications (motors fluctuations, dyskinesias, and gait freezing) over time.
The patient group was studied as a whole and by subgroups classified according to age at onset, initial treatment, and sex.By the end of the first decade, most patients exhibited dyskinesias (91%), motor fluctuations (62%), and freezing of gait (68%).
An association was found between several patients' characteristics and presence of motor complications by 5 years, though not after 10 years of follow up.
The apparition of motor fluctuations was mainly related to initial treatment (odds ratio [OR], 3.87).
The development of dyskinesias was linked to initial treatment (OR, 8.31), age at onset (OR, 0.90), and sex (OR, 12.87).
PMID: 22138181
Molecular pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease: update.
Parkinson disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disease characterised by progressive disturbances in motor, autonomic and psychiatric functions.
Much has been learnt since the disease entity was established in 1817.
Although there are well established treatments that can alleviate the symptoms of PD, a pressing need exists to improve our understanding of the pathogenesis to enable development of disease modifying treatments.
Ten responsible genes for PD have been identified and recent progress in molecular research on the protein functions of the genes provides new insights into the pathogenesis of hereditary as well as sporadic PD.
Also, genome wide association studies, a powerful approach to identify weak effects of common genetic variants in common diseases, have identified a number of new possible PD associated genes, including PD genes previously detected.
However, there is still much to learn about the interactions of the gene products, and important insights may come from chemical and genetic screens.
In this review, an overview is provided of the molecular pathogenesis and genetics of PD, focusing particularly on the functions of the PD related gene products with marked research progress.
PMID: 22136163
Levodopa infusion combined with entacapone or tolcapone in Parkinson disease: a pilot trial.
Background and purpose:  Catechol-O-methyltransferase inhibitors may be used to decrease levodopa requirement.
The objective was to investigate whether the levodopa/carbidopa intestinal gel infusion dose can be reduced by 20% without worsening of motor fluctuations and levodopa concentration stability when oral catechol-O-methyltransferase inhibitors are added.
Methods:  A short-term, randomized, partly blinded, crossover, investigator-initiated clinical trial was performed, with levodopa/carbidopa intestinal gel combined with oral entacapone and tolcapone on two different days in 10 patients.
The primary outcome measure was difference in coefficient of variation of levodopa in plasma between levodopa/carbidopa, levodopa/carbidopa/entacapone, and levodopa/carbidopa/tolcapone.
The secondary outcome measures other pharmacokinetic variables, patient-reported outcome, and blinded analysis of motor performance.
Results:  Variation of plasma levodopa concentrations did not differ significantly between the treatments.
The treatments did not differ regarding motor performance.
Levodopa concentrations were significantly higher using tolcapone.
Concentrations of the metabolite 3-O-methyldopa decreased gradually during catechol-O-methyltransferase inhibition.
Conclusions:  According to this small, short-term pilot study, oral catechol-O-methyltransferase inhibitors administered in 5-h intervals may be useful in cases where levodopa/carbidopa intestinal gel dose reduction is wanted.
Stability of plasma levodopa levels is not significantly altered, and off-time is not increased when decreasing the levodopa/carbidopa intestinal gel dose by 20%.
Rather, the dose should probably be decreased more than 20%, especially under tolcapone co-treatment, to avoid increased dyskinesias with time.
PMID: 22135753
Disability research: progress made, opportunities for even greater gains.
PMID: 22135272
Essential tremor: choosing the right management plan for your patient.
Essential tremor is a common neurologic problem seen widely at all levels of patient care.
It should be differentiated from secondary causes of tremor and Parkinson disease.
It can be managed with commonly used drugs.
However, severe, resistant, or atypical cases should be referred to a specialist for evaluation and the possible use of botulinum toxin or deep brain stimulation.
PMID: 22134940
Cheaper, simpler, and better: tips for treating seniors with Parkinson disease.
Treatment of seniors with Parkinson disease is within the domain of primary care physicians and internists.
A good working knowledge of carbidopa/levodopa principles should allow excellent care of most patients, at least during the early years of the disease.
Even later, when levodopa responses become more complicated (eg, dyskinesias, motor fluctuations, insomnia, anxiety), levodopa adjustments may be all that is necessary.
A dozen tips for optimizing treatment of Parkinson disease are discussed herein.
PMID: 22134915
Characterization of heparin-induced glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase early amyloid-like oligomers and their implication in α-synuclein aggregation.
Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites, neuropathological hallmarks of several neurological diseases, are mainly made of filamentous assemblies of α-synuclein.
However, other macromolecules including Tau, ubiquitin, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, and glycosaminoglycans are routinely found associated with these amyloid deposits.
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase is a glycolytic enzyme that can form fibrillar aggregates in the presence of acidic membranes, but its role in Parkinson disease is still unknown.
In this work, the ability of heparin to trigger the amyloid aggregation of this protein at physiological conditions of pH and temperature is demonstrated by infrared and fluorescence spectroscopy, dynamic light scattering, small angle x-ray scattering, circular dichroism, and fluorescence microscopy.
Aggregation proceeds through the formation of short rod-like oligomers, which elongates in one dimension.
Heparan sulfate was also capable of inducing glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase aggregation, but chondroitin sulfates A, B, and C together with dextran sulfate had a negligible effect.
Aided with molecular docking simulations, a putative binding site on the protein is proposed providing a rational explanation for the structural specificity of heparin and heparan sulfate.
Finally, it is demonstrated that in vitro the early oligomers present in the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase fibrillation pathway promote α-synuclein aggregation.
Taking into account the toxicity of α-synuclein prefibrillar species, the heparin-induced glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase early oligomers might come in useful as a novel therapeutic strategy in Parkinson disease and other synucleinopathies.
PMID: 22132548
On paper.
PMID: 22131425
Striatal dysfunctions associated with mitochondrial DNA damage in dopaminergic neurons in a mouse model of Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is one of the most common progressive neurodegenerative disorders, characterized by resting tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia, and postural instability.
These symptoms are associated with massive loss of tyrosine hydroxylase-positive neurons in the substantia nigra (SN) causing an estimated 70-80% depletion of dopamine (DA) in the striatum, where their projections are located.
Although the etiology of PD is unknown, mitochondrial dysfunctions have been associated with the disease pathophysiology.
We used a mouse model expressing a mitochondria-targeted restriction enzyme, PstI or mito-PstI, to damage mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) in dopaminergic neurons.
The expression of mito-PstI induces double-strand breaks in the mtDNA, leading to an oxidative phosphorylation deficiency, mostly due to mtDNA depletion.
Taking advantage of a dopamine transporter (DAT) promoter-driven tetracycline transactivator protein (tTA), we expressed mito-PstI exclusively in dopaminergic neurons, creating a novel PD transgenic mouse model (PD-mito-PstI mouse).
These mice recapitulate most of the major features of PD: they have a motor phenotype that is reversible with l-DOPA treatment, a progressive neurodegeneration of the SN dopaminergic population, and striatal DA depletion.
Our results also showed that behavioral phenotypes in PD-mito-PstI mice were associated with striatal dysfunctions preceding SN loss of tyrosine hydroxylase-positive neurons and that other neurotransmitter systems [noradrenaline (NE) and serotonin (5-HT)] were increased after the disruption of DA neurons, potentially as a compensatory mechanism.
This transgenic mouse model provides a novel model to study the role of mitochondrial defects in the axonal projections of the striatum in the pathophysiology of PD.
PMID: 22128150
Hypokinesia and Reduced Dopamine Levels in Zebrafish Lacking β- and γ1-Synucleins.
α-Synuclein is strongly implicated in the pathogenesis of Parkinson disease.
However, the normal functions of synucleins and how these relate to disease pathogenesis are uncertain.
We characterized endogenous zebrafish synucleins in order to develop tractable models to elucidate the physiological roles of synucleins in neurons in vivo.
Three zebrafish genes, sncb, sncg1, and sncg2 (encoding β-, γ1-, and γ2-synucleins respectively), show extensive phylogenetic conservation with respect to their human paralogues.
A zebrafish α-synuclein orthologue was not found.
Abundant 1.45-kb sncb and 2.7-kb sncg1 mRNAs were detected in the CNS from early development through adulthood and showed overlapping but distinct expression patterns.
Both transcripts were detected in catecholaminergic neurons throughout the CNS.
Zebrafish lacking β-, γ1-, or both synucleins during early development showed normal CNS and body morphology but exhibited decreased spontaneous motor activity that resolved as gene expression recovered.
Zebrafish lacking both β- and γ1-synucleins were more severely hypokinetic than animals lacking one or the other synuclein and showed delayed differentiation of dopaminergic neurons and reduced dopamine levels.
Phenotypic abnormalities resulting from loss of endogenous zebrafish synucleins were rescued by expression of human α-synuclein.
These data demonstrate that synucleins have essential phylogenetically conserved neuronal functions that regulate dopamine homeostasis and spontaneous motor behavior.
Zebrafish models will allow further elucidation of the molecular physiology and pathophysiology of synucleins in vivo.
PMID: 22125780
Just noticeable difference in olfaction: a discriminative tool between healthy elderly and patients with cognitive disorders associated with dementia.
Olfactory dysfunction appears to be one of the earliest signs of several age-related neurodegenerative disorders, including Alzheimer`s disease (AD) or Parkinson`s disease (PD).
To rate performance and olfactory deficits in patients with cognitive disorders, various olfactory tasks have been used such as odor detection, discrimination, recognition memory, identification and naming but no study has been focused on just noticeable difference (JND), a sensitive tool of detection.
The aim of this study was to investigate and compare variations in JNDs in healthy elderly and in patients with cognitive disorders associated with dementia.
The results showed significantly higher olfactory JNDs in a population with cognitive disorders associated with dementia - i.e.
a lower olfactory detection performance - compared to a control population paired in age, gender and education level.
Additionally, the findings of the present study showed strong correlations between cognitive performances and JND scores in the control population contrary to the patient population.
These findings are discussed in relation to the relevance of using olfactory JNDs in the diagnosis of dementias.
PMID: 22123787
Patient page. Parkinson disease and polyneuropathy. About Parkinson disease.
PMID: 22121752
Electrochemical sensor to detect neurotransmitter using gold nano-island coated ITO electrode.
Parkinson disease is a chronic neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the loss of dopamine, which is a neurotransmitter in the substantia nigra.
In this study, a simple, rapid and inexpensive method to fabricate gold nano-island film (GNIF) coated ITO electrode has been developed based on electrochemical deposition of Au onto ITO substrate.
The nanostructured film surface was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM).
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) were used to evaluate the electrochemical behavior of induvidul dopamine and uric acid solution were studied.
Moreover, GNIF/ITO electrode was applied to detecte DA in the presence of Bovine Serum Albumin (50 microM) as an interference.
These results demonstrate that, interfering component has no effect on the determination of DA at GNIF electrode, hence this GNIF electrode is suitable for the determination of DA with high sensitivity and selectivity.
Then, GNIF coated ITO electrode was applied to monitor the electrochemical simultaneous detection of dopamine and uric acid mixtures based on CV and DPV with high sensitivity.
GNIF-modified ITO electrode showed a linear range for the determination of dopamine concentration from 0.1 microM to 40 microM in the presence of 50 microM of uric acid.
Based on these results, the proposed technique can be a promising method to construct a highly sensitive biosensor as well as highly efficient protein chip.
PMID: 22118943
DLB and PDD: a role for mutations in dementia and Parkinson disease genes?
Based on the substantial overlap in clinical and pathological characteristics of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Parkinson disease with dementia (PDD) with Alzheimer disease (AD) and Parkinson disease (PD) we hypothesized that these disorders might share underlying genetic factors.
The contribution of both sequence and copy number variants (CNVs) in known AD and PD genes to the genetic etiology of DLB and PDD however is currently unclear.
Therefore, we performed a gene-based mutation analysis of all major AD and PD genes in 99 DLB and 75 PDD patients, including familial and sporadic forms, from Flanders, Belgium.
Also, copy number variants in APP, SNCA, and PARK2 were determined.
In the AD genes we detected proven pathogenic missense mutations in PSEN1 and PSEN2, and 2 novel missense variants in PSEN2 and MAPT.
In the PD genes we identified 1 SNCA duplication, the LRRK2 R1441C founder mutation and 4 novel heterozygous missense variants with unknown pathogenicity.
Our results suggest a contribution of established AD and PD genes to the genetic etiology of DLB and PDD though to a limited extent.
They do support the hypothesis of a genetic overlap between members of the Lewy body disease spectrum, but additional genes still have to exist.
PMID: 22115849
Can Parkinson's disease pathology be propagated from one neuron to another?
Parkinson's disease is the second most prevalent neurodegenerative disease, yet despite this, very little is known about the underlying cellular mechanisms.
Initially it was thought to be a disease primarily involving loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta.
Recent studies, however, have focused on observations that aggregated α-synuclein protein, the major component of Lewy bodies, is found throughout the nervous system.
It is speculated that misfolded α-synuclein transfers between cells in a prion-like manner, thereby mediating the spread of the neuropathology.
In this review, we discuss the staging (according to Braak) of Parkinson pathology and the concept describing the disease progression from one region of the brain to the other.
We highlight how α-synuclein might be responsible for the spread of the disease.
We compare the idea of a prion-like mechanism contributing to Parkinson's disease to emerging concepts that other proteins participate in similar processes in other neurodegenerative diseases.
We then examine the future implications of a critical role in disease pathogenesis of α-synuclein for the classification, diagnosis and treatment of Parkinson's disease in the future.
PMID: 22113202
Isorhynchophylline, a natural alkaloid, promotes the degradation of alpha-synuclein in neuronal cells via inducing autophagy.
Accumulation of α-synuclein (α-syn) in the brain is a pathogenic feature and also a causative factor of Parkinson disease.
Isorhynchophylline (IsoRhy) is a major tetracyclic oxindole alkaloid isolated from the Chinese herbal medicine Uncaria rhynchophylla (Miq.)Jacks (Gouteng in Chinese), which has been used for the treatment of neurological diseases in East Asia for centuries.
Here we report a novel function of IsoRhy as a neuronal autophagy inducer.
IsoRhy induced autophagy in different neuronal cell lines, including N2a, SH-SY5Y and PC12 cells, and also in primary cortical neurons.
Furthermore, IsoRhy induced autophagy in the fat bodies of Drosophila.
IsoRhy promoted clearance of wild-type, A53T and A30P α-syn monomers, α-syn oligomers and α-syn/synphilin-1 aggresomes in neuronal cells via the autophagy-lysosome pathway.
More importantly, IsoRhy was able to decrease the expression levels of wild-type and A53T α-syn protein in differentiated human dopaminergic neurons.
Notably, IsoRhy-induced autophagy was independent of the mTOR pathway but dependent on the function of Beclin 1.
Taken together, data from this study raise the possibility that oxindole alkaloid derivatives may serve as a means to stimulate autophagy in neuronal cells, thereby exerting preventive and therapeutic values against neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson disease by reducing pathogenic protein aggregates in neurons.
PMID: 22113180
Peripheral markers in neurodegenerative patients and their first-degree relatives.
We have determined various biomarkers in the peripheral blood of Alzheimer, Parkinson and vascular dementia patients by comparing the samples with those of first-degree relatives and control subjects.
Our results, together with correlation studies using data from the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), suggest that the clinical evaluation of the nitrite (NOx) concentration in Alzheimer patients should be complemented by assays of protein carbonyls (PCs) levels, the ratio of reduced to oxidized glutathione (GSH/GSSG) in plasma, PCs in erythrocytes and PCs and calcium content in leukocytes.
For Parkinson patients it would be useful to determine NOx, thiobarbituric-acid reactive substances (TBARS) and PCs in erythrocytes, and NOx and TBARS en leukocytes.
For vascular-demented (VD) patients, determination of NOx, Cu, and GSH/GSSG in plasma and TBARS, and PCs in erythrocytes together with PCs in leukocytes should be assayed.
Relatives of Alzheimer patients showed alterations in plasma Se and Zn concentrations, catalase (CAT) activity in erythrocytes and calcium content in leukocytes as possible predictive markers of the disease.
Relatives of Parkinson patients showed elevated levels of NOx in leukocytes.
In the case of vascular-demented patients we suggest NOx, GSH/GSSG and α-tocopherol in plasma, the CAT/superoxide dismutase ratio in erythrocytes and TBARS, GSSG and glutathione reductase in leukocytes as predictive markers.
Large-scale longitudinal population-based studies using these suggested biomarkers are necessary in order to assess their level of reliability and specificity in clinical practice.
PMID: 22111351
[Effects of the induction of anesthesia with propofol on hemodynamics in patients with Parkinson's disease].
Patients with Parkinson's disease frequently suffer from impaired autonomic nervous function.
To elucidate the effects of the induction of anesthesia with propofol on cardiovascular hemodynamics has become important, since the number of patients with Parkinson's disease undergoing deep brain stimulation under general anesthesia has increased recently.
Effects of induction with propofol in patients with Parkinson's disease on cardiovascular hemodynamics and autonomic nervous activity were compared with those of the control patients.
Moreover, possible different effect on hemodynamics between the propofol alone and the combination of propofol and fentanyl for the induction were examined in patients with Parkinson's disease.
Although heart rate or blood pressure was not different between patients with Parkinson's disease and the control patients before the induction, sympathetic vasomotor activity was lower in patients with Parkinson's disease than the control patients.
The induction of anesthesia significantly decreased blood pressure in patients with Parkinson's disease.
However the decreasing systolic blood pressure after the induction of anesthesia was more marked in patients with Parkinson's disease than the control patients.
We did not find differences in the changes of blood pressure between the propofol alone and the combination of propofol and fentanyl in patients with Parkinson's disease.
No abnormal responses to the induction of anesthesia with propofol were found in the patients with Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 22110694
A TNF receptor 2 selective agonist rescues human neurons from oxidative stress-induced cell death.
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) plays a dual role in neurodegenerative diseases.
Whereas TNF receptor (TNFR) 1 is predominantly associated with neurodegeneration, TNFR2 is involved in tissue regeneration and neuroprotection.
Accordingly, the availability of TNFR2-selective agonists could allow the development of new therapeutic treatments of neurodegenerative diseases.
We constructed a soluble, human TNFR2 agonist (TNC-scTNF(R2)) by genetic fusion of the trimerization domain of tenascin C to a TNFR2-selective single-chain TNF molecule, which is comprised of three TNF domains connected by short peptide linkers.
TNC-scTNF(R2) specifically activated TNFR2 and possessed membrane-TNF mimetic activity, resulting in TNFR2 signaling complex formation and activation of downstream signaling pathways.
Protection from neurodegeneration was assessed using the human dopaminergic neuronal cell line LUHMES.
First we show that TNC-scTNF(R2) interfered with cell death pathways subsequent to H(2)O(2) exposure.
Protection from cell death was dependent on TNFR2 activation of the PI3K-PKB/Akt pathway, evident from restoration of H(2)O(2) sensitivity in the presence of PI3K inhibitor LY294002.
Second, in an in vitro model of Parkinson disease, TNC-scTNF(R2) rescues neurons after induction of cell death by 6-OHDA.
Since TNFR2 is not only promoting anti-apoptotic responses but also plays an important role in tissue regeneration, activation of TNFR2 signaling by TNC-scTNF(R2) appears a promising strategy to ameliorate neurodegenerative processes.
PMID: 22108829
Danon disease as a cause of concentric left ventricular hypertrophy in patients who underwent endomyocardial biopsy.
BackgroundDanon disease is an X-linked dominant disorder; concentric left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) is one of its manifestations.
In this study, we investigated the prevalence of Danon disease in patients with concentric LVH who underwent endomyocardial biopsy (EMB).Methods and resultsA total of 50 patients with concentric LVH underwent EMB from January 2008 to December 2010.
Cardiac amyloidosis was diagnosed in 14 patients; genetic analysis of lysosome-associated membrane protein 2 (LAMP2) was done in the remaining 36 patients.
Three novel LAMP2 frameshift mutations were found.
They were c.808_809 insG in exon 6, c.320_321 insCATC in exon 3, and c.257_258delCC in exon 3, leading to a premature stop codon on cDNA analysis.
The prevalence of Danon disease was seen in 6% (3 of 50) of unselected concentric LVH patients who underwent EMB, or 8% (3 of 36) after excluding cardiac amyloidosis through EMB.
All the three patients were male teenagers with a mean age of 15 ± 1 years, and had mild mental retardation, two of the three with Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome and markedly increased left ventricular voltage.
All the three patients had increased serum hepatic enzymes and creatine kinase (CK) concentrations.
There was no death or cardiovascular hospitalization during 20 ± 15 months of follow-up.ConclusionsDanon disease may account for a number of patients with concentric LVH who underwent EMB.
Danon disease should be suspected in the male teenager with concentric LVH, especially with elevated serum hepatic enzymes and CK concentrations, and/or WPW syndrome with markedly increased voltage of the left ventricle.
Genetic analysis of LAMP2 can help make the diagnosis.
PMID: 22106466
Moving pictures of Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 22104010
SNCA and MAPT genes: Independent and joint effects in Parkinson disease in the Italian population.
Significant efforts have been focused on investigating the contribution of common variants to Parkinson disease (PD) risk.
Several independent GWAS and metanalysis studies have shown a genome-wide significant association of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the α-synuclein (SNCA) and microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) regions.
Here we investigated the role of SNCA and MAPT as PD susceptibility genes in a large Italian population of 904 patients and 891 controls.
An evaluation of gene-gene and gene-environment interactions in association with PD was also attempted.
The SNCA Rep1 microsatellite was genotyped by a fluorescent PCR assay, whereas the SNPlex genotyping system was used to genotype 12 additional markers across the SNCA gene, and 2 SNPs tagging the risk MAPT H1 haplotype.
Single-marker analysis demonstrated nominal evidence of association for: i) the 261-bp-long allele of Rep1; ii) 7 SNPs in the SNCA region (top SNP: rs356186, P = 3.08 × 10(-04), intron 4); iii) both SNPs identifying the MAPT H1 haplotype (P = 4.63 × 10(-04) and P = 4.23 × 10(-04) for rs1800547 and rs9468, respectively).
Moreover, we found a highly significant protective haplotype spanning ∼83 kb from intron 4 to the 3' end of SNCA (P = 1.29 × 10(-05)).
Our findings strongly confirm SNCA and MAPT as major PD susceptibility genes for idiopathic PD in the Italian population.
Interaction analyses did not evidence either epistatic effects between the two loci or gene-environment interactions.
PMID: 22103807
eXframe: reusable framework for storage, analysis and visualization of genomics experiments.
Genome-wide experiments are routinely conducted to measure gene expression, DNA-protein interactions and epigenetic status.
Structured metadata for these experiments is imperative for a complete understanding of experimental conditions, to enable consistent data processing and to allow retrieval, comparison, and integration of experimental results.
Even though several repositories have been developed for genomics data, only a few provide annotation of samples and assays using controlled vocabularies.
Moreover, many of them are tailored for a single type of technology or measurement and do not support the integration of multiple data types.
We have developed eXframe - a reusable web-based framework for genomics experiments that provides 1) the ability to publish structured data compliant with accepted standards 2) support for multiple data types including microarrays and next generation sequencing 3) query, analysis and visualization integration tools (enabled by consistent processing of the raw data and annotation of samples) and is available as open-source software.
We present two case studies where this software is currently being used to build repositories of genomics experiments - one contains data from hematopoietic stem cells and another from Parkinson's disease patients.
The web-based framework eXframe offers structured annotation of experiments as well as uniform processing and storage of molecular data from microarray and next generation sequencing platforms.
The framework allows users to query and integrate information across species, technologies, measurement types and experimental conditions.
Our framework is reusable and freely modifiable - other groups or institutions can deploy their own custom web-based repositories based on this software.
It is interoperable with the most important data formats in this domain.
We hope that other groups will not only use eXframe, but also contribute their own useful modifications.
PMID: 22101994
Syncope and autonomic cardiovascular dysfunction in Parkinson disease.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE : The aim of the study was to investigate the relationship between syncope or presyncope occurrence and dysfunction of the cardiovascular autonomic system in patients with Parkinson disease (PD).
MATERIAL AND METHODS : Twenty-four PD patients were studied, including 10 subjects with syncope/presyncope and 14 con-trols without those symptoms.
Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM), Holter electrocardiographic monitoring, carotid sinus massage, tilt test, and cardiac scintigraphy with 123I metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) were performed.
RESULTS : Differences between the two groups were found in myocardial scintigraphy and ABPM.
The stepwise regression analyses suggest that the values of late phase reduced uptake of MIBG (95% CI: 0.0-0.77; p < 0.05) and day-time minimum systolic blood pressure (95% CI: 0.78-0.98; p = 0.007) may be related to the occurrence of syncope/presyncope.
CONCLUSIONS : The findings suggest an association between syncope/presyncope occurrence and dysfunction of the cardiovascular autonomic system in PD patients.
Both 123I MIBG myocardial scintigraphy and ABPM may help identify a group of patients with an elevated risk for syncopic episodes which, in turn, may affect the choice of treatment.
PMID: 22097420
[Shaking. Evaluating and intervening].
PMID: 22096232
The BioSample Database (BioSD) at the European Bioinformatics Institute.
The BioSample Database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biosamples) is a new database at EBI that stores information about biological samples used in molecular experiments, such as sequencing, gene expression or proteomics.
The goals of the BioSample Database include: (i) recording and linking of sample information consistently within EBI databases such as ENA, ArrayExpress and PRIDE; (ii) minimizing data entry efforts for EBI database submitters by enabling submitting sample descriptions once and referencing them later in data submissions to assay databases and (iii) supporting cross database queries by sample characteristics.
Each sample in the database is assigned an accession number.
The database includes a growing set of reference samples, such as cell lines, which are repeatedly used in experiments and can be easily referenced from any database by their accession numbers.
Accession numbers for the reference samples will be exchanged with a similar database at NCBI.
The samples in the database can be queried by their attributes, such as sample types, disease names or sample providers.
A simple tab-delimited format facilitates submissions of sample information to the database, initially via email to biosamples@ebi.ac.uk.
PMID: 22094648
Complexity of motor response to different doses of duodenal levodopa infusion in Parkinson disease.
The aim was to elaborately describe individual pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic profiles in patients with difficult-to-treat dyskinesias treated with levodopa/carbidopa intestinal gel infusion.
A nonrandomized, partly blinded, investigator-initiated trial was conducted in 5 patients with idiopathic Parkinson disease who were difficult to keep in "on" state without dyskinesia.
Levodopa/carbidopa intestinal gel (Duodopa) doses of 80% to 120% of individually and clinically optimized dosage were infused during five 4-hour periods.
Pharmacokinetic profiling, blinded assessment of video recordings, and objective movement analysis were applied every 20 to 30 minutes.
Individual correlations between plasma levodopa concentrations and corresponding motor scores 20 to 30 minutes after the sampling time were significant in all patients (P < 0.05 and P < 0.001).
Motor scores were generally stable during the 4-hour periods.
The objective test revealed that motor performance was faster the more dyskinetic the patients were.
Mean individual Treatment Response Scale scores were positive in 24 of the 25 steady-state periods.
Dystonia was always combined with choreic dyskinesias.
Motor response from different doses of levodopa/carbidopa intestinal gel is in a broad sense predictable even in dyskinetic patients although major interindividual differences in dose requirement, plasma levels, and motor response are found.
That motor performance was faster the more dyskinetic the patients were implies that motor performance may be better with moderate dyskinesia than with mild dyskinesia.
This may explain why patients with persistent dyskinesias choose to keep their doses above the dyskinesia threshold.
There is no ideal therapeutic window in such patients, but levodopa infusion offers stable motor response.
PMID: 22094370
Cardiovascular dysautonomia in Parkinson disease: From pathophysiology to pathogenesis.
Signs or symptoms of impaired autonomic regulation of circulation often attend Parkinson disease (PD).
This review covers biomarkers and mechanisms of autonomic cardiovascular abnormalities in PD and related alpha-synucleinopathies.
The clearest clinical laboratory correlate of dysautonomia in PD is loss of myocardial noradrenergic innervation, detected by cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging.
About 30-40% of PD patients have orthostatic hypotension (OH), defined as a persistent, consistent fall in systolic blood pressure of at least 20mmHg or diastolic blood pressure of at least 10mmHg within 3min of change in position from supine to standing.
Neuroimaging evidence of cardiac sympathetic denervation is universal in PD with OH (PD+OH).
In PD without OH about half the patients have diffuse left ventricular myocardial sympathetic denervation, a substantial minority have partial denervation confined to the inferolateral or apical walls, and a small number have normal innervation.
Among patients with partial denervation the neuronal loss invariably progresses over time, and in those with normal innervation at least some loss eventually becomes evident.
Thus, cardiac sympathetic denervation in PD occurs independently of the movement disorder.
PD+OH also entails extra-cardiac noradrenergic denervation, but this is not as severe as in pure autonomic failure.
PD+OH patients have failure of both the parasympathetic and sympathetic components of the arterial baroreflex.
OH in PD therefore seems to reflect a "triple whammy" of cardiac and extra-cardiac noradrenergic denervation and baroreflex failure.
In contrast, most patients with multiple system atrophy, which can resemble PD+OH clinically, do not have evidence for cardiac or extra-cardiac noradrenergic denervation.
Catecholamines in the neuronal cytoplasm are potentially toxic, via spontaneous and enzyme-catalyzed oxidation.
Normally cytoplasmic catecholamines are efficiently taken up into vesicles via the vesicular monoamine transporter.
The recent finding of decreased vesicular uptake in Lewy body diseases therefore suggests a pathogenetic mechanism for loss of catecholaminergic neurons in the periphery and brain.
Parkinson disease (PD) is one of the most common chronic neurodegenerative diseases of the elderly, and it is likely that as populations age PD will become even more prevalent and more of a public health burden.
Severe depletion of dopaminergic neurons of the nigrostriatal system characterizes and likely produces the movement disorder (rest tremor, slowness of movement, rigid muscle tone, and postural instability) in PD.
Over the past two decades, compelling evidence has accrued that PD also involves loss of noradrenergic neurons in the heart.
This finding supports the view that loss of catecholaminergic neurons, both in the nigrostriatal system and the heart, is fundamental in PD.
By the time PD manifests clinically, most of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons are already lost.
Identifying laboratory measures-biomarkers-of the disease process is therefore crucial for advances in treatment and prevention.
Deposition of the protein, alpha-synuclein, in the form of Lewy bodies in catecholaminergic neurons is a pathologic hallmark of PD.
Alpha-synucleinopathy in autonomic neurons may occur early in the pathogenetic process.
The timing of cardiac noradrenergic denervation in PD is therefore a key issue.
This review updates the field of autonomic cardiovascular abnormalities in PD and related disorders, with emphasis on relationships among striatal dopamine depletion, sympathetic noradrenergic denervation, and alpha-synucleinopathy.
PMID: 22094225
Rotenone activates phagocyte NADPH oxidase by binding to its membrane subunit gp91phox.
Rotenone, a widely used pesticide, reproduces parkinsonism in rodents and associates with increased risk for Parkinson disease.
We previously reported that rotenone increased superoxide production by stimulating the microglial phagocyte NADPH oxidase (PHOX).
This study identified a novel mechanism by which rotenone activates PHOX.
Ligand-binding assay revealed that rotenone directly bound to membrane gp91(phox), the catalytic subunit of PHOX; such binding was inhibited by diphenyleneiodonium, a PHOX inhibitor with a binding site on gp91(phox).
Functional studies showed that both membrane and cytosolic subunits were required for rotenone-induced superoxide production in cell-free systems, intact phagocytes, and COS7 cells transfected with membrane subunits (gp91(phox)/p22(phox)) and cytosolic subunits (p67(phox) and p47(phox)).
Rotenone-elicited extracellular superoxide release in p47(phox)-deficient macrophages suggested that rotenone enabled activation of PHOX through a p47(phox)-independent mechanism.
Increased membrane translocation of p67(phox), elevated binding of p67(phox) to rotenone-treated membrane fractions, and coimmunoprecipitation of p67(phox) and gp91(phox) in rotenone-treated wild-type and p47(phox)-deficient macrophages indicated that p67(phox) played a critical role in rotenone-induced PHOX activation via its direct interaction with gp91(phox).
Rac1, a Rho-like small GTPase, enhanced p67(phox)-gp91(phox) interaction; Rac1 inhibition decreased rotenone-elicited superoxide release.
In conclusion, rotenone directly interacted with gp91(phox); such an interaction triggered membrane translocation of p67(phox), leading to PHOX activation and superoxide production.
PMID: 22094131
Modelling of Parkinson's disease in mice.
Although progress has been made in the symptomatic treatment of Parkinson's disease since the discovery of L-dopa in the 1960s, no neuroprotective therapy is yet available.
Absence of adequate animal models of the disease that enable prediction of clinical success of potential treatments is often cited as a major impediment to progress and discourages researchers and pharmaceutical companies from investing resources to develop such treatments.
Classic models are still widely used, but have been disappointing, and development of genetic models has given new hope.
However, can a human disease be faithfully reproduced in a mouse? In this Review we summarise evidence that some genetic mouse models do reproduce key features of Parkinson's disease and show that much can be learned from even imperfect models.
The hope is that this information could be used to advance the search for neuroprotective therapies for Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 22093536
Pharmacological treatment and the prospect of pharmacogenetics in Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson disease (PD) is a progressive movement disorder marked by tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia and postural instability.
Levodopa (l-dopa), usually combined with a peripheral dopa decarboxylase inhibitor, has been proved to provide the best symptomatic benefit for PD.
However, its long-term efficacy is limited because of motor complications and drug-induced dyskinesia.
Dopamine agonists, catechol-O-methyltransferase inhibitors and monoamine oxidase-B inhibitors are anti-parkinsonian (anti-PD) drugs that have been found to further improve the potency of l-dopa and prevent the onset of motor complications.
However, as PD is a progressive disorder, all the drugs used for its therapy, manifest reduced efficacy and adverse effects with time.
Research on the field of pharmacogenetics has pointed out that the genetic variability of each individual determines to a large extent the inter-individual variability in response to anti-PD drugs.
Clinicogenetic trials show that drug efficacy or toxicity or susceptibility to side effects are features governed by genetic principles.
This article is a review of the present pharmacological treatment of PD and current pharmacogenetic data for PD.
PMID: 22090514
Authentically phosphorylated α-synuclein at Ser129 accelerates neurodegeneration in a rat model of familial Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra (SN) and the appearance of fibrillar aggregates of insoluble α-synuclein (α-syn) called Lewy bodies (LBs).
Approximately 90% of α-syn deposited in LBs is phosphorylated at serine 129 (Ser129).
In contrast, only 4% of total α-syn is phosphorylated in normal brain, suggesting that accumulation of Ser129-phosphorylated α-syn is involved in the pathogenesis of PD.
However, the role of Ser129 phosphorylation in α-syn neurotoxicity remains unclear.
In this study, we coexpressed familial PD-linked A53T α-syn and G-protein-coupled receptor kinase 6 (GRK6) in the rat SN pars compacta using recombinant adeno-associated virus 2.
Coexpression of these proteins yielded abundant Ser129-phosphorylated α-syn and significantly exacerbated degeneration of dopaminergic neurons when compared with coexpression of A53T α-syn and GFP.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that Ser129-phosphorylated α-syn was preferentially distributed to swollen neurites.
However, biochemical analysis showed that the increased expression of Ser129-phosphorylated α-syn did not promote accumulation of detergent-insoluble α-syn.
Coexpression of catalytically inactive K215R mutant GRK6 failed to accelerate A53T α-syn-induced degeneration.
Furthermore, introducing a phosphorylation-incompetent mutation, S129A, into A53T α-syn did not alter the pace of degeneration, even when GRK6 was coexpressed.
Our study demonstrates that authentically Ser129-phosphorylated α-syn accelerates A53T α-syn neurotoxicity without the formation of detergent-insoluble α-syn, and suggests that the degenerative process could be constrained by inhibiting the kinase that phosphorylates α-syn at Ser129.
PMID: 22090352
[Long-term care of Parkinson patients with deep brain stimulation].
For more than 15 years deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus and globus pallidus internus have become therapeutic options in advanced Parkinson's disease.
The number of patients with long-term treatment is increasing steadily.
This review focuses on issues of the long-term care of these Parkinson's patients, including differences of the available deep brain stimulation systems, recommendations for follow-up examinations, implications for medical diagnostics and therapies and an algorithm for symptom deterioration.
Today, there is no profound evidence that deep brain stimulation prevents disease progression.
However, symptomatic relief from motor symptoms is maintained during long-term follow-up and interruption of the therapy remains an exception.
PMID: 22089194
Paeonol attenuates microglia-mediated inflammation and oxidative stress-induced neurotoxicity in rat primary microglia and cortical neurons.
ABSTRACT: Inflammation and oxidative stress play important roles in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders such as stroke, traumatic injury, Parkinson disease, and Alzheimer disease.
Paeonol, a natural compound extracted from Moutan cortex, is a potent anti-inflammatory and antioxidative agent.
The aim of this study was to investigate the neuroprotective mechanisms of paeonol on lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammation in rat primary microglia and 6-hydroxydopamine-induced oxidative damage in cortical neurons.
In LPS-treated microglia, paeonol attenuated the overexpression of inducible nitric oxide synthase and cyclooxygenase 2, leading to the decrease in nitric oxide and prostaglandin E2 production, respectively.
Paeonol also suppressed LPS-induced phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase and Jun N-terminal kinase.
In addition, LPS-stimulated NADPH oxidase activation and reactive oxygen species production were attenuated by paeonol.
Paeonol-induced upregulation of heme oxygenase 1 was also observed.
Moreover, paeonol attenuated LPS-treated microglia culture medium-induced neuron cells death.
Posttreatment with paeonol also reduced inflammatory responses in LPS-activated microglia and increased cell viability in LPS-treated microglia culture medium-treated neurons.
Furthermore, in 6-hydroxydopamine-treated cortical neurons, paeonol not only decreased reactive oxygen species production but also increased cell viability, superoxide dismutase activity, and the antiapoptotic protein B-cell lymphoma 2 expression.
Taken together, the present results suggest that paeonol might be a potential neuroprotective agent via inhibiting microglia-mediated inflammation and oxidative stress-induced neuronal damage.
PMID: 22087832
Immunophilin dysfunction and neuropathology.
In case of nervous damages, like nervous system trauma or various neurodegenerative diseases such as dementia or Parkinson, several treatments are available to restore neurological function.
In spite of these treatments, results are often insufficient or not satisfactory in many neurologic diseases, especially for central nervous system (CNS) lesions.
To minimize neurological dysfunction, it is critical to reduce neuronal death, avoiding loss of the synaptic connections, and securing viable neurons to extend axons.
Unfortunately, there are no effective strategies to fulfill these basic needs except for some cases of peripheral neural damage up to now.
Rescue of damaged neurons, stimulation of neurogenesis and transplantation of nervous tissue are strategies proposed to prevent neurodegenerative disorders.
A number of studies have recently reported successful axon regeneration and neurological recovery by using immunosuppressants, such as FK506.
Immunosuppressants act as excellent agents for enhancing the rate and extent of axon regeneration and neurological recovery.
FK506 and other neuroimmunophilin ligands (NILs) might reverse neuronal degeneration.
In several animal models mimicking Parkinson's disease, dementia and surgical damage, NILs induces resprouting, by acting as neurotrophic agents and preventing nerve damage, although more studies are necessary to identify new NILs with neuroprotective action, but lacking the side immunological effects observed in the ligands analyzed to date.
This review explores the new clinical role of immunosuppressants in the treatment of nerve surgery of autologous, allografts or xenografts.
Results of studies regarding immunosuppressant treatment of nervous system trauma and neurodegenerative diseases, like neurogenic erectile dysfunction, will be here considered.
PMID: 22086882
No association between Parkinson disease alleles and the risk of melanoma.
Recent data showed that melanoma was more common among patients with Parkinson disease than individuals without Parkinson disease and vice versa.
It has been hypothesized that these two diseases may share common genetic and environmental risk factors.
We evaluated the association between single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) selected on the basis of recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) on Parkinson disease risk and the risk of melanoma using 2,297 melanoma cases and 6,651 controls.
The Parkinson disease SNP rs156429 in the chromosome 7p15 region was nominally associated with melanoma risk with P value of 0.04, which was not significant after the Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons.
No association was observed between the remaining 31 Parkinson disease SNPs and the risk of melanoma.
The genetic score based on the number of Parkinson disease risk allele was not associated with melanoma risk [OR for the highest genetic score quartile (30-35) vs.
the lowest (15-20), 1.13, 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.47-2.70].
The Parkinson disease SNPs identified in published GWAS do not seem to play an important role in melanoma development.
The Parkinson disease susceptibility loci discovered by GWAS contribute little to the observed epidemiologic association between the Parkinson disease and melanoma.
PMID: 22086726
Primary and secondary drug screening assays for friedreich ataxia.
Friedreich ataxia (FRDA) is an autosomal recessive neuro- and cardiodegenerative disorder for which there are no proven effective treatments.
FRDA is caused by decreased expression and/or function of the protein frataxin.
Frataxin chaperones iron in the mitochondrial matrix for the assembly of iron-sulfur clusters (ISCs), which are prosthetic groups critical for the function of the Krebs cycle and the mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC).
Decreased expression of frataxin or the yeast frataxin orthologue, Yfh1p, is associated with decreased ISC assembly, mitochondrial iron accumulation, and increased oxidative stress, all of which contribute to mitochondrial dysfunction.
Using yeast depleted of Yfh1p, a high-throughput screening (HTS) assay was developed in which mitochondrial function was monitored by reduction of the tetrazolium dye WST-1 in a growth medium with a respiration-only carbon source.
Of 101 200 compounds screened, 302 were identified that effectively rescue mitochondrial function.
To confirm activities in mammalian cells and begin understanding mechanisms of action, secondary screening assays were developed using murine C2C12 cells and yeast mutants lacking specific complexes of the ETC, respectively.
The compounds identified in this study have potential relevance for other neurodegenerative disorders associated with mitochondrial dysfunction, such as Parkinson disease.
PMID: 22086428
[Awareness of dysphagia in Parkinson's disease].
In order to be able to assess the level of awareness of swallowing disorders in Parkinson's disease (PD), a specific questionnaire was designed and validated: the Dysphapark questionnaire.
A total of 470 persons with PD were asked whether they believe they have problems swallowing or not, and then they filled in a self-administered questionnaire that evaluates the effectiveness and safety of swallowing.
The Dysphapark questionnaire was validated by means of Rasch analysis and classical psychometric methods.
The safety and effectiveness dimensions of the Dysphapark fit the Rasch model well.
The efficacy dimension showed significant differences for gender, length of the illness, awareness of dysphagia and length of meals.
Significant differences were also found in the safety dimension for length and severity of illness, awareness of dysphagia, speech therapy and knowledge of thickening agents.
Despite the fact that 90% of patients had problems concerning effectiveness and safety in swallowing, 79.45% were not aware that they suffered from dysphagia.
The Dysphapark questionnaire is a suitable measure of dysphagia in PD, according to the Rasch analysis.
A high proportion of patients with PD have dysphagia, although it has been observed that they have a low level of awareness of the condition, of the consequences it may have and of the possibility of using thickening agents.
Given that some of the swallowing disorders in PD are asymptomatic and that the level of awareness of the disorder is low, we recommend including specific questionnaires as well as clinical and instrumental evaluation of dysphagia in clinical practice.
PMID: 22086220
Neuropsychiatric profiles in dementia.
We compared patterns of neuropsychiatric symptoms across 4 dementia types [Alzheimer disease (AD), vascular dementia (VAD), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), and Parkinson disease dementia], and 2 mixed groups (AD/VAD and AD/DLB) in sample of 2,963 individuals from the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center Uniform Data Set between September 2005 and June 2008.
We used confirmatory factor analysis to compare neuropsychiatric symptom severity ratings made by collateral sources on the Neuropsychiatric Inventory Questionnaire for people with Clinical Dementia Rating scores of 1 or higher.
A 3-factor model of psychiatric symptoms (mood, psychotic, and frontal) was shared across all dementia types.
Between-group comparisons revealed unique neuropsychiatric profiles by dementia type.
The AD group had moderate levels of mood, psychotic, and frontal symptoms whereas VAD exhibited the highest levels and Parkinson disease dementia had the lowest levels.
DLB and the mixed dementias had more complex symptom profiles.
Depressed mood was the dominant symptom in people with mild diagnoses.
Differing psychiatric symptom profiles provide useful information regarding the noncognitive symptoms of dementia.
PMID: 22085607
Manganese accumulation in nail clippings as a biomarker of welding fume exposure and neurotoxicity.
Occupational exposure to welding fumes (WF) is thought to cause Parkinson's disease (PD)-like neurological dysfunction.
An apprehension that WF may accelerate the onset of PD also exists.
Identifying reliable biomarkers of exposure and neurotoxicity are therefore critical for biomonitoring and neurological risk characterization of WF exposure.
Manganese (Mn) in welding consumables is considered the causative factor for the neurological deficits seen in welders.
Hence, we sought to determine if Mn accumulation in blood or nail clippings can be a marker for adverse exposure and neurotoxicity.
To model this, rats were exposed by intratracheal instillation to dissolved or suspended fume components collected from gas metal arc-mild steel (GMA-MS) or manual metal arc-hard surfacing (MMA-HS) welding.
Trace element analysis revealed selective Mn accumulation in dopaminergic brain areas, striatum (STR) and midbrain (MB), following exposure to the two fumes.
This caused dopaminergic abnormality as evidenced by loss of striatal tyrosine hydroxylase (Th; 25-32% decrease) and Parkinson disease (autosomal recessive, early onset) 7 (Park7; 25-46% decrease) proteins.
While blood Mn was not detectable, Mn levels in nails strongly correlated with the pattern of Mn accumulation in the striatum (R(2)=0.9386) and midbrain (R(2)=0.9332).
Exposure to manganese chloride (MnCl(2)) caused similar Mn accumulation in STR, MB and nail.
Our findings suggest that nail Mn has the potential to be a sensitive and reliable biomarker for long-term Mn exposure and associated neurotoxicity.
The non-invasive means by which nail clippings can be collected, stored, and transported with relative ease, make it an attractive surrogate for biomonitoring WF exposures in occupational settings.
PMID: 22085464
Neuromelanin is an immune stimulator for dendritic cells in vitro.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized at the cellular level by a destruction of neuromelanin (NM)-containing dopaminergic cells and a profound reduction in striatal dopamine.
It has been shown recently that anti-melanin antibodies are increased in sera of Parkinson patients, suggesting that NM may act as an autoantigen.
In this study we tested whether NM is being recognized by dendritic cells (DCs), the major cell type for inducing T- and B-cell responses in vivo.
This recognition of NM by DCs is a prerequisite to trigger an adaptive autoimmune response directed against NM-associated structures.
Murine DCs were treated with NM of substantia nigra (SN) from human subjects or with synthetic dopamine melanin (DAM).
DCs effectively phagocytized NM and subsequently developed a mature phenotype (CD86(high)/MHCII(high)).
NM-activated DCs secreted the proinflammatory cytokines IL-6 and TNF-α.
In addition, they potently triggered T cell proliferation in a mixed lymphocyte reaction, showing that DC activation was functional to induce a primary T cell response.
In contrast, DAM, which lacks the protein and lipid components of NM but mimics the dopamine-melanin backbone of NM, had only very little effect on DC phenotype and function.
NM is recognized by DCs in vitro and triggers their maturation.
If operative in vivo, this would allow the DC-mediated transport and presentation of SN antigens to the adaptive immune system, leading to autoimmmunity in susceptible individuals.
Our data provide a rationale for an autoimmune-based pathomechanism of PD with NM as the initial trigger.
PMID: 22083847
Solvent exposures and parkinson disease risk in twins.
OBJECTIVE: Several case reports have linked solvent exposure to Parkinson disease (PD), but few studies have assessed associations with specific agents using an analytic epidemiologic design.
We tested the hypothesis that exposure to specific solvents is associated with PD risk using a discordant twin pair design.
METHODS: Ninety-nine twin pairs discordant for PD ascertained from the National Academy of Sciences/National Research Council World War II Veteran Twins Cohort were interviewed regarding lifetime occupations and hobbies using detailed job task-specific questionnaires.
Exposures to 6 specific solvents selected a priori were estimated by expert raters unaware of case status.
RESULTS: Ever exposure to trichloroethylene (TCE) was associated with significantly increased risk of PD (odds ratio [OR], 6.1; 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.2-33; p = 0.034), and exposure to perchloroethylene (PERC) and carbon tetrachloride (CCl(4) ) tended toward significance (respectively: OR, 10.5; 95% CI, 0.97-113; p = 0.053; OR, 2.3; 95% CI, 0.9-6.1; p = 0.088).
Results were similar for estimates of exposure duration and cumulative lifetime exposure.
INTERPRETATION: Exposure to specific solvents may increase risk of PD.
TCE is the most common organic contaminant in groundwater, and PERC and CCl(4) are also ubiquitous in the environment.
Our findings require replication in other populations with well-characterized exposures, but the potential public health implications are substantial.
ANN NEUROL 2011.
PMID: 22081675
Structural brain abnormalities in patients with Parkinson disease: a comparative voxel-based analysis using T1-weighted MR imaging and magnetization transfer imaging.
In PD, tissue damage occurs in specific cortical and subcortical regions.
Conventional MR images have only limited capacity to depict these structural changes.
The purpose of the current study was to investigate whether voxel-based MT imaging could indicate structural abnormalities beyond atrophy measurable with T1-weighted MR imaging.
Thirty-six patients with PD without dementia (9 in H&Y stage 1, thirteen in H&Y 2, eleven in H&Y 3, three in H&Y 4) and 23 age-matched control subjects were studied with T1-weighted MR imaging and MT imaging.
Voxel-based analyses of T1-weighted MR imaging was performed to investigate brain atrophy, while MT imaging was used to study abnormalities within existing tissue.
Modulated GM and WM probability maps, sensitive to volume, and nonmodulated maps, indicative of tissue density, were obtained from T1-weighted MR imaging.
Effects seen on MTR images, but absent on density maps, were attributed to damage of existing tissue.
Contrary to T1-weighted MR imaging, MT imaging was sensitive to the progression of brain pathology of the neocortex and paraventricular WM.
MTR images and T1-based volume images, but not density images, showed a progression of disease in the olfactory cortex, indicating the occurrence of atrophy as well as damage to existing tissue in this region.
MTR images revealed bilateral damage to the SN, while T1-weighted MR imaging only showed left-sided abnormalities.
The findings suggest that voxel-based MT imaging permits a whole-brain unbiased investigation of CNS structural integrity in PD and may be a valuable tool for identifying structural damage occurring without or before measurable atrophy.
PMID: 22081612
Ataxin-3 deubiquitination is coupled to Parkin ubiquitination via E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme.
We reported previously that parkin, a Parkinson disease-associated E3 ubiquitin-ligase interacts with ataxin-3, a deubiquitinating enzyme associated with Machado-Joseph disease.
Ataxin-3 was found to counteract parkin self-ubiquitination both in vitro and in cells.
Moreover, ataxin-3-dependent deubiquitination of parkin required the catalytic cysteine 14 in ataxin-3, although the precise mechanism remained unclear.
We report here that ataxin-3 interferes with the attachment of ubiquitin (Ub) onto parkin in real-time during conjugation but is unable to hydrolyze previously assembled parkin-Ub conjugates.
The mechanism involves an ataxin-3-dependent stabilization of the complex between parkin and the E2 Ub-conjugating enzyme, which impedes the efficient charging of the E2 with Ub.
Moreover, within this complex, the transfer of Ub from the E2 is diverted away from parkin and onto ataxin-3, further explaining how ataxin-3 deubiquitination is coupled to parkin ubiquitination.
Taken together, our findings reveal an unexpected convergence upon the E2 Ub-conjugating enzyme in the regulation of an E3/deubiquitinating enzyme pair, with important implications for the function of parkin and ataxin-3, two proteins responsible for closely related neurodegenerative diseases.
PMID: 22080837
LRRK2 Parkinson disease mutations enhance its microtubule association.
Dominant missense mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most common genetic causes of Parkinson disease (PD) and genome-wide association studies identify LRRK2 sequence variants as risk factors for sporadic PD.
Intact kinase function appears critical for the toxicity of LRRK2 PD mutants, yet our understanding of how LRRK2 causes neurodegeneration remains limited.
We find that most LRRK2 PD mutants abnormally enhance LRRK2 oligomerization, causing it to form filamentous structures in transfections of cell lines or primary neuronal cultures.
Strikingly, ultrastructural analyses, including immuno-electron microscopy and electron microscopic tomography, demonstrate that these filaments consist of LRRK2 recruited onto part of the cellular microtubule network in a well-ordered, periodic fashion.
Like LRRK2-related neurodegeneration, microtubule association requires intact kinase function and the WD40 domain, potentially linking microtubule binding and neurodegeneration.
Our observations identify a novel effect of LRRK2 PD mutations and highlight a potential role for microtubules in the pathogenesis of LRRK2-related neurodegeneration.
PMID: 22080197
[Deep brain stimulation - expectations and doubts : A nationwide questionnaire study of patients with Parkinson's disease and their family members.]
BACKGROUND: The aim of this questionnaire-based study was to determine the decision-making motives from Parkinson's patients and their family members for deep brain stimulation (DBS), which are crucial for the attitude towards this therapy and which should be considered during the clinical interview.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The questionnaire was sent out nationwide to members of the German Parkinson Association.
Patient and family specific data as well as information sources, doubts and expectations with respect to DBS were assessed.
RESULTS: A total of 582 patients and 476 family members answered the questionnaire, revealing that 96% of the patients and 91% of the family members already possessed information regarding DBS.
While a large proportion of interviewees had specific expectations concerning DBS, more than two thirds expressed concerns regarding DBS; the most frequent with respect to intraoperative complications and stimulation-induced worsening of symptoms.
The quantity of realistic patients and family expectations significantly correlated with a positive evaluation of DBS and doubts as well as unrealistic expectations of family members correlated with a negative attitude towards the operation.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest that patients and their relatives organized in support groups indeed possess detailed information regarding DBS.
However, for the acceptance of the treatment a timely elucidation about DBS as well as responding to the individual concerns by the consulting physician is essential.
PMID: 22078885
PINK1 and Parkin target Miro for phosphorylation and degradation to arrest mitochondrial motility.
Cells keep their energy balance and avoid oxidative stress by regulating mitochondrial movement, distribution, and clearance.
We report here that two Parkinson's disease proteins, the Ser/Thr kinase PINK1 and ubiquitin ligase Parkin, participate in this regulation by arresting mitochondrial movement.
PINK1 phosphorylates Miro, a component of the primary motor/adaptor complex that anchors kinesin to the mitochondrial surface.
The phosphorylation of Miro activates proteasomal degradation of Miro in a Parkin-dependent manner.
Removal of Miro from the mitochondrion also detaches kinesin from its surface.
By preventing mitochondrial movement, the PINK1/Parkin pathway may quarantine damaged mitochondria prior to their clearance.
PINK1 has been shown to act upstream of Parkin, but the mechanism corresponding to this relationship has not been known.
We propose that PINK1 phosphorylation of substrates triggers the subsequent action of Parkin and the proteasome.
PMID: 22078875
Autophagy: renovation of cells and tissues.
Autophagy is the major intracellular degradation system by which cytoplasmic materials are delivered to and degraded in the lysosome.
However, the purpose of autophagy is not the simple elimination of materials, but instead, autophagy serves as a dynamic recycling system that produces new building blocks and energy for cellular renovation and homeostasis.
Here we provide a multidisciplinary review of our current understanding of autophagy's role in metabolic adaptation, intracellular quality control, and renovation during development and differentiation.
We also explore how recent mouse models in combination with advances in human genetics are providing key insights into how the impairment or activation of autophagy contributes to pathogenesis of diverse diseases, from neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson disease to inflammatory disorders such as Crohn disease.
PMID: 22077446
Using imaging to identify psychogenic parkinsonism before deep brain stimulation surgery. Report of 2 cases.
The frequency with which patients with atypical parkinsonism and advanced motor symptoms undergo deep brain stimulation (DBS) procedures is unknown.
However, the potential exposure of these patients to unnecessary surgical risks makes their identification critical.
As many as 15% of patients enrolled in recent early Parkinson disease (PD) trials have been found to lack evidence of a dopaminergic deficit following PET or SPECT imaging.
This suggests that a number of patients with parkinsonism who are referred for DBS may not have idiopathic PD.
The authors report on 2 patients with probable psychogenic parkinsonism who presented for DBS surgery.
They found that both patients had normal caudate and putamen [(18)F]-fluorodopa uptake on PET imaging, along with normal expression of specific disease-related metabolic networks for PD and multiple system atrophy, a common form of atypical neurodegenerative parkinsonism.
The clinical and PET findings in these patients highlight the role of functional imaging in assisting clinical decision making when the diagnosis is uncertain.
PMID: 22076545
Not all that goes "bump in the night" is RLS: leg motor restlessness in PD.
PMID: 22076542
Increased risk of leg motor restlessness but not RLS in early Parkinson disease.
This study explores the risk and correlates of leg restlessness in drug-naive patients with Parkinson disease (PD) as compared to control subjects matched for age and gender.
A total of 200 drug-naive patients with early, unmedicated PD derived from a population-based incident cohort and 173 age- and gender-matched control subjects were assessed for leg restlessness by structured interviews, clinical examination, and blood samples.
All subjects were Caucasian.
Restless legs syndrome (RLS) was diagnosed according to the essential diagnostic criteria.
More patients (81 of 200, 40.5%) than controls (31 of 173, 17.9%) reported leg restlessness (p < 0.001).
Thirty-one (15.5%) of these patients with PD and 16 (9.2%) control subjects met RLS criteria (p = 0.07).
A total of 21 (12.5%) patients and 12 (6.9%) controls with RLS remained after the exclusion of potential RLS mimics and 26 patients vs 10 control subjects with leg motor restlessness (LMR), leading to a relative risk for RLS of 1.76 (95% confidence interval [CI] 0.90-3.43, p = 0.089) and 2.84 for LMR (95% CI 1.43-5.61, p = 0.001) in PD.
Except for increased sleep disturbances in patients with RLS and increased Montgomery and Åsberg Depression Rating Scale scores for patients with RLS or LMR there were no other major differences in relevant blood tests, motor or cognitive function between PD with and without RLS or LMR.
LMR and not RLS occurs with a near 3-fold higher risk as compared to controls in early PD.
The findings underline a need for more accurate assessments of RLS in PD and support the notion that RLS and PD are different entities.
PMID: 22075521
Longitudinal evolution of compensatory changes in striatal dopamine processing in Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease is a relentlessly progressive neurodegenerative disease.
Breakdown of compensatory mechanisms influencing putaminal dopamine processing could contribute to the progressive motor symptoms.
We studied a cohort of 78 subjects (at baseline) with sporadic Parkinson's disease and 35 healthy controls with multi-tracer positron emission tomography scans to investigate the evolution of adaptive mechanisms influencing striatal dopamine processing in Parkinson's disease progression.
Presynaptic dopaminergic integrity was assessed with three radioligands: (i) [(11)C](±)dihydrotetrabenazine, to estimate the density of vesicular monoamine transporter type 2; (ii) [(11)C]d-threo-methylphenidate, to label the dopamine transporter; and (iii) 6-[(18)F]fluoro-L-DOPA, to assess the activity of aromatic amino acid decarboxylase and storage of 6-[(18)F]-fluorodopamine in synaptic vesicles.
The subjects with Parkinson's disease and the healthy controls underwent positron emission tomography scans at the initial visit and after 4 and 8 years of follow-up.
Non-linear multivariate regression analyses with random effects were utilized to model the longitudinal changes in tracer values in the putamen standardized relative to normal controls.
We found evidence for possible upregulation of dopamine synthesis and downregulation of dopamine transporter in the more severely affected putamen in the early stage of Parkinson's disease.
The standardized 6-[(18)F]fluoro-L-DOPA and [(11)C]d-threo-methylphenidate values tended to approach [(11)C](±)dihydrotetrabenazine values in the putamen in later stages of disease (i.e.
for [(11)C](±)dihydrotetrabenazine values <25% of normal), when the rates of decline in the positron emission tomography measurements were similar for all the markers.
Our data suggest that compensatory mechanisms decline as Parkinson's disease progresses.
This breakdown of compensatory strategies in the putamen could contribute to the progression of motor symptoms in advanced disease.
PMID: 22075520
The proliferative capacity of the subventricular zone is maintained in the parkinsonian brain.
There are many indications that neurogenesis is impaired in Parkinson's disease, which might be due to a lack of dopamine in the subventricular zone.
An impairment in neurogenesis may have negative consequences for the development of new therapeutic approaches in Parkinson's disease, as neural stem cells are a potential source for endogenous repair.
In this study, we examined the subventricular zone of 10 patients with Parkinson's disease and 10 age- and sex-matched controls for proliferation and neural stem cell numbers.
We also included five cases with incidental Lewy body disease, which showed Parkinson's disease pathology but no clinical symptoms and thus did not receive dopaminergic treatment.
We quantified the neural stem cell number and proliferative capacity in the subventricular zone of these three donor groups.
We found subventricular neural stem cells in each donor, with a high variation in number.
We did not observe significant differences in neural stem cell number or in proliferation between the groups.
Additionally, we were able to culture neural stem cells from post-mortem brain of several patients with Parkinson's disease, confirming the presence of viable neural stem cells in these brains.
We have also examined the subventricular zone of a chronic, 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine-induced Parkinson's disease mouse model, and again found no effect of dopaminergic denervation on precursor proliferation.
Lastly, we investigated the proliferation capacity of two different human neural stem cell lines in response to dopamine.
Both cell lines did not respond with a change in proliferation to treatment with dopamine agonists and an antagonist.
In summary, the adult neural stem cell pool in the subventricular zone was not clearly affected in the human parkinsonian brain or a Parkinson's disease mouse model.
Furthermore, we did not find evidence that dopamine has a direct effect on human neural stem cell proliferation in vitro.
Thus, we conclude that the number of adult neural stem cells is probably not diminished in the parkinsonian brain and that dopamine depletion most likely has no effect on human neural stem cells.
PMID: 22074992
Sudden death associated with danon disease in women.
Danon disease is an X-linked systemic disorder characterized by left ventricular hypertrophy, mental retardation, and skeletal myopathy affecting young men.
Electrocardiogram usually displays a Wolff-Parkinson-White preexcitation pattern.
Less has been reported about the phenotype in women, although later-onset cardiac symptoms have been described.
The aim of this study was to expand the knowledge of the phenotype of Danon disease in women.
We clinically followed and evaluated with echocardiography, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI), and genetic testing a family affected by Danon disease in which 2 men and 6 women showed a severe arrhythmogenic phenotype.
Affected family members carried a nucleotide substitution at position 294 in exon 3 (c.294 G → A) that changed a tryptophan residue to a stop codon at position W98X in the lysosome-associated membrane protein 2 (LAMP2) gene.
Four women died suddenly (1 aborted) at 37 to 54 years of age.
Wolff-Parkinson-White pattern with atrioventricular block was detected in 2 of 6 women.
Four had successful pregnancies without symptoms of heart failure.
cMRI showed late gadolinium enhancement areas in a clinically healthy woman who was a mutation carrier.
Two patients underwent heart transplantation; histology of explanted hearts demonstrated severe interstitial fibrosis, hypertrophic cardiomyocytes with cytoplasmic vacuoles, and myofibrillar disarray.
In conclusion, LAMP2 mutation can cause a severe arrhythmogenic phenotype in women that includes a high risk of sudden death.
cMRI may be useful in women harboring LAMP2 mutations to permit early detection of cardiac involvement and guide timely considerations of implantable cardioverter-defibrillator therapy.
Heart transplantation should be considered at onset of heart failure symptoms owing to rapid progression of the disease.
PMID: 22074315
Quantification and recognition of parkinsonian gait from monocular video imaging using kernel-based principal component analysis.
The computer-aided identification of specific gait patterns is an important issue in the assessment of Parkinson's disease (PD).
In this study, a computer vision-based gait analysis approach is developed to assist the clinical assessments of PD with kernel-based principal component analysis (KPCA).
Twelve PD patients and twelve healthy adults with no neurological history or motor disorders within the past six months were recruited and separated according to their "Non-PD", "Drug-On", and "Drug-Off" states.
The participants were asked to wear light-colored clothing and perform three walking trials through a corridor decorated with a navy curtain at their natural pace.
The participants' gait performance during the steady-state walking period was captured by a digital camera for gait analysis.
The collected walking image frames were then transformed into binary silhouettes for noise reduction and compression.
Using the developed KPCA-based method, the features within the binary silhouettes can be extracted to quantitatively determine the gait cycle time, stride length, walking velocity, and cadence.
The KPCA-based method uses a feature-extraction approach, which was verified to be more effective than traditional image area and principal component analysis (PCA) approaches in classifying "Non-PD" controls and "Drug-Off/On" PD patients.
Encouragingly, this method has a high accuracy rate, 80.51%, for recognizing different gaits.
Quantitative gait parameters are obtained, and the power spectrums of the patients' gaits are analyzed.
We show that that the slow and irregular actions of PD patients during walking tend to transfer some of the power from the main lobe frequency to a lower frequency band.
Our results indicate the feasibility of using gait performance to evaluate the motor function of patients with PD.
This KPCA-based method requires only a digital camera and a decorated corridor setup.
The ease of use and installation of the current method provides clinicians and researchers a low cost solution to monitor the progression of and the treatment to PD.
In summary, the proposed method provides an alternative to perform gait analysis for patients with PD.
PMID: 22072682
Real-time functional magnetic resonance imaging neurofeedback for treatment of Parkinson's disease.
Self-regulation of brain activity in humans based on real-time feedback of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) signal is emerging as a potentially powerful, new technique.
Here, we assessed whether patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) are able to alter local brain activity to improve motor function.
Five patients learned to increase activity in the supplementary motor complex over two fMRI sessions using motor imagery.
They attained as much activation in this target brain region as during a localizer procedure with overt movements.
Concomitantly, they showed an improvement in motor speed (finger tapping) and clinical ratings of motor symptoms (37% improvement of the motor scale of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale).
Activation during neurofeedback was also observed in other cortical motor areas and the basal ganglia, including the subthalamic nucleus and globus pallidus, which are connected to the supplementary motor area (SMA) and crucial nodes in the pathophysiology of PD.
A PD control group of five patients, matched for clinical severity and medication, underwent the same procedure but did not receive feedback about their SMA activity.
This group attained no control of SMA activation and showed no motor improvement.
These findings demonstrate that self-modulation of cortico-subcortical motor circuits can be achieved by PD patients through neurofeedback and may result in clinical benefits that are not attainable by motor imagery alone.
PMID: 22072662
Thalamic contributions to Basal Ganglia-related behavioral switching and reinforcement.
Although the existence of prominent connections between the intralaminar thalamic nuclei and the basal ganglia has long been established, the limited knowledge of the functional relevance of this network has considerably hampered progress in our understanding of the neural mechanisms by which the thalamostriatal system integrates and regulates the basal ganglia circuitry.
In this brief commentary, we will address this gap of knowledge through a discussion of the key points of a symposium entitled "Thalamic Contributions to Basal Ganglia-Related Behavioral Switching and Reinforcement" that will be presented at the 2011 Society for Neuroscience meeting.
Recent anatomical and physiological data that support the role of the thalamostriatal system in action selection, attentional shifting, and reinforcement will be discussed.
We will also address the possibility that degeneration of the thalamostriatal system could underlie some of the deficits in redirection of attention in response to salient stimuli seen in Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 22068482
[Translation and linguistic validation of the Japanese version of the wearing-off questionnaires(WOQ-19 and WOQ-9)].
Levodopa remains the most effective drug for the treatment of Parkinson disease (PD).
Long-term levodopa treatment of PD is associated with the development of motor complications, the first of which to occur is the wearing-off phenomenon.
In routine clinical practice, poor patient education, communication difficulties, and lack of awareness often hamper detection of the wearing-off phenomenon.
Failure to recognize wearing-off may lead to incorrect therapeutic dicision-making and/or decline in the patient's quality of life.
In order to develop a Japanese version of the 19-symptom and 9-symptom Wearing-off Questionnaires (WOQ-19 and WOQ-9), a linguistic validation was performed to validate the translated version according to the internationally recognized procedure.
Forward translation was made independently by 2 Japanese translators with medical knowledge.
The Japanese translations were consolidated and revised by the authors into the Japanese draft version.
The Japanese draft version was modified into the Japanese final draft by reference to the results of PD patients' surveys.
The Japanese final draft was back-translated into English by 2 native translators, and negotiated with the original developers.
We thus developed a linguistically validated Japanese version of the WOQ-19 and the WOQ-9.
(Received: February 3, 2011, Accepted: March 29, 2011).
PMID: 22067963
Parkinson disease: the enteric nervous system spills its guts.
Lewy pathology in Parkinson disease (PD) extends well beyond the CNS, also affecting peripheral autonomic neuronal circuits, especially the enteric nervous system (ENS).
The ENS is an integrative neuronal network also referred to as "the brain in the gut" because of its similarities to the CNS.
We have recently shown that the ENS can be readily analyzed using routine colonic biopsies.
This led us to propose that the ENS could represent a unique window to assess the neuropathology in living patients with PD.
In this perspective, we discuss current evidence which indicates that the presence of ENS pathology may by exploited to improve our understanding and management of PD and likely other neurodegenerative disorders.
PMID: 22067166
Distinct hydration properties of wild-type and familial point mutant A53T of α-synuclein associated with Parkinson's disease.
The propensity of α-synuclein to form amyloid plays an important role in Parkinson's disease.
Three familial mutations, A30P, E46K, and A53T, correlate with Parkinson's disease.
Therefore, unraveling the structural effects of these mutations has basic implications in understanding the molecular basis of the disease.
Here, we address this issue through comparing details of the hydration of wild-type α-synuclein and its A53T mutant by a combination of wide-line NMR, differential scanning calorimetry, and molecular dynamics simulations.
All three approaches suggest a hydrate shell compatible with a largely disordered state of both proteins.
Its fine details, however, are different, with the mutant displaying a somewhat higher level of hydration, suggesting a bias to more open structures, favorable for protein-protein interactions leading to amyloid formation.
These differences disappear in the amyloid state, suggesting basically the same surface topology, irrespective of the initial monomeric state.
PMID: 22065755
α-Synuclein fate is determined by USP9X-regulated monoubiquitination.
α-Synuclein is central to the pathogenesis of Parkinson disease (PD).
Mutations as well as accumulation of α-synuclein promote the death of dopaminergic neurons and the formation of Lewy bodies.
α-Synuclein is monoubiquitinated by SIAH, but the regulation and roles of monoubiquitination in α-synuclein biology are poorly understood.
We now report that the deubiquitinase USP9X interacts in vivo with and deubiquitinates α-synuclein.
USP9X levels are significantly lower in cytosolic fractions of PD substantia nigra and Diffuse Lewy Body disease (DLBD) cortices compared to controls.
This was associated to lower deubiquitinase activity toward monoubiquitinated α-synuclein in DLBD cortical extracts.
A fraction of USP9X seems to be aggregated in PD and DLBD, as USP9X immunoreactivity is detected in Lewy bodies.
Knockdown of USP9X expression promotes accumulation of monoubiquitinated α-synuclein species and enhances the formation of toxic α-synuclein inclusions upon proteolytic inhibition.
On the other hand, by manipulating USP9X expression levels in the absence of proteolytic impairment, we demonstrate that monoubiquitination controls the partition of α-synuclein between different protein degradation systems.
Deubiquitinated α-synuclein is mostly degraded by autophagy, while monoubiquitinated α-synuclein is preferentially degraded by the proteasome.
Moreover, monoubiquitination promotes the degradation of α-synuclein, whereas deubiquitination leads to its accumulation, suggesting that the degradation of deubiquitinated α-synuclein by the autophagy pathway is less efficient than the proteasomal one.
Lower levels of cytosolic USP9X and deubiquitinase activity in α-synucleinopathies may contribute to the accumulation and aggregation of monoubiquitinated α-synuclein in Lewy bodies.
Our data indicate that monoubiquitination is a key determinant of α-synuclein fate.
PMID: 22065209
CSF biomarkers in different phenotypes of Parkinson disease.
CSF biomarker studies were performed in 6 patients each with tremor-dominant (TD) and non-tremor-dominant (NT) Parkinson disease (PD) patients, 27 Alzheimer disease (AD) and 17 age-matched controls.
In both NT-PD and AD patients total tau levels and the cortex tau/Aβ-42 were significantly increased compared to both TD-PD patients and controls (p < 0.01).
These data in a small cohort confirm previous studies, corroborating the opinion that CSF levels of tau protein and the index total-tau/Aβ-42 may be potential markers of the severity of neurodegeneration in PD.
PMID: 22064864
Gene Expression Atlas update--a value-added database of microarray and sequencing-based functional genomics experiments.
Gene Expression Atlas (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/gxa) is an added-value database providing information about gene expression in different cell types, organism parts, developmental stages, disease states, sample treatments and other biological/experimental conditions.
The content of this database derives from curation, re-annotation and statistical analysis of selected data from the ArrayExpress Archive and the European Nucleotide Archive.
A simple interface allows the user to query for differential gene expression either by gene names or attributes or by biological conditions, e.g.
diseases, organism parts or cell types.
Since our previous report we made 20 monthly releases and, as of Release 11.08 (August 2011), the database supports 19 species, which contains expression data measured for 19,014 biological conditions in 136,551 assays from 5598 independent studies.
PMID: 22064613
Psychometric properties of the starkstein apathy scale in patients with early untreated Parkinson disease.
: Although the 14-item Starkstein Apathy Scale (SAS) is recommended to screen for and measure the severity of apathetic symptoms in Parkinson disease (PD), the psychometric attributes of this scale have not yet been fully evaluated.
: The authors examined the reliability, factor structure, and discriminant validity of the SAS in 194 nondemented patients with early untreated PD.
: Cross-sectional multicenter population-based study from Western and Southern Norway.
: Standardized rating scales for parkinsonism and neuropsychiatric symptoms.
: The SAS showed fair internal consistency (Cronbach's α = 0.69) and exploratory factor analysis identified two factors: the first factor (24.2% of the variance) represented cognitive-behavioral aspects of apathy (items 1, 2, and 4-8; Cronbach's α = 0.74) and the second factor (15.0% of the variance) a general apathy dimension (items 3 and 9-14; Cronbach's α = 0.52).
The correlation between these two factors was low (Spearman's r = 0.19, N = 194, p = 0.008), indicating clinically distinct dimensions, but both factor scores were strongly related to the total SAS score (Spearman's r > 0.6, N = 194, p < 0.0005).
Item 3 (insight or self-reflection) showed a negative item-total correlation, and removing this item raised the Cronbach's α of the second factor to 0.70, but did not substantially alter the other results.
Both the total score and factor scores of SAS showed fair discriminant validity.
: Although the SAS showed fairly good psychometric properties and the exploratory factor analysis suggested a two-factor solution, the results with this PD sample indicate that item 3 is ambiguous and should be considered removed from the scale.
PMID: 22045328
Nonmotor disorders and their correlation with dopamine: can they be treated by currently available methods?
Many of the nonmotor symptoms in Parkinson disease have a dopaminergic basis, whether the result of dopaminergic degeneration or as a result of dopaminergic treatment.
In the latter case, the symptoms may be genuine side effects of drugs (hypotension, pathologic gambling, etc.) or they may be secondary either to the pathoplastic effect they have on the natural course of the disease (nonmotor fluctuations) or to the lack of dopamine (apathy, depression, dopamine withdrawal syndrome, etc.).
In all these cases, dopaminergic treatment can be helpful.
However, many other nonmotor (and motor) symptoms will have no correlation with dopamine; therefore, they require different treatments, very often with little efficacy, as in apathy or cognitive decline.
PMID: 22045327
Neuroprotective role of dopamine agonists: evidence from animal models and clinical studies.
Parkinson disease is a progressive neurodegenerative disease that affects, among other neurotransmitter systems, the nigrostriatal dopaminergic projection.
Palliative treatment with levodopa and/or dopamine agonists improves motor symptoms even though patients continue to get clinically worse by the neurodegenerative process that continues to act as the major factor of physiological aging.
Studies (in vitro and in vivo) with experimental models have shown that dopamine agonists have neuroprotective effects, directly or indirectly mediated by their ability to stabilize mitochondria, antioxidant effects, synthesis of growth factors, stabilization of the ubiquitin-proteasome system, activation of autophagy, antiapoptotic induction of Bcl2 family, or enhancement of neurogenesis (proliferation and migration) in the subventricular zone.
Clinical studies have not completely confirmed these effects.
Analysis in better characterized groups of patients with similar clinical symptoms, identical treatments, and the same evolution time are required.
Technological advances which enable the learning of the etiology and the pathogenesis (genetic and environmental) of the disease, together with clinical assessment methods, bring hope to the development of new molecules in the symptomatic treatment of Parkinson disease.
These molecules must display neuroprotective potential (prophylactic and/or therapeutic) which must be able to maintain the brain's physiological function and to modify or slow the natural course of the disease.
PMID: 22045326
Exercise and physical therapy in early management of Parkinson disease.
Experimental research has produced evidence in recent years underlying the beneficial effects that exercise can have in preventing and deceleration of the development of Parkinson disease.
These beneficial effects are exerted through various mechanisms such as neuroprotection, neurotransmission, plasticity, neurogenesis, homeostasis, and neurotrophic factors.
Studies on clinical application at an early stage are still scarce, although some results are encouraging.
There are still many questions to determine the most suitable type of exercise (forced/voluntary), the time of its implementation, the duration, and the combination of strategies.
Nonconventional therapies can play an important role in addition to exercise, and are so numerous that they could be adapted to the circumstances of patients, although there is no evidence to date that they could have a neuroprotective effect.
PMID: 22045325
Treatment of Parkinson disease, time and dosage: "does simple dosage facilitate compliance and therapeutic goals?".
Current available treatment for Parkinson disease has many drawbacks: single action on the nigrostriatal pathway, no halt of disease progression, pulsatile dopaminergic stimulation, complex treatment regimens, and motor complications.
Compliance with treatment may be irregular in a variable number of patients.
Factors such as age, education, complexity of posology, stage of disease, disease comprehension, cognitive function, or family support significantly influence compliance either in a positive or negative way.
The consequences of noncompliance include withdrawal symptoms, increase in number of admissions, or, in severe cases, hyperthermia syndrome secondary to levodopa deficit in the case of infradose.
In situations of overdose, dyskinesia or psychiatric complications may arise.
The ideal treatment should have the potency of levodopa but not its side effects, act on striatal D2 receptors in a continuous way with a single dose and have low potential of addiction.
Thus far, simple regimens are only applicable in early stages.
PMID: 22045324
Sleep disorders in Parkinson disease.
Sleep is affected in a large number of patients with Parkinson disease.
The mechanisms by which this occurs and the different types of sleep disorders that a patient with Parkinson disease may suffer (insufficient or fragmented sleep, persistent excessive daytime sleepiness, sudden onset of sleep episodes, obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder, and restless legs syndrome) will be reviewed in this study, as well as their relationship with the dopaminergic system.
Finally, the most effective treatments will be proposed.
PMID: 22045322
Assessment of Parkinson disease: what do we need to show neuroprotection?
To date, no pharmacological agent has convincingly demonstrated the ability to slow the progression of Parkinson disease (PD).
The development of treatments that slow down the progressive degeneration of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic system (true neuroprotection), which is ultimately responsible for the patients' functional decline, has become one of the basic goals of PD research.
In this review, we have attempted to analyze the role of different methods that measure PD severity (basically, clinical scales, timed tests, and neuroimaging techniques) in the evaluation of the "neuroprotection" provided by different types of treatment for the disease, on the basis of clinical evidence.
PMID: 22045321
Dopamine receptors, motor responses, and dopaminergic agonists.
Dopamine receptors are widely distributed within the central nervous system with its highest expression in the striatum.
Two different families of dopamine receptors have been identified.
The D₁ family comprises D₁ and D5 receptors, whereas D₂, D₃, and D₄ receptors form the D₂ family.
These 2 families mediate different behavior patterns that are linked to activation of specific transduction pathways.
The functional relevance of dopamine receptors derives from the reduced dopamine content found in the striatum of Parkinson disease (PD) patients and the ability of dopamine and dopamine receptors to reverse the motor deficits exhibited by PD patients.
During the last 2 decades dopamine receptor agonists have been used either in de novo PD patients to prevent the appearance of dyskinesias or in PD patients with motor fluctuations to reduce the number of daily "off" hours.
It seems that all dopamine receptors agonists produce similar motor responses and adverse effects, but data comparing their effectiveness in the treatment of PD are not available.
In this article we summarize the main characteristics of dopamine receptors, their structure, their signaling pathways, and the responses mediated by their independent activation.
Here is also described the therapeutic value of the different dopamine receptor agonists in the treatment of PD.
PMID: 22045320
Initial motor symptoms of Parkinson disease.
Parkinson disease (PD) is characterized by a wide variety of motor and nonmotor symptoms.
Although recently nonmotor symptoms have gained considerable relevance and interest, especially in advanced stages, motor symptoms define the main core of PD and are essential for clinical diagnosis.
In this article, we review the characteristics, presentation, and evolution of motor symptoms in early PD.
PMID: 22045319
Editorial.
PMID: 22057400
Zoophilia and impulse control disorder in a patient with Parkinson disease.
PMID: 22057087
Oil based nanocarrier system for transdermal delivery of ropinirole: a mechanistic, pharmacokinetic and biochemical investigation.
Ropinirole, a recent introduction in the clinical treatment of Parkinson's disease, suffers with the problems of low oral bioavailability and frequent dosing.
An effective transdermal nano-emulsion drug delivery system can however resolve these issues effectively with greater therapeutic benefits and clinical significance.
Therefore, the present work focuses precisely on pharmacokinetic, biochemical and mechanistic assessment of transdermal nanoemulsion gel in rats induced with Parkinson lesioned brain by 6-OHDA.
DSC and FT-IR studies showed that NEG affects the normal lipid packing of stratum corneum to enhance the drug permeation.
Study of pharmacokinetic parameters (AUC, C(max), and T(max)) revealed a greater and more extended release of ropinirole from nanoemulsion gel compared to that from a conventional gel (RPG) and oral marketed tablet (Ropitor).
The AUC(0→∞) for RPCNG and RPTNG was found to be 928.07 ± 206.5 and 1055.99 ± 251.7 ngh/mL, respectively in comparison to 137.25 ± 31.3 and 467.15 ± 106.1 ngh/mL for RPG and oral tablet, respectively.
The relative bioavailability of ropinirole has been enhanced more than two fold by RPTNG.
Furthermore, antiparkinson activity was evaluated in terms of estimating the level of thiobarbituric acid reactive substances, glutathione antioxidant enzymes and catalase in lesioned brain of rats.
Formulations were also found to be non-toxic and non-irritant by histological investigations.
PMID: 22056989
Dopamine neurons derived from human ES cells efficiently engraft in animal models of Parkinson's disease.
Human pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) are a promising source of cells for applications in regenerative medicine.
Directed differentiation of PSCs into specialized cells such as spinal motoneurons or midbrain dopamine (DA) neurons has been achieved.
However, the effective use of PSCs for cell therapy has lagged behind.
Whereas mouse PSC-derived DA neurons have shown efficacy in models of Parkinson's disease, DA neurons from human PSCs generally show poor in vivo performance.
There are also considerable safety concerns for PSCs related to their potential for teratoma formation or neural overgrowth.
Here we present a novel floor-plate-based strategy for the derivation of human DA neurons that efficiently engraft in vivo, suggesting that past failures were due to incomplete specification rather than a specific vulnerability of the cells.
Midbrain floor-plate precursors are derived from PSCs 11 days after exposure to small molecule activators of sonic hedgehog (SHH) and canonical WNT signalling.
Engraftable midbrain DA neurons are obtained by day 25 and can be maintained in vitro for several months.
Extensive molecular profiling, biochemical and electrophysiological data define developmental progression and confirm identity of PSC-derived midbrain DA neurons.
In vivo survival and function is demonstrated in Parkinson's disease models using three host species.
Long-term engraftment in 6-hydroxy-dopamine-lesioned mice and rats demonstrates robust survival of midbrain DA neurons derived from human embryonic stem (ES) cells, complete restoration of amphetamine-induced rotation behaviour and improvements in tests of forelimb use and akinesia.
Finally, scalability is demonstrated by transplantation into parkinsonian monkeys.
Excellent DA neuron survival, function and lack of neural overgrowth in the three animal models indicate promise for the development of cell-based therapies in Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 22053701
Relationship between 3-O-methyldopa and the clinical effects of entacapone in advanced Parkinson's disease.
The aim of this study is to clarify the relationship between serum 3-O-methyldopa (3-OMD) and the clinical effects of entacapone.
The 3-OMD and maximum serum concentration (Cmax) of levodopa were measured in 21 Parkinson's Disease patients who took 100 mg levodopa / dopa decarboxylase inhibitor.
After the administration of entacapone, the 3-OMD concentration and percentage of "on" time during waking hours (% of "on" time) were studied for 8 weeks.
The 3-OMD concentration was reduced by 34%, and the increase in % of "on" time was 28% at the 8th week compared with baseline.
We defined the COMT-index as [baseline 3-OMD concentration] / [levodopa Cmax when 100 mg levodopa was administered alone].
The COMT-index was significantly correlated with the increase in % of "on" time at the 8th week.
In conclusion, the measurement of baseline 3-OMD and levodopa pharmacokinetics is useful for predicting the clinical effects of entacapone.
PMID: 22052348
Polyglutamine misfolding in yeast: Toxic and protective aggregation.
Protein misfolding is associated with many human diseases, including neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease and Huntington disease.
Protein misfolding often results in the formation of intracellular or extracellular inclusions or aggregates.
Even though deciphering the role of these aggregates has been the object of intense research activity, their role in protein misfolding diseases is unclear.
Here, I discuss the implications of studies on polyglutamine aggregation and toxicity in yeast and other model organisms.
These studies provide an excellent experimental and conceptual paradigm that contributes to understanding the differences between toxic and protective trajectories of protein misfolding.
Future studies like the ones discussed here have the potential to transform basic concepts of protein misfolding in human diseases and may thus help to identify new therapeutic strategies for their treatment.
PMID: 22052286
An aggregation sensing reporter identifies leflunomide and teriflunomide as polyglutamine aggregate inhibitors.
Intracellular protein aggregation is a common pathologic feature in neurodegenerative diseases such as Huntington' disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Parkinson' disease.
Although progress towards understanding protein aggregation in vitro has been made, little of this knowledge has translated to patient therapy.
Moreover, mechanisms controlling aggregate formation and catabolism in cellulo remain poorly understood.
One limitation is the lack of tools to quantitatively monitor protein aggregation and disaggregation.
Here, we developed a protein-aggregation reporter that uses huntingtin exon 1 containing 72 glutamines fused to the N-terminal end of firefly luciferase (httQ72-Luc).
httQ72-Luc fails to aggregate unless seeded by a non-luciferase-containing polyglutamine (polyQ) protein such as Q80-cfp.
Upon co-aggregation, httQ72-luc becomes insoluble and loses its enzymatic activity.
Using httQ72-Luc with Q80(CFP/YFP) as seeds, we screened the Johns Hopkins Clinical Compound Library and identified leflunomide, a dihydroorotate dehydrogenase inhibitor with immunosuppressive and anti-psoriatic activities, as a novel drug that prevents polyQ aggregation.
Leflunomide and its active metabolite teriflunomide inhibited protein aggregation independently of their known role in pyrimidine biosynthesis, since neither uridine treatment nor other pyrimidine biosynthesis inhibitors affected polyQ aggregation.
Inducible cell line and cycloheximide-chase experiments indicate that these drugs prevent incorporation of expanded polyQ into an aggregate.
This study demonstrates the usefulness of luciferase-based protein aggregate reporters for high-throughput screening applications.
As current trials are under-way for teriflunomide in the treatment of multiple sclerosis, we propose that this drug be considered a possible therapeutic agent for polyQ diseases.
PMID: 22049202
Parkinson disease, L-dopa, and neuropathy: did we miss something?
PMID: 22049200
Neuropathy in Parkinson disease: prevalence and determinants.
To ascertain the prevalence and determinants of neuropathy in patients with Parkinson disease (PD), in particular, the roles of vitamin B12 and levodopa exposure.
We performed a cross-sectional study of 37 patients with PD and 37 age- and gender-matched controls, using a sensitive and validated neuropathy scale.
The prevalence of neuropathy was determined and compared between groups.
We then ascertained the role of vitamin B12 by a separate case-control analysis (1) comparing numbers of patients in whom the neuropathy was directly attributable to vitamin B12 deficiency and (2) comparing serum vitamin B12 levels in patients with PD with neuropathy with a second control group consisting of age- and gender-matched consecutive patients with neuropathy without PD.
We also determined correlations between cumulative levodopa exposure, PD duration, neuropathy status and score, and vitamin B12 status and levels in all patients with PD and, specifically, in those with neuropathy.
Fourteen of 37 (37.8%) patients with PD and 3 of 37 (8.1%) control subjects had neuropathy (p = 0.005), corresponding to an odds ratio (95% confidence interval) for neuropathy, of 6.9 (1.78-26.73).
Vitamin B12 deficiency was a significantly more common cause of neuropathy (p = 0.024) and vitamin B12 levels were significantly lower (p = 0.002) in patients with PD with neuropathy than in age- and gender-matched consecutive control subjects with neuropathy without PD.
Cumulative levodopa exposure correlated with PD duration (p = 0.001) and vitamin B12 levels (p = 0.044), in patients with PD with neuropathy.
Neuropathy is more prevalent in patients with PD than in control subjects.
This may be predominantly due to vitamin B12 deficiency, which could relate to cumulative levodopa exposure in susceptible individuals.
Vitamin B12 monitoring and supplementation, as well as serial clinical assessment for neuropathy, may be advisable in patients with PD.
PMID: 22048791
Frontal assessment battery scores and non-motor symptoms in parkinsonian disorders.
Using data from the PRIAMO study, we investigated non-motor symptoms (NMS) versus frontal lobe dysfunction in patients with idiopathic Parkinson disease (PD); 808 patients with PD and 118 with atypical parkinsonisms (AP) were consecutively enrolled at 55 Centers in Italy.
Twelve categories of NMS were investigated.
Cognitive impairment was defined as a Mini-Mental Status Evaluation score ≤23.8 and frontal lobe dysfunction as a Frontal Assessment Battery (FAB) score ≤13.48.
Multivariable logistic regression was used to identify predictor of frontal lobe dysfunction in 524 PD patients, and a generalized linear model was used for each of the six FAB items.
Not only the total FAB scores but also the single FAB items were lower in AP versus PD (p ≤ 0.005).
Age (OR = 1.05), cognitive impairment (OR = 9.54), lack of cardiovascular symptoms (OR = 3.25), attention or memory problems (OR = 0.59) and treatment with L: -DOPA (OR = 5.58) were predictors of frontal lobe dysfunction.
MMSE was negatively associated with all FAB items (β ≤ -0.16) and age with all FAB items but prehension behavior (β ≤ -0.01).
Previous use of L: -DOPA was negatively associated with verbal fluency (β = -0.32) possibly acting as surrogate marker of disease duration.
Cognitive impairment is a predictor of frontal lobe dysfunction.
Among NMS, lack of attention or memory problems were negatively associated with frontal impairment.
Further studies are nonetheless needed to better identify the predictors of frontal impairment in PD patients.
PMID: 22047128
Clinicoradiological changes of brain NK/T cell lymphoma manifesting pure akinesia: a case report.
Pure akinesia (PA) is a distinct form of parkinsonism characterized by freezing phenomena.
Little is known about brain tumor-associated PA.
We highlight the clinicoradiological changes in a patient with PA and central nervous system (CNS) metastases of natural killer/T-cell lymphoma (NKTL).
A 68-year-old man with stage IVB extranodal NKTL developed a gait disturbance.
Neurological examination of his gait revealed freezing, start hesitation, short step, forward flexion posture, festination and postural instability.
Mild facial hypomimia and micrographia were observed.
There was no rigidity or tremor in any of the four extremities.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) displayed T2-hyperintense lesions in the dorsal brainstem, cerebellum and periventricular white matter.
Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) revealed hyperintensity in these regions.
Cerebrospinal fluid cytology revealed CD56-positive cells on immunohistochemical staining.
The patient's neurological deficits did not respond to L-dopa treatment and intrathecal administration of methotrexate (MTX).
Two weeks later, he displayed confusion and generalized convulsions.
T2-hyperintense lesions spread to the basal ganglia and the infratentorial regions.
Gadolinium enhancement was observed in the cerebellum and frontal subcortex.
DWI and the ADC revealed diffusion-restricted lesions in the middle cerebellar peduncles, left internal capsules and cerebral white matter.
MTX pulse therapy and intrathecal administration of cytosine arabinoside and MTX were performed.
Two months later, his ambulatory state was normalized.
Brain MRI also revealed marked alleviation of the infratentorial and supratentorial lesions.
The clinicoradiological profile of our patient suggested that dorsal ponto-mesencephalic lesions could contribute to the pathogenesis of PA.
Physicians should pay more attention to striking CNS seeding of metastatic NKTL.
MTX pulse therapy had an excellent effect in improving serious symptoms and brain lesions in our patient.
PMID: 22046592
New animal models of Parkinson's disease.
Background: Parkinson's disease is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder mainly characterized by the loss of dopaminergic neurons from the substantia nigra pars compacta and the presence, in the affected brain regions, of protein inclusions named Lewy Bodies.
Despite the fact that numerous mutations causing hereditary forms of Parkinson's disease have been identified in the last decade, current transgenic animal models do not adequately reproduce cardinal features of the human disease.
Altogether, the animal models derived of human mutations indicate that the nigrostriatal degenerative process results from the combination of several mechanisms that implicate mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative damage, and protein degradation impairment.Methods and Results: We performed a literature search between 2008 and 2010.Discussion: The absence of adequate in vivo experimental models of Parkinson's disease has severe repercussions for therapeutic intervention success for this incurable neurodegenerative disorder.
The present nonexhaustive review looks at invertebrate and mammalian models of Parkinson's disease generated in the last three years.
PMID: 22045282
Rasagiline: time to onset of antiparkinson effect is similar when used as a monotherapy or adjunct treatment.
Rasagiline, a monoamine oxidase type B inhibitor, is indicated for both the initial treatment of Parkinson disease (PD) and as adjunctive (add-on) treatment for patients already taking dopaminergic therapy.
This open-label prospective community-based clinical trial was designed to determine the time-to-onset and the magnitude of the beneficial effects of rasagiline in PD patients.
Patients received rasagiline of 1.0 mg once daily as monotherapy or 0.5 mg once daily as adjunct therapy (adjunct therapy dose could be increased to 1 mg/d if clinically indicated) for 12 weeks.
Dietary restrictions and recommendations regarding concurrent antidepressant treatment consistent with the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulations were in keeping with typical usage.
Effectiveness was measured as change from baseline in bradykinesia scores and physicians' and patients' global impression.
Patients were prospectively monitored for treatment emergent dopaminergic side effects, tyramine reactions, and possible interactions with commonly used antidepressants.
Objective and subjective measures of symptom severity improved at 1 week in 272 PD patients treated with once-daily rasagiline (n=123 monotherapy, n=149 adjunct therapy).
The magnitude of beneficial effect was similar in monotherapy and adjunct therapy patients.
No significant dopaminergic side effects, tyramine reactions, or interactions with antidepressants were observed in the 12-week trial.
Rasagiline has a measurable beneficial effect on PD symptoms within 1 week of treatment.
Rasagiline has a similar magnitude of benefit in monotherapy and adjunct therapy patients.
Adverse interactions between antidepressants and rasagiline were not observed in patients in this trial.
The usual use of rasagiline in community neurology practice, consistent with the FDA labeling, seems safe and effective.
PMID: 22045168
Brief cognitive assessment in the early stages of Parkinson disease.
Cognitive dysfunction is an integral part of the Parkinson disease (PD) symptom spectrum.
Early detection of cognitive dysfunction could help to delineate prevention strategies.
Our main objective was to study the validity of brief cognitive tests, the Frontal Assessment Battery (FAB) and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), as cognitive screening tools for detecting global and executive cognitive deficits in early stages of PD, as compared to a healthy control population.
We evaluated 75 early-stage PD patients and 45 healthy age-matched and education-matched controls with the MMSE (global test) and FAB (frontal test), and compared total and subtest scores.
We evaluated PD motor function with the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale Part III.
We assessed the relationship between cognitive and motor variables.
Frontal and global cognitive dysfunction was significantly more frequent in PD patients.
PD patients scored significantly lower on FAB total and similarities, motor series, and conflicting instructions scores, and on the MMSE total, visuoconstructive, and memory scores.
MMSE scores correlated significantly with Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale part III total score, speech, and bradykinesia scores.
Early-stage PD patients present with frontal, memory, and visuoconstructive deficits in brief cognitive tests.
Our results suggest that these brief bedside tests are useful for cognitive deficit screening in the early stages of PD.
Our study did not account for the influence of depression in cognition.
This constitutes a limitation, because many PD patients have depressive symptoms, which some studies have shown can be related to cognitive dysfunction.
PMID: 22043288
Bioenergetic consequences of PINK1 mutations in Parkinson disease.
Mutations of the gene for PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) are a cause of familial Parkinson's disease (PD).
PINK1 protein has been localised to mitochondria and PINK1 gene knockout models exhibit abnormal mitochondrial function.
The purpose of this study was to determine whether cells derived from PD patients with a range of PINK1 mutations demonstrate similar defects of mitochondrial function, whether the nature and severity of the abnormalities vary between mutations and correlate with clinical features.
We investigated mitochondrial bioenergetics in live fibroblasts from PINK1 mutation patients using single cell techniques.
We found that fibroblasts from PINK1 mutation patients had significant defects of bioenergetics including reduced mitochondrial membrane potential, altered redox state, a respiratory deficiency that was determined by substrate availability, and enhanced sensitivity to calcium stimulation and associated mitochondrial permeability pore opening.
There was an increase in the basal rate of free radical production in the mutant cells.
The pattern and severity of abnormality varied between different mutations, and the less severe defects in these cells were associated with later age of onset of PD.
The results provide insight into the molecular pathology of PINK1 mutations in PD and also confirm the critical role of substrate availability in determining the biochemical phenotype--thereby offering the potential for novel therapeutic strategies to circumvent these abnormalities.
PMID: 22043175
Early exposure to paraquat sensitizes dopaminergic neurons to subsequent silencing of PINK1 gene expression in mice.
Environmental exposure, genetic modification, and aging are considered risky for Parkinson's disease (PD).
How these risk factors cooperate to induce progressive neurodegeneration in PD remains largely unknown.
Paraquat is an herbicide commonly used for weed and grass control.
Exposure to paraquat is associated with the increased incidence of PD.
In contrast to familial PD, most sporadic PD cases do not have genetic mutation, but may suffer from partial dysfunction of neuron-protective genes as aging.
Using conditional transgenic RNAi, we showed that temporal silencing of PINK1 expression in adult mice increased striatal dopamine, the phenotype that could not be induced by constitutive gene silencing.
Moreover, early exposure to paraquat sensitized dopaminergic neurons to subsequent silencing of PINK1 gene expression, leading to a significant loss of dopaminergic neurons.
Our findings suggest a novel pathogenesis of PD: exposure to environmental toxicants early in the life reduces the threshold of developing PD and partial dysfunction of neuron-protective genes later in the life initiates a process of progressive neurodegeneration to cross the reduced threshold of disease onset.
PMID: 22042176
Lees' syndrome: a case series.
We report a case series of dopamine dysregulation syndrome, previously known as hedonistic homeostatic dysregulation in patients with Parkinson's disease on dopamine replacement therapies, now designated as Lees' syndrome.
PMID: 22042172
Dementia in Parkinson's disease: a Brazilian sample.
To determine the prevalence of dementia associated with Parkinson's disease (PD-D) in a Brazilian sample adopting clinical and diagnostic procedures recommended by the Movement Disorders Society (MDS).
Sixty-seven patients were consecutively submitted to neurological, neuropsychological and functional examinations.
PD-D was established according to MDS clinical criteria (Level II) and clinical procedures for PD-D (Level I) and prevalence rate was compared between the levels adopted.
Ten patients (14.9%) were diagnosed as demented by Level I criteria whereas sixteen (23.8%) were diagnosed based on Level II criteria.
Level I criteria had low sensitivity in detecting PD-D (31.25%), but greater specificity (90.19).
The PD-D group had significantly worse performance on all neuropsychological tests, were older (p<0.001), had an older age of onset of disease (p<0.01), had lower educational level (p<0.02) and had higher scores on functional scales.
Current age (p=0.046) and Hoehn & Yahr score (p=0.048) were predictors for developing PD-D.
PMID: 22042171
Dementia associated with Parkinson's disease: usefulness of the Movement Disorder Society diagnostic criteria in Brazil.
PMID: 22041733
Parkinson's tremor mimicking torsades de pointes.
A 72-year-old woman with Parkinson's disease presented to outpatients with a history of falls.
The falls were not associated with loss of consciousness, and the history suggested gait and balance problems leading to falls.
A 12-lead electrocardiogram, as shown in Figure 1, had the appearance of torsades de pointes.
However, the patient was cardiologically asymptomatic, and the electrocardiogram appearance was thought to be caused by a Parkinson's disease-associated artefact.
PMID: 22040900
Apathy and depression: separate factors in Parkinson's disease.
The objective of this study was to test the hypothesis that apathy and depression are dissociable in Parkinson disease (PD) by conducting a confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) of items from two commonly used mood scales.
A total of 161 non-demented PD patients (age = 64.1; ± 8.4 years) were administered the Apathy Scale and the Beck Depression Inventory-II.
Items were hypothesized to load onto four factors: (1) an apathy factor representing loss of motivation, (2) dysphoric mood factor representing sadness and negativity, (3) loss of interest/pleasure factor representing the features common to both apathy and depression, and (4) a somatic factor representing bodily complaints.
Results indicated a good fit for the overall CFA model, χ² (128, N = 146) = 194.9; p<.01.
RMSEA was .060 (p = .16).
The four-factor model was significantly better than all alternative nested models at p < .001, including an overarching single factor model, representing "depression." Results support the concept that apathy and depression are discrete constructs.
We suggest a "factor based" scoring of the Apathy Scale and Beck Depression Inventory-II that disentangles symptoms related to apathy, depression, overlapping symptoms, and somatic complaints.
Such scoring may be important in providing useful information regarding differential treatment options.
PMID: 22021174
The Movement Disorder Society Evidence-Based Medicine Review Update: Treatments for the non-motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease.
The Movement Disorder Society (MDS) Task Force on Evidence-Based Medicine (EBM) Review of Treatments for Parkinson's Disease (PD) was first published in 2002 and was updated in 2005 to cover clinical trial data up to January 2004 with the focus on motor symptoms of PD.
In this revised version the MDS task force decided it was necessary to extend the review to non-motor symptoms.
The objective of this work was to update previous EBM reviews on treatments for PD with a focus on non-motor symptoms.
Level-I (randomized controlled trial, RCT) reports of pharmacological and nonpharmacological interventions for the non-motor symptoms of PD, published as full articles in English between January 2002 and December 2010 were reviewed.
Criteria for inclusion and ranking followed the original program outline and adhered to EBM methodology.
For efficacy conclusions, treatments were designated: efficacious, likely efficacious, unlikely efficacious, non-efficacious, or insufficient evidence.
Safety data were catalogued and reviewed.
Based on the combined efficacy and safety assessment, Implications for clinical practice were determined using the following designations: clinically useful, possibly useful, investigational, unlikely useful, and not useful.
Fifty-four new studies qualified for efficacy review while several other studies covered safety issues.
Updated and new efficacy conclusions were made for all indications.
The treatments that are efficacious for the management of the different non-motor symptoms are as follows: pramipexole for the treatment of depressive symptoms, clozapine for the treatment of psychosis, rivastigmine for the treatment of dementia, and botulinum toxin A (BTX-A) and BTX-B as well as glycopyrrolate for the treatment of sialorrhea.
The practical implications for these treatments, except for glycopyrrolate, are that they are clinically useful.
Since there is insufficient evidence of glycopyrrolate for the treatment of sialorrhea exceeding 1 week, the practice implication is that it is possibly useful.
The treatments that are likely efficacious for the management of the different non-motor symptoms are as follows: the tricyclic antidepressants nortriptyline and desipramine for the treatment of depression or depressive symptoms and macrogol for the treatment of constipation.
The practice implications for these treatments are possibly useful.
For most of the other interventions there is insufficient evidence to make adequate conclusions on their efficacy.
This includes the tricyclic antidepressant amitriptyline, all selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) reviewed (paroxetine, citalopram, sertraline, and fluoxetine), the newer antidepressants atomoxetine and nefazodone, pergolide, Ω-3 fatty acids as well as repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) for the treatment of depression or depressive symptoms; methylphenidate and modafinil for the treatment of fatigue; amantadine for the treatment of pathological gambling; donepezil, galantamine, and memantine for the treatment of dementia; quetiapine for the treatment of psychosis; fludrocortisone and domperidone for the treatment of orthostatic hypotension; sildenafil for the treatment of erectile dysfunction, ipratropium bromide spray for the treatment of sialorrhea; levodopa/carbidopa controlled release (CR), pergolide, eszopiclone, melatonin 3 to 5 mg and melatonin 50 mg for the treatment of insomnia and modafinil for the treatment of excessive daytime sleepiness.
Due to safety issues the practice implication is that pergolide and nefazodone are not useful for the above-mentioned indications.
Due to safety issues, olanzapine remains not useful for the treatment of psychosis.
As none of the studies exceeded a duration of 6 months, the recommendations given are for the short-term management of the different non-motor symptoms.
There were no RCTs that met inclusion criteria for the treatment of anxiety disorders, apathy, medication-related impulse control disorders and related behaviors other than pathological gambling, rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (RBD), sweating, or urinary dysfunction.
Therefore, there is insufficient evidence for the treatment of these indications.
This EBM review of interventions for the non-motor symptoms of PD updates the field, but, because several RCTs are ongoing, a continual updating process is needed.
Several interventions and indications still lack good quality evidence, and these gaps offer an opportunity for ongoing research.
© 2011 Movement Disorder Society.
PMID: 22021173
The Movement Disorder Society Evidence-Based Medicine Review Update: Treatments for the motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease.
The objective was to update previous evidence-based medicine reviews of treatments for motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease published between 2002 and 2005.
Level I (randomized, controlled trial) reports of pharmacological, surgical, and nonpharmacological interventions for the motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease between January 2004 (2001 for nonpharmacological) and December 2010 were reviewed.
Criteria for inclusion, clinical indications, ranking, efficacy conclusions, safety, and implications for clinical practice followed the original program outline and adhered to evidence-based medicine methodology.
Sixty-eight new studies qualified for review.
Piribedil, pramipexole, pramipexole extended release, ropinirole, rotigotine, cabergoline, and pergolide were all efficacious as symptomatic monotherapy; ropinirole prolonged release was likely efficacious.
All were efficacious as a symptomatic adjunct except pramipexole extended release, for which there is insufficient evidence.
For prevention/delay of motor fluctuations, pramipexole and cabergoline were efficacious, and for prevention/delay of dyskinesia, pramipexole, ropinirole, ropinirole prolonged release, and cabergoline were all efficacious, whereas pergolide was likely efficacious.
Duodenal infusion of levodopa was likely efficacious in the treatment of motor complications, but the practice implication is investigational.
Entacapone was nonefficacious as a symptomatic adjunct to levodopa in nonfluctuating patients and nonefficacious in the prevention/delay of motor complications.
Rasagiline conclusions were revised to efficacious as a symptomatic adjunct, and as treatment for motor fluctuations.
Clozapine was efficacious in dyskinesia, but because of safety issues, the practice implication is possibly useful.
Bilateral subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation, bilateral globus pallidus stimulation, and unilateral pallidotomy were updated to efficacious for motor complications.
Physical therapy was revised to likely efficacious as symptomatic adjunct therapy.
This evidence-based medicine review updates the field and highlights gaps for research.
PMID: 22021172
Evidence-based medicine. Introduction.
PMID: 22037902
Epigenetics DNA methylation in the core ataxin-2 gene promoter: novel physiological and pathological implications.
Pathogenic CAG (cytosine-adenine-guanine) expansions beyond certain thresholds in the ataxin-2 (ATXN2) gene cause spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2) and were shown to contribute to Parkinson disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration.
Regulation of ATXN2 gene expression and the function of the protein product are not known.
SCA2 exhibits an inverse correlation between the size of the CAG repeat and the age at disease onset.
However, a wide range of age at onset are typically observed, with CAG repeat number alone explaining only partly this variability.
In this study, we explored the hypothesis that ATXN2 levels could be controlled by DNA methylation and that the derangement of this control may lead to escalation of disease severity and influencing the age at onset.
We found that CpG methylation in human ATXN2 gene promoter is associated with pathogenic CAG expansions in SCA2 patients.
Different levels of methylation in a SCA2 pedigree without an intergenerational CAG repeat instability caused the disease anticipation in a SCA2 family.
DNA methylation also influenced the disease onset in SCA2 homozygotes and SCA3 patients.
In conclusion, our study points to a novel regulatory mechanism of ATXN2 expression involving an epigenetic event resulting in differential disease course in SCA2 patients.
PMID: 22037599
Alpha-synuclein in the Cerebrospinal Fluid Differentiates Synucleinopathies (Parkinson Disease, Dementia With Lewy Bodies, Multiple System Atrophy) From Alzheimer Disease.
BACKGROUND:: We examined the utility of quantification of α-synuclein (SNCA) in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) to differentiate patients with Alzheimer disease (AD), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), Parkinson disease (PD), and multiple system atrophy (MSA).
METHODS:: Thirty-seven patients were divided into 4 age-matched and sex-matched clinical groups: AD (n=9), DLB (n=6), PD (n=11), and MSA (n=11).
Eleven subjects served as neurological disease controls.
The total of 48 subjects included 27 men and 21 women, aged 66.5±11.4 years.
We performed a solid-phase sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, which enables the sensitive quantification of CSF SNCA.
RESULTS:: In comparison with controls, CSF SNCA levels in AD were significantly higher (P<0.05).
CSF SNCA levels in PD (P<0.001), DLB (P<0.01), and MSA (P<0.05) were all significantly lower than those in AD.
However, CSF SNCA levels did not differ significantly among the 3 synucleinopathies.
CONCLUSIONS:: The results of the present study suggest that quantification of CSF SNCA helps in the differentiation of synucleinopathies (PD, DLB, and MSA) from AD.
However, CSF SNCA levels did not differ significantly among the 3 synucleinopathies.
PMID: 22036560
The seeds of neurodegeneration: prion-like spreading in ALS.
Misfolded proteins accumulating in several neurodegenerative diseases (including Alzheimer, Parkinson, and Huntington diseases) can cause aggregation of their native counterparts through a mechanism similar to the infectious prion protein's induction of a pathogenic conformation onto its cellular isoform.
Evidence for such a prion-like mechanism has now spread to the main misfolded proteins, SOD1 and TDP-43, implicated in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
The major neurodegenerative diseases may therefore have mechanistic parallels for non-cell-autonomous spread of disease within the nervous system.
PMID: 22036119
Deep brain stimulation for Parkinson's disease, essential tremor, and dystonia.
PMID: 22034770
[Physical therapy for parkinson's disease].
Parkinson's disease is a complex neurologic and progressive incapacitating disease.
Parkinson's disease severely threatens the quality of live and the number of patients worldwide is expected to rise considerably in the coming decade due to aging of the population.
Even with optimal medical management using drugs or neurosurgery, patients are faced with progressively increasing impairments (e.g.
in speech, mental and movement related functions), and restrictions in participation (e.g.
domestic life and social activities).
Physical therapy is often prescribed next to medical treatment but there is a lack of uniform treatment.
A systematic literature search for guidelines, systematic reviews, trials, and expert opinions lead to a better understanding.
The key question: Is physiotherapy able to optimally treat the Parkinson's disease symptoms? In which way, how and on which scientific bases can the physiotherapist participate to improve autonomy and to help them living independently and avoid, as long as possible, institutionalization? This article has integrated clinical research findings to provide clinicians with an overview to physical therapist management of disorders in people with Parkinson's disease.
An Evidence-Based Physical Therapy Guideline providing practice recommendations was developed by the Royal Dutch Society for Physical Therapy (KNGF).
Evidence from research was supplemented with clinical expertise and patients values.
Randomized clinical trials reflect specific core areas of physical therapy, that is, transfer, posture, balance, reaching and grasping, gait and physical condition.
Another aspect is that of educating patients (as well as their partners and family) about the disease process and the benefits of exercise therapy.
Alternative therapies can be helpful like Tai Chi, virtual games, dancing, yoga, ball games for example.
PMID: 22032468
Parkinson's disease in regional Australia.
Parkinson's disease (PD) incidence and prevalence, particularly in Western countries, is greater in rural areas.
Despite several epidemiological studies on PD in Australia, there are few publications addressing specific issues facing people with Parkinson's disease (PWP) in regional, rural and remote areas.
This study looked at the dynamics of healthcare delivery to PWP and their carers in and around a regional New South Wales centre.
Qualitative analysis of rural and regional healthcare delivery to PWP involved five participant groups.
Literature searches via electronic and medical databases were performed to provide a foundation for focus group questions, semi-structured interviews and questionnaires.
Volunteers from five groups: PWP, carers, allied health professionals (AHP), GPs and neurologists participated after recruitment via pamphlets, newsletters, postal invitation, public advertisements and preliminary talks.
Data analysis highlighted a lack of relevant facilities, funding, available health staff and awareness of information regarding beneficial services for PWP and their carers.
With few available neurologists, the roles of GP and AHP were emphasized in consumer focus groups as being most significant in a regional and rural setting.
Transport, and geographical and financial issues were also significant in these areas.
Psychological issues, dementia and memory loss were considered to be as debilitating as the overt motor symptoms of PD.
The study found that the management of PD in regional NSW was highly variable, depending on geographical location and liaison among GPs, neurologists, AHPs, carers and PWP.
Enhanced communication is recommended among PD stakeholders in regional NSW.
This study provided a microcosmic view of the issues revealed by the very limited literature available on Australia's rural and regional healthcare delivery to PWP and their carers.
It highlighted the lack of health staff, funding and information for relevant stakeholders, as well as PWP's desire for increased input from medical practitioners and the ancillary sectors.
While this study did not directly compare rural with metropolitan PD services, it was inferred from all participant groups that regional and rural areas are disadvantaged in terms of medical staff and facilities, hindering timely diagnosis, management and treatment.
The findings have implications for all stakeholders in the care of rural patients with PD.
PMID: 22032181
BioNØT: a searchable database of biomedical negated sentences.
Negated biomedical events are often ignored by text-mining applications; however, such events carry scientific significance.
We report on the development of BioNØT, a database of negated sentences that can be used to extract such negated events.
Currently BioNØT incorporates ≈32 million negated sentences, extracted from over 336 million biomedical sentences from three resources: ≈2 million full-text biomedical articles in Elsevier and the PubMed Central, as well as ≈20 million abstracts in PubMed.
We evaluated BioNØT on three important genetic disorders: autism, Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease, and found that BioNØT is able to capture negated events that may be ignored by experts.
The BioNØT database can be a useful resource for biomedical researchers.
BioNØT is freely available at http://bionot.askhermes.org/.
In future work, we will develop semantic web related technologies to enrich BioNØT.
PMID: 22031685
[Gene therapy in Parkinson disease: a promising future treatment?].
Parkinson disease is a neurodegenerative pathology with high incidence.
Current treatments ease the symptoms but don't stop the development of the disease and aren't without any major side effects.
Although this pathology is not specifically caused by genetic abnormalities, the involvement of numerous proteins in the pathophysiological process enables us to give an interest to gene therapy.
This hypothesis has been upheld by positive results on animals and by five phase I trials on humans but may be attenuated by the first phase II trial recently published showing modest efficiency and multiple side effects.
However, these preliminary results will need to be reinforced by more important trials in order to be sure of the safety and get efficacy data, which will allow us to give an opinion upon this new way of treatment.
PMID: 22030944
Acute effects of passive leg cycling on upper extremity tremor and bradykinesia in Parkinson's disease.
Previous studies have shown that single bouts of high-rate active cycling (> 80 rpm) improve upper extremity motor function in individuals with Parkinson's disease (PD).
It is unknown if passive leg cycling produces a similar effect on upper extremity function.
This article examines whether passive leg cycling can promote immediate changes in upper tremor and bradykinesia in PD and if pedaling rates have variable effects.
Twenty individuals with mild-to-moderate idiopathic PD completed 4 sessions, with each session taking place 1 week apart.
In the second to fourth sessions, a motorized bicycle was set to passively rotate the subjects' legs at rates of 60, 70, or 80 rpm for 30 minutes.
Quantitative upper extremity motor assessments were completed immediately before and after each session.
Passive leg cycling was shown to reduce tremor and bradykinesia in PD.
However, the rate of passive cycling did not affect the degree of improvement in bradykinesia or tremor.
These findings suggest that lower extremity passive cycling can promote changes in upper extremity motor function in individuals with PD.
PMID: 22028228
Therapies for dopaminergic-induced dyskinesias in Parkinson disease.
PMID: 22028219
Pathogenic protein seeding in Alzheimer disease and other neurodegenerative disorders.
The misfolding and aggregation of specific proteins is a seminal occurrence in a remarkable variety of neurodegenerative disorders.
In Alzheimer disease (the most prevalent cerebral proteopathy), the two principal aggregating proteins are β-amyloid (Aβ) and tau.
The abnormal assemblies formed by conformational variants of these proteins range in size from small oligomers to the characteristic lesions that are visible by optical microscopy, such as senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles.
Pathologic similarities with prion disease suggest that the formation and spread of these proteinaceous lesions might involve a common molecular mechanism-corruptive protein templating.
Experimentally, cerebral β-amyloidosis can be exogenously induced by exposure to dilute brain extracts containing aggregated Aβ seeds.
The amyloid-inducing agent probably is Aβ itself, in a conformation generated most effectively in the living brain.
Once initiated, Aβ lesions proliferate within and among brain regions.
The induction process is governed by the structural and biochemical nature of the Aβ seed, as well as the attributes of the host, reminiscent of pathogenically variant prion strains.
The concept of prionlike induction and spreading of pathogenic proteins recently has been expanded to include aggregates of tau, α-synuclein, huntingtin, superoxide dismutase-1, and TDP-43, which characterize such human neurodegenerative disorders as frontotemporal lobar degeneration, Parkinson/Lewy body disease, Huntington disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Our recent finding that the most effective Aβ seeds are small and soluble intensifies the search in bodily fluids for misfolded protein seeds that are upstream in the proteopathic cascade, and thus could serve as predictive diagnostics and the targets of early, mechanism-based interventions.
Establishing the clinical implications of corruptive protein templating will require further mechanistic and epidemiologic investigations.
However, the theory that many chronic neurodegenerative diseases can originate and progress via the seeded corruption of misfolded proteins has the potential to unify experimental and translational approaches to these increasingly prevalent disorders.
PMID: 22027928
Medication phobia: a new cause of drug noncompliance in Parkinson disease.
To describe a new form of anxiety in patients with Parkinson disease (PD).
We retrospectively reviewed 100 consecutive charts of patients with PD to identify those who did not adhere to their medication schedule owing to irrational fear of taking their medication.
Information pertaining to their PD and comorbid medical conditions was collected.
We identified 6 patients with PD who had severe disability, yet anxiety from taking the medication caused avoidance of taking appropriate oral medication.
This avoidance persisted in the face of reassurance that the medication is not dangerous and that taking the medication would improve their disability.
This study describes a new form of anxiety in patients with PD.
We propose the term ``medication phobia'' to describe these patients.
PMID: 22027794
[Critical illness polyneuropathy in a patient with Parkinson disease: a case report and review of the literature].
To report a case of critical illness polyneuropathy (CIP) with Parkinson disease and discuss the development, clinical features and early diagnosis of this condition.
The clinical data of a patient with CIP and Parkinson's disease and the relevant literature were reviewed.
This case showed no typical disease course of sepsis, and the condition exacerbated rapidly.
The patient presented initially with abnormal homeostasis, followed by rapid onset of respiratory muscle weakness to require mechanical ventilation, but no limb weaknesses were detected.
Intravenous antibiotics and aggressive treatment of sepsis did not produce any positive responses to wean from mechanical ventilation.
Examinations of creatine kinase and cerebrospinal fluid showed no abnormalities.
Electromyography and nerve conduction studies demonstrated declined nerve conduction velocity and decreased sensory and motor muscle action potentials, suggesting the possibility of CIP.
In patients with Parkinson disease, the occurrence of sepsis with prolonged mechanical ventilation and limb weakness indicates the necessity of neurophysiological examination, muscle biopsies and laboratory tests, which may help detect CIP in the early phase.
Proper interventions of sepsis may reduce the likeliness of CIP.
Elimination of the risk factors and aggressive management of sepsis can be effective measures for preventing CIP.
PMID: 22026326
Usefulness of screening tools for predicting driving performance in people with Parkinson's disease.
We used screening tests administered by a certified driving rehabilitation specialist and by Parkinson's disease (PD) specialty neurologists to develop a model to predict on-road outcomes for patients with PD.
We administered a battery of screening tests to 41 patients with PD and 41 age-matched control participants before on-road testing.
We used statistical models to predict actual on-road performance.
The PD group had a higher failure rate, indicating more on-road errors.
For the PD participants, the Useful Field of View (UFOV) Subtest 2 and Rapid Pace Walk were responsible for most of the variance in the on-road test.
The model accurately categorized pass-fail outcomes for 81% of PD patients.
Clinical screening batteries may be predictive of driving performance in PD.
The UFOV Subtest 2, administered in approximately 15 min, may be the single most useful clinical test for such predictions.
PMID: 22025277
Genetic variants of α-synuclein are not associated with essential tremor.
Given the overlap between Parkinson's disease and essential tremor, we examined genetic variants in α-synuclein (SNCA) as risk determinants for essential tremor.
Samples from 661 essential tremor subjects and 1316 control subjects from 4 participating North American sites were included in this study.
Parkinson's disease samples (n = 427) were compared against controls.
Twenty variants were selected for association analysis within the SNCA locus.
Individual logistic regression analyses against essential tremor diagnosis were run for each variant and then combined using meta-analysis.
Our results do not show a significant association between variants in the SNCA locus and risk of essential tremor, whereas the established association of SNCA variants with Parkinson's disease risk was observed.
Whereas genetic factors are likely to play a large role in essential tremor pathogenesis, our results do not support a role for common SNCA genetic variants in risk for essential tremor.
PMID: 22023479
Experimental and clinical application of plasmid DNA in the field of central nervous diseases.
Novel therapeutic strategies utilizing plasmid DNA (pDNA) have been sought for non-treatable neurological disorders, such as ischemic stroke, Parkinson disease (PD), Alzheimer disease (AD), and multiple sclerosis (MS).
One strategy is to induce overexpression of growth factors, such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), glial cell-line derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), in the brain.
Since ischemic stroke, PD, and AD show damage of neurons, the transfer of pDNA encoding these genes has been examined and shown to protect neurons from damage, associated with a better behavioral outcome.
These growth factors have also been shown to accelerate angiogenesis, neurite outgrowth, and neurogenesis in the brain, and overexpression of these factors showed therapeutic effects in cerebral ischemia in rodents.
Another application of pDNA is as a "DNA vaccine" to induce immunity against amyloid Aβ in AD, which requires a predominantly Th2 response to avoid autoimmune encephalomyelitis evoked by a Th1 response.
Since the combination of pDNA and special devices and/or modification of pDNA could induce a predominantly Th2 response to a targeted antigen, a pDNA-based vaccine would be ideal for AD.
Interestingly, pDNA could also induce immune tolerance, and pDNA-based vaccines to induce immune tolerance to autoimmune antibodies have been extensively examined in an animal model of MS.
Based on the results, a pDNA vaccine has already been tried in MS patients and reported to be safe and partly effective in phase I/II clinical studies.
In this review, we discuss the potential and problems of pDNA-mediated medicine in neurological disorders.
PMID: 22022363
Low concentrations of methamphetamine can protect dopaminergic cells against a larger oxidative stress injury: mechanistic study.
Mild stress can protect against a larger insult, a phenomenon termed preconditioning or tolerance.
To determine if a low intensity stressor could also protect cells against intense oxidative stress in a model of dopamine deficiency associated with Parkinson disease, we used methamphetamine to provide a mild, preconditioning stress, 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) as a source of potentially toxic oxidative stress, and MN9D cells as a model of dopamine neurons.
We observed that prior exposure to subtoxic concentrations of methamphetamine protected these cells against 6-OHDA toxicity, whereas higher concentrations of methamphetamine exacerbated it.
The protection by methamphetamine was accompanied by decreased uptake of both [(3)H] dopamine and 6-OHDA into the cells, which may have accounted for some of the apparent protection.
However, a number of other effects of methamphetamine exposure suggest that the drug also affected basic cellular survival mechanisms.
First, although methamphetamine preconditioning decreased basal pERK1/2 and pAkt levels, it enhanced the 6-OHDA-induced increase in these phosphokinases.
Second, the apparent increase in pERK1/2 activity was accompanied by increased pMEK1/2 levels and decreased activity of protein phosphatase 2.
Third, methamphetamine upregulated the pro-survival protein Bcl-2.
Our results suggest that exposure to low concentrations of methamphetamine cause a number of changes in dopamine cells, some of which result in a decrease in their vulnerability to subsequent oxidative stress.
These observations may provide insights into the development of new therapies for prevention or treatment of PD.
PMID: 22022275
A one base pair deletion in the canine ATP13A2 gene causes exon skipping and late-onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis in the Tibetan terrier.
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (NCL) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease characterized by brain and retinal atrophy and the intracellular accumulation of autofluorescent lysosomal storage bodies resembling lipofuscin in neurons and other cells.
Tibetan terriers show a late-onset lethal form of NCL manifesting first visible signs at 5-7 years of age.
Genome-wide association analyses for 12 Tibetan-terrier-NCL-cases and 7 Tibetan-terrier controls using the 127K canine Affymetrix SNP chip and mixed model analysis mapped NCL to dog chromosome (CFA) 2 at 83.71-84.72 Mb.
Multipoint linkage and association analyses in 376 Tibetan terriers confirmed this genomic region on CFA2.
A mutation analysis for 14 positional candidate genes in two NCL-cases and one control revealed a strongly associated single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the MAPK PM20/PM21 gene and a perfectly with NCL associated single base pair deletion (c.1620delG) within exon 16 of the ATP13A2 gene.
The c.1620delG mutation in ATP13A2 causes skipping of exon 16 presumably due to a broken exonic splicing enhancer motif.
As a result of this mutation, ATP13A2 lacks 69 amino acids.
All known 24 NCL cases were homozygous for this deletion and all obligate 35 NCL-carriers were heterozygous.
In a sample of 144 dogs from eleven other breeds, the c.1620delG mutation could not be found.
Knowledge of the causative mutation for late-onset NCL in Tibetan terrier allows genetic testing of these dogs to avoid matings of carrier animals.
ATP13A2 mutations have been described in familial Parkinson syndrome (PARK9).
Tibetan terriers with these mutations provide a valuable model for a PARK9-linked disease and possibly for manganese toxicity in synucleinopathies.
PMID: 22022239
Inversion of the balance between hydrophobic and hydrogen bonding interactions in protein folding and aggregation.
Identifying the forces that drive proteins to misfold and aggregate, rather than to fold into their functional states, is fundamental to our understanding of living systems and to our ability to combat protein deposition disorders such as Alzheimer's disease and the spongiform encephalopathies.
We report here the finding that the balance between hydrophobic and hydrogen bonding interactions is different for proteins in the processes of folding to their native states and misfolding to the alternative amyloid structures.
We find that the minima of the protein free energy landscape for folding and misfolding tend to be respectively dominated by hydrophobic and by hydrogen bonding interactions.
These results characterise the nature of the interactions that determine the competition between folding and misfolding of proteins by revealing that the stability of native proteins is primarily determined by hydrophobic interactions between side-chains, while the stability of amyloid fibrils depends more on backbone intermolecular hydrogen bonding interactions.
PMID: 22022189
Electrode position and the clinical outcome after bilateral subthalamic nucleus stimulation.
We compared the surgical outcome with electrode positions after bilateral subthalamic nucleus (STN) stimulation surgery for Parkinson's disease.
Fifty-seven patients treated with bilateral STN stimulations were included in this study.
Electrode positions were determined in the fused images of preoperative MRI and postoperative CT taken at six months after surgery.
The patients were divided into three groups: group I, both electrodes in the STN; group II, only one electrode in the STN; group III, neither electrode in the STN.
Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS), Hoehn and Yahr stage, and activities of daily living scores significantly improved at 6 and 12 months after STN stimulation in both group I and II.
The off-time UPDRS III speech subscore significantly improved (1.6 ± 0.7 at baseline vs 1.3 ± 0.8 at 6 and 12 months, P < 0.01) with least L-dopa equivalent daily dose (LEDD) (844.6 ± 364.1 mg/day at baseline; 279.4 ± 274.6 mg/day at 6 months; and 276.0 ± 301.6 mg/day at 12 months, P < 0.001) at 6 and 12 months after STN deep brain stimulation (DBS) in the group I.
Our findings suggest that the better symptom relief including speech with a reduced LEDD is expected in the patients whose electrodes are accurately positioned in both STN.
PMID: 22021252
Functional specialization within the striatum along both the dorsal/ventral and anterior/posterior axes during associative learning via reward and punishment.
The goal of the present study was to elucidate the role of the human striatum in learning via reward and punishment during an associative learning task.
Previous studies have identified the striatum as a critical component in the neural circuitry of reward-related learning.
It remains unclear, however, under what task conditions, and to what extent, the striatum is modulated by punishment during an instrumental learning task.
Using high-resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) during a reward- and punishment-based probabilistic associative learning task, we observed activity in the ventral putamen for stimuli learned via reward regardless of whether participants were correct or incorrect (i.e., outcome).
In contrast, activity in the dorsal caudate was modulated by trials that received feedback--either correct reward or incorrect punishment trials.
We also identified an anterior/posterior dissociation reflecting reward and punishment prediction error estimates.
Additionally, differences in patterns of activity that correlated with the amount of training were identified along the anterior/posterior axis of the striatum.
We suggest that unique subregions of the striatum--separated along both a dorsal/ventral and anterior/posterior axis--differentially participate in the learning of associations through reward and punishment.
PMID: 22020457
The 9-hole PEG test of upper extremity function: average values, test-retest reliability, and factors contributing to performance in people with Parkinson disease.
Pegboard tests of hand dexterity are commonly used in clinical settings to assess upper extremity function in various populations.
For individuals with Parkinson disease (PD), the clinical utility of pegboard tests has not been fully evaluated.
Our purpose was to examine the commercially available 9-Hole Peg Test (9HPT) using a large sample of individuals with PD to determine average values, test-retest reliability, and factors predictive of 9HPT performance.
A total of 262 participants with PD (67% men, Hoehn & Yahr stage = 2.3 ± 0.7) completed the 9HPT along with a battery of other tests including the Movement Disorder Society Unified PD Rating Scale-Motor Subscale III and Freezing of Gait Questionnaire.
Average time to complete the 9HPT was 31.4 ± 15.7 s with the dominant and 32.2 ± 12.4 s with the nondominant hand.
Test-retest reliability of 2 trials performed with the same hand was high (dominant ICC2,1 = 0.88, nondominant ICC2,1 = 0.91).
Women performed the test significantly faster than men, and nonfreezers significantly faster than freezers.
For either hand, age, bradykinesia, and freezing of gait scores individually predicted significant portions of the variance in 9HPT time.
Sex also was a significant predictor, but for the nondominant hand only.
Tremor and rigidity did not predict performance.
The 9HPT appears to be a clinically useful measure for assessing upper extremity function in individuals with PD.
The 9HPT has advantages over previously used methods including standardization, known normative values for healthy controls, commercial availability, transportability, and ease of administration.
PMID: 22020207
Parkinson's disease and cancer: two wars, one front.
Parkinson's disease is caused by the premature death of neurons in the midbrain.
By contrast, cancer spawns from cells that refuse to die.
We would therefore expect their pathogenic mechanisms to be very different.
However, recent genetic studies and emerging functional work show that strikingly similar and overlapping pathways are involved in both diseases.
We consider these areas of convergence and discuss how insights from one disease can inform us about, and possibly help us to treat, the other.
PMID: 22019972
Dynamic visual cueing in combination with treadmill training for gait rehabilitation in Parkinson disease.
Various cueing techniques as well as treadmill training have been shown to be effective in the gait rehabilitation of patients with Parkinson disease.
We present a novel setup combining both dynamic visual cueing and body weight-supported treadmill training.
A nonambulatory patient with Parkinson disease received six training sessions.
Continuous improvement of gait parameters was observed throughout the course of training.
When comparing cued and noncued conditions in individual training sessions, it was found that step length was larger and that gait symmetry was enhanced in the cued condition.
At the end of the training period, the patient was capable of walking short distances with a walking frame.
In conclusion, dynamic visual cueing in combination with body weight-supported treadmill training seems to be a promising treatment strategy for patients with Parkinson disease, even in the case of severe impairment.
PMID: 22019961
Tuning algorithms for control interfaces for users with upper-limb impairments.
Approximately 40% of Americans with disabilities cannot operate wheeled mobility devices and computers adequately because of diminished upper-limb motor control, sensory limitations, and cognitive impairments.
We developed tuning software that can customize control interfaces for individuals with upper-limb impairments.
This study compared the differences in each parameter among different diagnostic groups.
The age of the subjects ranged from 18 to 80 yrs.
The participants were classified into the following groups: athetoid cerebral palsy, spastic cerebral palsy, multiple sclerosis, upper-limb spasticity, and control.
We used a validated tuning software protocol to customize an isometric joystick before a virtual tracing or driving task.
Tuning parameters were then compared across groups.
Seventy-five subjects were included.
Gain, the parameter responsible for force-to-output ratios, in each directional axis (leftward gain: P = 0.018; rightward gain: P = 0.003; reverse gain: P = 0.007; forward gain: P = 0.014) was significantly different across the diagnostic groups.
Post hoc analyses showed that the control group required smaller leftward gain than spastic cerebral palsy, multiple sclerosis and upper-limb spasticity groups and smaller gain in all other directions compared with spastic cerebral palsy.
Gain may be a useful parameter in tuning by clinicians, and efforts aimed at gain customization may aid the development of commercially available tuning software packages.
PMID: 22019648
Pilot study on a fast postoperative programming approach to subthalamic nucleus stimulation in Parkinson's disease.
OBJECTIVES: T0 o evaluate the advantages and disadvantages of a fast post-operative screening method using deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the subthalamic nucleus (STN) in patients with Parkinson's disease.
MATERIALS AND METHODS : Twenty-four patients implanted with electrodes for STN-DBS were divided into two groups : Group I received traditional programming and Group II was treated with the fast method.
The time required for programming in each group and the treatment effects were analyzed.
RESULTS : Significant postoperative improvement of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale III was achieved in the "off medication" and "on stimulation" condition in both the groups (Group I: 51.2% vs.
Group II: 54.0%, P<0.05).
The average time needed for programming, however, was significantly shorter in Group II as compared to Group I (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS : T0 he new fast method can significantly reduce the time required to find a preliminary effective STN-DBS protocol in the early postoperative phase without sacrificing clinical efficacy.
PMID: 22019646
Effect of a single dose of standard levodopa on cardiac autonomic function in Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is associated with autonomic dysfunction and chronic levodopa therapy has been reported to impair the autonomic control of heart rate.
Our aim was to assess the immediate effect of a single dose of levodopa on heart rate variability (HRV) in idiopathic PD.
Eleven patients of idiopathic PD (F:M =2:9, mean age 57.3±8.6 years, duration of illness 4.1±2.8 years, Hoehn and Yahr stage 2.1±0.2) on stable levodopa dosage were studied.
Motor part of unified Parkinson's disease rating scale and resting Lead II electrocardiogram (ECG) recordings were performed at baseline (12 hours off medication) and after two tablets of 100/10 mg of standard levodopa/ carbidopa.
ECG was recorded continuously in the first hour (H1) followed by a 15-min recording in second (H2), third (H3) and fourth (H4) hours.
Artifact free 5-min segments of the ECG were analyzed offline to obtain the HRV parameters in time domain (ms) and frequency domains (ms 2 ).
Significant increase was observed in standard deviation of normal to normal intervals (23.5±2.7-46.2±6.6, P<0.05), root mean square of successive differences of NN intervals (16.3±2.9-30.7±5.1, P<0.01), total power (568.9±125.7-2739±667.5, P<0.01), low frequency power (146.5±40.8-614.1±206.7, P<0.05) and high frequency power (107.4±33.9-332.7±85.9, P<0.05) in H1.
The results are suggestive of an improvement in the overall variability of the heart rate indicating an enhanced vagal tone.
PMID: 22018708
[Saccadic system plasticity mechanisms in Parkinson disease patients.]
INTRODUCTION: Voluntary or reactive saccades predominate in rapid eye movements.
Their goal is to preserve an active and optimal visual perception of the environment.
Saccades cannot be guided once launched.
Oculomotor plasticity, or saccadic adaptation, is still partially unknown, in particular the role played by the basal ganglia.
New neuro-ophthalmological rehabilitation techniques require understanding the neurophysiological basis and demonstrating the neuronal structures involved in this plasticity.
OBJECTIVES: This study assessed the reactive saccade adaptation in patients with idiopathic Parkinson disease, as a model of basal ganglia dysfunction.
We predicted that saccadic adaptation would be preserved in this pathology.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Five patients with mild idiopathic hemi-Parkinson disease were included, as well as four age-matched controls.
Reactive saccade adaptation was studied using the double-step target paradigm, in patients with OFF-Dopa treatment and in controls.
RESULTS: Group analysis demonstrated that patients had a lower level of adaptation than the controls (p<0.05).
Individually, two patients did not adapt for bilateral saccades and one for ipsilateral (compared to Parkinson motor clinical syndrome) saccades.
Two additional patients adapted on both sides but with a deficit in contralateral saccades when compared to the control group.
DISCUSSION: These preliminary results suggest basal ganglia involvement in reactive saccadic adaptation, which remains to be clarified.
PMID: 22017994
Closed-loop deep brain stimulation is superior in ameliorating parkinsonism.
Continuous high-frequency deep brain stimulation (DBS) is a widely used therapy for advanced Parkinson's disease (PD) management.
However, the mechanisms underlying DBS effects remain enigmatic and are the subject of an ongoing debate.
Here, we present and test a closed-loop stimulation strategy for PD in the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) primate model of PD.
Application of pallidal closed-loop stimulation leads to dissociation between changes in basal ganglia (BG) discharge rates and patterns, providing insights into PD pathophysiology.
Furthermore, cortico-pallidal closed-loop stimulation has a significantly greater effect on akinesia and on cortical and pallidal discharge patterns than standard open-loop DBS and matched control stimulation paradigms.
Thus, closed-loop DBS paradigms, by modulating pathological oscillatory activity rather than the discharge rate of the BG-cortical networks, may afford more effective management of advanced PD.
Such strategies have the potential to be effective in additional brain disorders in which a pathological neuronal discharge pattern can be recognized.
PMID: 22017983
Stimulation on demand: closing the loop on deep brain stimulation.
High-frequency open-loop deep brain stimulation (DBS) has been used to alleviate Parkinson's symptoms for almost 20 years.
In this issue of Neuron, Rosin et al.
present a closed-loop real-time approach that improves DBS and shines light on the etiology of motor symptoms in Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 22017152
Charity criticises trusts' care of patients with Parkinson's.
PMID: 22016808
Identification of bilateral changes in TID1 expression in the 6-OHDA rat model of Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common neurodegenerative disease characterized by the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra and the aggregation of α-synuclein into Lewy bodies.
Existing therapies address motor dysfunction but do not halt progression of the disease.
A still unresolved question is the biochemical pathway that modulates the outcome of protein misfolding and aggregation processes in PD.
The molecular chaperone network plays an important defensive role against cellular protein misfolding and has been identified as protective in experimental models of protein misfolding diseases like PD.
Molecular mechanisms underlying chaperone-neuroprotection are actively under investigation.
Current evidence implicates a number of molecular chaperones in PD including Hsp25, Hsp70 and Hsp90, however their precise involvement in the neurodegenerative cascade is unresolved.
The J protein family (DnaJ or Hsp40 protein family) has long been known to be important in protein conformational processes.We assessed sensory and motor function of control and PD rats and then evaluated the brain region-specific expression levels of select J proteins by Western analysis.
Surprisingly, we observed a widespread 26 kDa breakdown product of the J protein, TID1, (tumorous imaginal discs, mtHsp40 or DnaJ3) in a 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) rat model of PD in which food handling, gait symmetry and sensory performance were impaired.
Greater behavioral deficits were associated with lower TID1 expression.
Furthermore, direct application of either 6-OHDA or MPP+ (1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinum) to CAD (CNS-derived catecholinaminergic neuronal cell line) cell cultures, reduced TID1 expression levels.Our results suggest that changes in cellular TID1 are a factor in the pathogenesis of PD by impeding functional and structural compensation and exaggerating neurodegenerative processes.
In contrast, no changes were observed in CSPα, Hsp40, Hsp70, Hsc70 and PrP(C) levels and no activation of caspase3 was observed.
This study links TID1 to PD and provides a new target for therapeutics that halts the PD progression.
PMID: 22016436
Visual hallucinations in dementia with Lewy bodies: transcranial magnetic stimulation study.
The aetiology of visual hallucinations is poorly understood in dementia with Lewy bodies.
Pathological alterations in visual cortical excitability may be one contributory mechanism.
To determine visual cortical excitability in people with dementia with Lewy bodies compared with aged-matched controls and also the relationship between visual cortical excitability and visual hallucinations in dementia with Lewy bodies.
Visual cortical excitability was determined by using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) applied to the occiput to elicit phosphenes (transient subjective visual responses) in 21 patients with dementia with Lewy bodies and 19 age-matched controls.
Phosphene parameters were similar between both groups.
However, in the patients with dementia with Lewy bodies, TMS measures of visual cortical excitability correlated strongly with the severity of visual hallucinations (P = 0.005).
Six patients with dementia with Lewy bodies experienced visual hallucination-like phosphenes (for example, seeing people or figures on stimulation) compared with none of the controls (P = 0.02).
Increased visual cortical excitability in dementia with Lewy bodies does not appear to explain visual hallucinations but it may be a marker for their severity.
PMID: 22014436
Pathological roles of α-synuclein in neurological disorders.
Substantial genetic, neuropathological, and biochemical evidence implicates the presynaptic neuronal protein α-synuclein in Parkinson's disease and related Lewy body disorders.
How dysregulation of α-synuclein leads to neurodegeneration is, however, unclear.
Soluble oligomeric, but not fully fibrillar, α-synuclein is thought to be toxic.
The major neuronal target of aberrant α-synuclein might be the synapse.
The effects of aberrant α-synuclein might include alteration of calcium homoeostasis or mitochondrial fragmentation and, in turn, mitochondrial dysfunction, which could link α-synuclein dysfunction to recessive and toxin-induced parkinsonism.
α-Synuclein also seems to be linked to other genetic forms of Parkinson's disease, such as those linked to mutations in GBA or LRRK2, possibly through common effects on autophagy and lysosomal function.
Finally, α-synuclein is physiologically secreted, and this extracellular form could lead to the spread of pathological accumulations and disease progression.
Consequently, factors that regulate the levels, post-translational modifications, specific aberrant cellular effects, or secretion of α-synuclein might be targets for therapy.
PMID: 22014434
Advances in imaging in Parkinson's disease.
Advances in imaging have made it possible to detect functional and, increasingly, structural changes in Parkinson's disease.
Although imaging is not yet routinely used for diagnosis, such an application is becoming increasingly feasible.
Of potentially greater interest, however, is the use of imaging as a biomarker to detect premotor disease and disease progression.
Imaging also provides insights into complications of Parkinson's disease and its long-term treatment, and the role of dopamine in the normal brain.
Furthermore, these techniques can be applied to animal models, to help validate these models and allow their use in the study of potential disease-modifying therapies.
PMID: 22014118
Biodegradable microspheres loaded with an anti-Parkinson prodrug: an in vivo pharmacokinetic study.
During chronic treatment with L-dopa (LD), Parkinsonian patients often experience uncontrolled motor complications due to fluctuations of the plasmatic levels of LD that result in pulsatile dopaminergic stimulation.
To overcome these plasmatic fluctuations, a novel prodrug of LD, L-dopa-α-lipoic acid (LD-LA), has been proposed as a tool for achieving continuous dopaminergic stimulation.
Due to slower susceptibility toward enzymatic conversion by LD-degrading enzymes (such as catechol-O-methyltransferase and monoamine oxidase), the plasma half-life of this prodrug is longer than that of LD.
Moreover, the higher lipophilicity of LD-LA over LD promotes its delivery to the CNS, where the resulting levels of dopamine (DA) are kept high for a longer time than after equimolar administration of LD.
To further reduce fluctuations in plasma levels of LD, LD-LA has been entrapped into biodegradable polymeric microspheres to be used as a depot system with the aim to prevent prodrug degradation and to obtain a sustained release of the intact compound.
In the present work, a formulation of LD-LA loaded microspheres (characterized for drug loading, size, morphology, thermal properties, and in vitro prodrug release) has been administered subcutaneously to rats, and the resulting levels of LD and DA in plasma and striatal tissue, respectively, have been monitored.
A good correlation between the in vitro release kinetics and the time range during which the formulation alters the LD/DA tissue levels in vivo was observed, suggesting that the polymeric microsphere matrix protects the loaded prodrug from chemical and enzymatic degradation and controls its release.
Interestingly, LD-LA microspheres provided sustained levels of DA neurotransmitter in the striatum nucleus for up to 4 days after a single administration.
In conclusion, a polymeric microsphere formulation of LD-LA is an attractive medicine for treating Parkinson's disease (PD) symptoms, avoiding motor complications.
PMID: 22013567
Urate as a marker of development and progression in Parkinson's disease.
Urate, a natural antioxidant and iron chelator, has emerged as a potentially promising compound that might prevent neurodegenerative disorders.
However, hyperuricemia may cause gout and is associated with increased cardiovascular morbidity.
This paper summarizes the impact of urate in the context of Parkinson's disease (PD).
It reviews the association of serum urate with the risk of PD, the clinical progression in PD, cognitive, dietary and gender aspects, the relationship between gout and PD, and potential therapeutic implications for the future.
PMID: 22013566
Psychosis in Parkinson's disease: therapeutic options.
This publication offers a review of the pharmacological interventions studied for Parkinson's disease psychosis.
Before initiating drug therapy for psychosis, possible contribution of antiparkinsonian medications to psychosis must be minimized by reducing their dose and completely switching them to levodopa if indicated.
As a group, second- generation antipsychotics have been studied the most for Parkinson's disease psychosis.
Evidence of efficacy for psychosis and safety for motor side effects is strongest for clozapine but routine use of clozapine is limited by its potential to cause agranulocytosis and the stringent monitoring requirements.
Based on several open-label studies, quetiapine appeared to be a reasonable alternative, but recent double-blind studies create uncertainty about its efficacy.
Olanzapine and aripiprazole have limited efficacy and are associated with worsening of motor symptoms.
Literature is limited and lacks clarity about the utility of risperidone and ziprasidone in this scenario.
Recently, encouraging literature has emerged on the use of donepezil and rivastigmine in patients with Parkinson's disease dementia and psychosis.
There is a considerable need to further study the existing drugs and explore other pharmacotherapies in Parkinson's disease psychosis.
Future research should ensure sound methodological quality and control for confounding variables to provide results that could be used reliably in clinical practice.
PMID: 22013420
Impact of a weekly dance class on the functional mobility and on the quality of life of individuals with Parkinson's disease.
Individuals with Parkinson's disease (PD) mainly suffer from motor impairments which increase the risk of falls and lead to a decline of quality of life.
Several studies investigated the long-term effect of dance for people with PD.
The aims of the present study were to investigate (i) the short-term effects of dance (i.e., the effect immediately after the dance class) on motor control in individuals with PD and (ii) the long-term effects of 8 months of participation in the weekly dance class on the quality of life of the PD patients and their caregivers.
The dance lessons took place in a ballet studio and were led by a professional dancer.
Eleven people with moderate to severe PD (58-85 years old) were subjected to a motor and quality of life assessments.
With respect to the motor assessments the unified Parkinson disease rating scale III (UPDRS III), the timed up and go test (TUG), and the Semitandem test (SeTa) before and after the dance class were used.
With respect to the quality of life and well-being we applied quality of life scale (QOLS) as well as the Westheimer questionnaire.
Additionally, we asked the caregivers to fill out the Questionnaire for caregivers.
We found a significant beneficial short-term effect for the total score of the UPDRS motor score.
The strongest improvements were in rigidity scores followed by significant improvements in hand movements, finger taps, and facial expression.
No significant changes were found for TUG and for SeTa.
The results of the questionnaires showed positive effects of the dance class on social life, health, body-feeling and mobility, and on everyday life competences of the PD patients.
Beneficial effect was also found for the caregivers.
The findings demonstrate that dance has beneficial effect on the functional mobility of individuals with PD.
Further, dance improves the quality of life of the patients and their caregivers.
Dance may lead to better therapeutic strategies as it is engaging and enjoyable.
PMID: 22013209
What genetics tells us about the causes and mechanisms of Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common motor disorder of mysterious etiology.
It is due to the progressive degeneration of the dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra and is accompanied by the appearance of intraneuronal inclusions enriched in α-synuclein, the Lewy bodies.
It is becoming increasingly clear that genetic factors contribute to its complex pathogenesis.
Over the past decade, the genetic basis of rare PD forms with Mendelian inheritance, representing no more than 10% of the cases, has been investigated.
More than 16 loci and 11 associated genes have been identified so far; genome-wide association studies have provided convincing evidence that polymorphic variants in these genes contribute to sporadic PD.
The knowledge acquired of the functions of their protein products has revealed pathways of neurodegeneration that may be shared between inherited and sporadic PD.
An impressive set of data in different model systems strongly suggest that mitochondrial dysfunction plays a central role in clinically similar, early-onset autosomal recessive PD forms caused by parkin and PINK1, and possibly DJ-1 gene mutations.
In contrast, α-synuclein accumulation in Lewy bodies defines a spectrum of disorders ranging from typical late-onset PD to PD dementia and including sporadic and autosomal dominant PD forms due to mutations in SCNA and LRRK2.
However, the pathological role of Lewy bodies remains uncertain, as they may or may not be present in PD forms with one and the same LRRK2 mutation.
Impairment of autophagy-based protein/organelle degradation pathways is emerging as a possible unifying but still fragile pathogenic scenario in PD.
Strengthening these discoveries and finding other convergence points by identifying new genes responsible for Mendelian forms of PD and exploring their functions and relationships are the main challenges of the next decade.
It is also the way to follow to open new promising avenues of neuroprotective treatment for this devastating disorder.
PMID: 22011618
Spatiotemporally controlled initiation of Parkin-mediated mitophagy within single cells.
Mitophagy, the selective removal of mitochondria through the autophagic pathway, is involved in cellular mitochondria quality control.
Dysfunctional mitochondria can be selectively eliminated through Parkin-mediated mitophagy.
Parkin is a ubiquitin E3 ligase that selectively translocates onto impaired mitochondria to initiate mitophagy, and mutations in Parkin have been identified in autosomal recessive forms of Parkinson disease.
Here with the use of a genetically encoded, mitochondria-matrix targeting photosensitizer, we established a robust strategy that allows for spatiotemporally controlled initiation of Parkin-mediated mitophagy in single cells with light.
The method can specifically target varying numbers of mitochondria into the Parkin-mediated mitophagy pathway for clearance.
Combined with live cell imaging, we demonstrated that mitochondria can be cleared by Parkin-mediated mitophagy without juxtanuclear mito-aggresome formation.
Autophagy proceeded with the asynchronous appearance of small LC3B-coated structures on Parkin-labeled mitochondria subsections in a nucleation-expansion manner.
Our method allows for quantitative measurement on the Parkin-mediated mitophagy process, and can be multiplexed in imaging for higher throughput studies.
PMID: 22009151
α-synuclein promotes neuroprotection through NF-κB-mediated transcriptional regulation of protein kinase Cδ.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder that results in a progressively debilitating loss of motor function and hypokinesia and is characterized by the selective loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta.
Recent evidence suggests that caspase-3-dependent proteolytic cleavage and nuclear translocation of the δ isoform of protein kinase C (PKCδ) may be required for oxidative stress-induced dopaminergic cell death.
Whereas several proteins have been postulated to contribute to dopaminergic neuron loss, the signaling cascades that mediate this selective neuron loss in PD are not well understood.
The presynaptic protein α-synuclein (α-syn), mutations in which cause familial PD, has been implicated in pathways that influence both neuronal protection and apoptosis.
However, the activities of α-syn in PD have not been elucidated at the molecular level, and whether α-syn is neuroprotective or neurotoxic remains controversial.
This Journal Club discusses recent research indicating that α-syn may protect against dopaminergic cell death by down-regulating PKCδ, a key molecule that mediates apoptosis in these cells.
These findings are the first steps toward the understanding of critical signaling pathways that might be important in PD pathogenesis and represent potential targets for developing new therapies.
PMID: 22008259
MicroRNAs in neurodegenerative diseases and their therapeutic potential.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are abundant, endogenous, short, noncoding RNAs that act as important post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression by base-pairing with their target mRNA.
During the last decade, substantial knowledge has accumulated regarding the biogenesis of miRNAs, their molecular mechanisms and functional roles in a variety of cellular contexts.
Altered expression of certain miRNA molecules in the brains of patients with neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer and Parkinson suggests that miRNAs could have a crucial regulatory role in these disorders.
Polymorphisms in miRNA target sites may also constitute an important determinant of disease risk.
Additionally, emerging evidence points to specific miRNAs targeting and regulating the expression of particular proteins that are key to disease pathogenesis.
Considering that the amount of these proteins in susceptible neuronal populations appears to be critical to neurodegeneration, miRNA-mediated regulation represents a new target of significant therapeutic prospects.
In this review, the implications of miRNAs in several neurodegenerative disorders and their potential as therapeutic interventions are discussed.
PMID: 22006323
A soluble α-synuclein construct forms a dynamic tetramer.
A heterologously expressed form of the human Parkinson disease-associated protein α-synuclein with a 10-residue N-terminal extension is shown to form a stable tetramer in the absence of lipid bilayers or micelles.
Sequential NMR assignments, intramonomer nuclear Overhauser effects, and circular dichroism spectra are consistent with transient formation of α-helices in the first 100 N-terminal residues of the 140-residue α-synuclein sequence.
Total phosphorus analysis indicates that phospholipids are not associated with the tetramer as isolated, and chemical cross-linking experiments confirm that the tetramer is the highest-order oligomer present at NMR sample concentrations.
Image reconstruction from electron micrographs indicates that a symmetric oligomer is present, with three- or fourfold symmetry.
Thermal unfolding experiments indicate that a hydrophobic core is present in the tetramer.
A dynamic model for the tetramer structure is proposed, based on expected close association of the amphipathic central helices observed in the previously described micelle-associated "hairpin" structure of α-synuclein.
PMID: 22005945
The Parkinson disease before James Parkinson.
The first formal description of the Shaking Palsy is ascribed to James Parkinson.
However, a review of the literature shows that several civilizations had know this disease from long before, despite the fact it was often mistaken for other diseases.
Equally, therapies of some effectiveness were prescribed since ancient times.
PMID: 22004453
Phosphorylation of LRRK2 serines 955 and 973 is disrupted by Parkinson's disease mutations and LRRK2 pharmacological inhibition.
Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most common cause of familial Parkinson's disease.
An amino terminal cluster of constitutively phosphorylated residues, serines 860, 910, 935, 955, and 973, appears to be biologically relevant.
Phosphorylation of serines 910 and 935 is regulated in response to LRRK2 kinase activity and is responsible for interaction with 14-3-3 and maintaining LRRK2 in a non-aggregated state.
We examined the phosphorylation status of two other constitutive phosphorylation sites, serines 955 and 973.
Treatment of LRRK2 expressing cells with the selective LRRK2 inhibitor LRRK2-IN1 revealed that, like Ser910/Ser935, phosphorylation of Ser955 and Ser973 is disrupted by acute inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity.
Additionally, phosphorylation of Ser955 and 973 is disrupted in the context of several Parkinson's disease associated mutations [R1441G/C, Y1699C, and I2020T].
We observed that modification of Ser973 is dependent on the modification of Ser910/Ser935.
Ser955Ala and Ser973Ala mutations do not induce relocalization of LRRK2; however, all phosphomutants exhibited similar localization patterns when exposed to LRRK2-IN1.
We conclude that the mechanisms of regulation of Ser910/935/955/973 phosphorylation are similar and physiologically relevant.
These sites can be utilized as biomarkers for LRRK2 activity as well as starting points for the elucidation of upstream and downstream enzymes that regulate LRRK2.
PMID: 22003998
Aripiprazole monotherapy in the treatment of vascular parkinsonism.
PMID: 22003392
Convergence of miRNA expression profiling, α-synuclein interacton and GWAS in Parkinson's disease.
miRNAs were recently implicated in the pathogenesis of numerous diseases, including neurological disorders such as Parkinson's disease (PD).
miRNAs are abundant in the nervous system, essential for efficient brain function and play important roles in neuronal patterning and cell specification.
To further investigate their involvement in the etiology of PD, we conducted miRNA expression profiling in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of 19 patients and 13 controls using microarrays.
We found 18 miRNAs differentially expressed, and pathway analysis of 662 predicted target genes of 11 of these miRNAs revealed an over-representation in pathways previously linked to PD as well as novel pathways.
To narrow down the genes for further investigations, we undertook a parallel approach using chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-seq) analysis to uncover genome-wide interactions of α-synuclein, a molecule with a central role in both monogenic and idiopathic PD.
Convergence of ChIP-seq and miRNomics data highlighted the glycosphingolipid biosynthesis and the ubiquitin proteasome system as key players in PD.
We then tested the association of target genes belonging to these pathways with PD risk, and identified nine SNPs in USP37 consistently associated with PD susceptibility in three genome-wide association studies (GWAS) datasets (0.46≤OR≤0.63) and highly significant in the meta-dataset (3.36×10⁻⁴<p <1.94×10⁻³).
A SNP in ST8SIA4 was also highly associated with PD (p = 6.15×10⁻³) in the meta-dataset.
These findings suggest that several miRNAs may act as regulators of both known and novel biological processes leading to idiopathic PD.
PMID: 22003171
Factors associated with exercise behavior in people with Parkinson disease.
The benefits of exercise for reducing disability in people with Parkinson disease (PD) are becoming more evident.
Optimal benefit, however, requires regular and sustained participation.
Factors associated with engaging in regular exercise have received little scientific scrutiny in people with PD.
The purpose of this study was to explore factors associated with exercise behavior in patients with PD using the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) as a guiding framework.
This was a cross-sectional study.
The participants in this study were 260 patients with PD from 4 institutions.
Participants were designated as "exercisers" or "nonexercisers" based on responses to the Stages of Readiness to Exercise Questionnaire.
Exercise status was validated using the Physical Activity Scale for the Elderly and an activity monitor.
Factors potentially associated with exercise behavior included measures of body structure and function, activity, participation, environmental factors, and personal factors.
Their relative contributions were analyzed using logistic regression and quantified with odds ratios.
One hundred sixty-four participants (63%) were designated as exercisers.
Participants with high self-efficacy were more than twice as likely to engage in regular exercise than those with low self-efficacy (adjusted odds ratio=2.34, 95% confidence interval=1.30-4.23).
College educated and older participants also were more likely to exercise.
Disabling influences of impairments, activity limitations, and participation restrictions were not associated with exercise behavior.
The cross-sectional nature of the study limited the ability to make causal inferences.
Self-efficacy, rather than disability, appears to be strongly associated with whether ambulatory, community-dwelling people with PD exercise regularly.
The results of this study suggest that physical therapists should include strategies to increase exercise self-efficacy when designing patient intervention programs for patients with PD.
PMID: 22001711
Glucocerebrosidase gene variants in parkinsonian patients with Machado Joseph/spinocerebellar ataxia 3.
Machado-Joseph disease/spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (MJD/SCA3) may rarely presents a parkinsonian phenotype.
Considering that mutations in the glucocerebrosidase (GBA) gene have been associated with Parkinson disease, we investigated whether these would be more prevalent in MJD/SCA3 patients with parkinsonian manifestations than in those without them.
MJD/SCA3 patients with parkinsonian features were identified and compared to relatives and to a MJD/SCA3 control group with no such features.
The GBA gene was sequenced and, in a subset of patients and in normal volunteers, GBA enzyme activity was measured.
We have identified nine index MJD/SCA3 patients with parkinsonian manifestations.
Overall, GBA sequence variations were found in 3/9 MJD/SCA3 index cases with parkinsonian manifestations (33%) and in 0/40 MJD/SCA3 controls without parkinsonism (p=0.03, Fisher exact test).
The GBA sequence variations found were p.K(-27)R, p.E326K, and p.T369M.
The latter two sequence variations were also found in two symptomatic relatives with no parkinsonian manifestations.
A MJD/SCA3 relative belonging to the first positive pedigree and carrier of the p.K(-27)R mutation also presented parkinsonian manifestations.
GBA activity in MJD/SCA3 patients was similar to those found in the normal control group.
Sequence variations at the GBA gene may play a role as a minor, modifying gene of MJD/SCA3 phenotype.
This hypothetical role was not related to changes in GBA activity in peripheral leukocytes.
PMID: 22001456
Frequency and characteristics of taste impairment in patients with Parkinson's disease: results of a clinical interview.
Patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) frequently complain of a diminished sense of smell.
Less frequently, they may complain of taste impairment.
In the present study, we investigated the symptoms, frequency, and severity of taste impairment as well as smell impairment in PD patients and compared the results with those of age- and sex-matched healthy controls.
We interviewed 285 PD patients (120 men, 165 women) without dementia or nasal problems.
Control subjects comprised 61 (20 men, 41 women) healthy spouses of the PD patients.
Alteration of smell and taste sense lasting more than 3 months was defined as abnormal.
One hundred and sixteen patients with PD complained of smell impairment and 26 complained of taste impairment.
Only 5 controls complained of smell impairment, and no control subjects reported taste impairment.
Taste impairment was more marked in patients with smell impairment.
Impaired taste included diminished taste perception in 21 patients, altered sense of taste in 4 patients and burning mouth in 1 patient.
Taste as well as smell perception is impaired in patients with PD.
The frequency of smell and taste impairments tended to increase with disease progression.
PMID: 22001363
CSF α-synuclein concentrations do not fluctuate over hours and are not correlated to amyloid β in humans.
Reports on the value of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) α-synuclein as a biomarker for dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson disease are contradicting.
This may be explained by fluctuating CSF α-synuclein concentrations over time.
Such fluctuations have been suggested for CSF amyloid β concentrations.
Furthermore, a physiological relationship between α-synuclein and amyloid β has been suggested based on in vitro research.
We performed repeated CSF sampling in healthy elderly and AD patients and showed that sinusoidal fluctuations in CSF α-synuclein concentrations were not present.
Furthermore, we did not find evidence for an interaction between amyloid β and α-synuclein concentrations in CSF.
PMID: 22000081
Preservation of function in Parkinson's disease: what's learning got to do with it?
Dopamine denervation gives rise to abnormal corticostriatal plasticity; however, its role in the symptoms and progression of Parkinson's disease (PD) has not been articulated or incorporated into current clinical models.
The 'integrative selective gain' framework proposed here integrates dopaminergic mechanisms known to modulate basal ganglia throughput into a single conceptual framework: (1) synaptic weights, the neural instantiation of accumulated experience and skill modulated by dopamine-dependent plasticity and (2) system gain, the operating parameters of the basal ganglia, modulated by dopamine's on-line effects on cell excitability, glutamatergic transmission and the balance between facilitatory and inhibitory pathways.
Within this framework and based on recent work, a hypothesis is presented that prior synaptic weights and established skills can facilitate motor performance and preserve function despite diminished dopamine; however, dopamine denervation induces aberrant corticostriatal plasticity that degrades established synaptic weights and replaces them with inappropriate, inhibitory learning that inverts the function of the basal ganglia resulting in 'anti-optimization' of motor performance.
Consequently, mitigating aberrant corticostriatal plasticity represents an important therapeutic objective, as reflected in the long-duration response to levodopa, reinterpreted here as the correction of aberrant learning.
It is proposed that viewing aberrant corticostriatal plasticity and learning as a provisional endophenotype of PD would facilitate investigation of this hypothesis.
PMID: 21999316
Deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus for advanced Parkinson disease using general anesthesia: long-term results.
The authors analyze long-term outcome in a substantial number of patients who underwent subthalamic nucleus (STN) deep brain stimulation (DBS) surgery under general anesthesia.
Eighty-two patients underwent bilateral placement of DBS electrodes under general anesthesia for advanced Parkinson disease; the STN was the target in all cases.
All patients underwent intraoperative microelectrode recording of the STN.
No intraoperative macrostimulation was performed.
Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) data were recorded in 28 patients.
Assessment of outcome was performed using the UPDRS (in 28 cases), the electrophysiological recordings (in all 82 cases), medication reduction (in 78 cases), and complications (in 82 cases).
There was improvement in UPDRS scores across all measures following surgery.
The total UPDRS score, off medication, improved from 68.78 (geometrical mean, 95% CI 61.76-76.60) preoperatively to 45.89 (geometrical mean, 95% CI 34.86-60.41) at 1 year postoperatively (p = 0.003, data available in 26 patients).
Improvements were obtained in UPDRS Part II (Activities of Daily Living) off medication (p = 0.001) and also UPDRS Part III (Motor Examination) off medication (p < 0.001).
Results for the on-medication and on-stimulation states also showed a statistically significant improvement for UPDRS Part III (p = 0.047).
Good microelectrode recording of the STN was obtained under general anesthesia; the median first-track length was 4.0 mm, and the median number of tracks passed per patient was 3.0.
The median reduction in levodopa medication was 58.1% (interquartile range 42.9%-73.3%).
One patient had an intracerebral hemorrhage in the track of 1 electrode but did not require surgical evacuation.
One patient had generalized convulsive seizures 24 hours postoperatively and was intubated for seizure control.
Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale scores were obtained in 26 patients at 1 year, 28 patients at 3 years, 17 at 5 years, and 7 at 7 years postoperatively.
Up to 7 years postoperatively, there was sustained improvement in the total UPDRS score.
The results in these patients showed minimal deterioration in the motor section of the UPDRS over time, up to 7 years following the operation.
The authors found no evidence that the UPDRS Part II scores changed significantly over the period of 1-7 years after surgery (p = 0.671, comparison of mean scores at 1 and 7 years using generalized estimating equations).
Long-term outcomes confirm that it is both safe and effective to perform STN DBS under general anesthesia.
As part of patient choice, this option should be offered to all DBS candidates with advanced Parkinson disease to enable more of these patients to undergo this beneficial surgery.
PMID: 21998100
Altered brain activation and connectivity in early Parkinson disease tactile perception.
Deficits in tactile perception are common in patients with PD.
However, the neural mechanisms have not been previously reported in the early stages.
This study aims to investigate how the brain activity and connectivity changed under tactile perception at early Parkinsonian state by using functional MR imaging.
Twenty-one patients with early PD and 22 age- and sex-matched controls were recruited and scanned under a passive tactile stimulation task.
Within-group and between-group activation maps were acquired, and regions of interest were defined according to the group-comparison result.
This was followed by a functional connectivity analysis based on the graph theory.
We found that in the PD group, bilateral sensorimotor cortex was hypoactive during the task, whereas the hyperactive regions were mainly in bilateral prefrontal cortex, bilateral cerebellum, and contralateral striatum.
There was a significant decrease of total connectivity degree in ipsilateral SMA in PD, which was negatively correlated with the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale score.
Furthermore, the connection strengths among the areas of prefrontal cortex, striatum, and cerebellum were increased.
This study illustrated that early PD was associated with not only altered brain activation but also changed functional connectivity in tactile perception.
The most significant impairment was in SMA, whereas striato-prefrontal and cerebello-prefrontal loops may play a compensatory role in early PD tactile function.
PMID: 21995451
The impact of familial structure on Parkinson's disease in istanbul medical school, Turkey.
The prevalence and family structure of idiopathic Parkinson disease (iPD) in Turkey is not known.
Patients with iPD were recruited consecutively at the Medical School of Istanbul University over an 18-month period.
Clinical details were assessed with standardized forms.
Of the 219 iPD patients, 136 had sporadic iPD [26 with parental consanguinity (cs)], 20 autosomal recessive PD (9 with cs) and 63 autosomal dominant or pseudo-dominant inheritances (20 with cs).
Age at onset was 49.1 ± 17.1 years (range 3-83) and age at examination 56.4 ± 16.5 years (range 4-93).
Ages at examination and at clinical onset of PD were significantly greater in sporadic iPD than in familial iPD patients, but disease duration was similar.
Patients with familial PD had significantly lower basal UPDRS III and Hoehn and Yahr scores than sporadic PD patients and brisk reflexes in the lower limbs were significantly more frequent, but they suffered less from mictional problems.
The frequency of familial PD and consanguinity in Turkey is higher and age at onset of iPD earlier than in Western countries.
Molecular diagnoses and genetic counseling will therefore have a very important impact on the medical, psychological, and familial handling of PD in Turkey.
PMID: 21994362
Dopaminergic striatal innervation predicts interlimb transfer of a visuomotor skill.
We investigated whether dopamine influences the rate of adaptation to a visuomotor distortion and the transfer of this learning from the right to the left limb in human subjects.
We thus studied patients with Parkinson disease as a putative in vivo model of dopaminergic denervation.
Despite normal adaptation rates, patients showed a reduced transfer compared with age-matched healthy controls.
The magnitude of the transfer, but not of the adaptation rate, was positively predicted by the values of dopamine-transporter binding of the right caudate and putamen.
We conclude that striatal dopaminergic activity plays an important role in the transfer of visuomotor skills.
PMID: 21994149
Handedness correlates with the dominant parkinson side: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Parkinson's disease (PD) characteristically presents with asymmetrical symptoms, contralateral to the side of the most extensive cerebral affection.
This intriguing asymmetry, even included in the definition for diagnosing PD, however, is still part of a mystery.
The relation with handedness as a common indicator of cerebral asymmetry might provide a clue in the search for causal factors of asymmetrical symptom onset in PD.
This possible relationship, however, is still under debate.
The objective of this study was to establish whether a relation between handedness and dominant PD side exists.
We searched for cross-sectional or cohort studies that registered handedness and onset side in PD patients in PubMed, EMBASE, and Web of Science from their first record until 14 February 2011.
Data about handedness and dominant PD side was extracted.
Authors who registered both but not described their relation were contacted for further information.
Odds ratios (ORs) were analyzed with a fixed effect Mantel-Haenszel model.
Heterogeneity and indications of publication bias were limited.
Our electronic search identified 10 studies involving 4405 asymmetric PD patients.
Of the right-handed patients, 2413 (59.5%) had right-dominant and 1644 (40.5%) had left-dominant PD symptoms.
For the left-handed patients this relation was reversed, with 142 (40.8%) right-dominant and 206 (59.2%) left-dominant PD symptoms.
Overall OR was 2.13 (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.71-2.66).
Handedness and symptom dominance in PD are firmly related with each other in such a way that the PD symptoms emerge more often on the dominant hand-side.
Possible causal factors are discussed.
© 2011 Movement Disorder Society.
PMID: 21994043
Cortically evoked responses of human pallidal neurons.
PMID: 21993592
The yin and yang of amyloid: insights from α-synuclein and repeat domain of Pmel17.
Amyloid has been traditionally viewed in the context of disease.
However, the emerging concept of 'functional amyloid' has taken a new direction into how we view amyloid.
Recent studies have identified amyloid fibrils ranging from bacteria to humans that have a beneficial role, instead of being associated with a misfolded state that has been implicated in diseases such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and prion diseases.
Here, we review our work on two human amyloidogenic polypeptides, one associated with Parkinson's disease, α-synuclein (α-syn), and the other important for melanin synthesis, the repeat domain (RPT) from Pmel17.
Particularly, we focused our attention on spectroscopic studies of protein conformation and dynamics and their impact on α-syn amyloid formation and for RPT, we discussed the strict pH dependence of amyloid formation and its role in melanin biosynthesis.
PMID: 21992241
Survey of U.S. neurologists' attitudes towards deep brain stimulation for Parkinson's disease.
  Deep brain stimulation (DBS) for Parkinson's disease (PD) was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 2002 and has demonstrated clinical benefit in advanced PD.
Our aim was to assess attitudes of U.S.
neurologists towards the role of DBS in management of advanced PD.
  We sent a 40-item Internet-based survey assessing opinions regarding the role of medical and surgical therapies in managing PD to 7722 neurologists in the American Medical Association Physician MasterFile data base.
  The response rate was low (4.2%).
In total, 78 of the 298 (26%) responders self-identified as movement disorders specialists.
Specialists and non-specialists had differences on a number of medical strategies used to manage PD.
There were no statistically significant differences in reasons for or against referring patients for DBS, except for the number of non-specialists who agreed with referring a patient who had a "poor or absent response to levodopa" (71% vs.
16%, p < 0.001).
Both groups indicated a need for more information concerning appropriate indications for DBS, adverse effects of surgery, and postoperative programming.
  Movement disorders specialists and non-specialists were in general agreement towards the beneficial role of DBS in management of advanced PD except for whether to refer patients with poor or absent response to levodopa.
PMID: 21990005
The cellular pathology of lysosomal diseases.
With a constitutive recycling function and the capacity to digest exogenous material as well as endogenous organelles in the process of autophagy, lysosomes are at the heart of the living cell.
Dynamic interactions with other cellular components ensure that the lysosomal compartment is a central point of convergence in countless diverse diseases.
Inborn lysosomal (storage) diseases represent about 70 genetically distinct conditions, with a combined birth frequency of about 1 in 7500.
Many are associated with macromolecular storage, causing physical disruption of the organelle and cognate structures; in neurons, ectopic dendritogenesis and axonal swelling due to distension with membraneous tubules and autophagic vacuoles are observed.
Disordered autophagy is almost universal in lysosomal diseases but biochemical injury due to toxic metabolites such as lysosphingolipid molecules, abnormal calcium homeostasis and endoplasmic reticulum stress responses and immune-inflammatory processes occur.
However, in no case have the mechanistic links between individual clinico-pathological manifestations and the underlying molecular defect been precisely defined.
With access to the external fluid-phase and intracellular trafficking pathways, the lysosome and its diseases are a focus of pioneering investment in biotechnology; this has generated innovative orphan drugs and, in the case of Gaucher's disease, effective treatment for the haematological and visceral manifestations.
Given that two-thirds of lysosomal diseases have potentially devastating consequences in the nervous system, future therapeutic research will require an integrative understanding of the unitary steps in their neuro pathogenesis.
Informative genetic variants illustrated by patients with primary defects in this organelle offer unique insights into the central role of lysosomes in human health and disease.
We provide a conspectus of inborn lysosomal diseases and their pathobiology; the cryptic evolution of events leading to irreversible changes may be dissociated from the cellular storage phenotype, as revealed by the outcome of therapeutic gene transfer undertaken at different stages of disease.
PMID: 21989633
Toward automated, at-home assessment of mobility among patients with Parkinson disease, using a body-worn accelerometer.
To develop an automated and objective method to assess mobility in Parkinson disease (PD) patients in daily-life settings and to investigate whether accelerometer-derived measures discriminate between PD and healthy controls as they walk and simulate activities of daily living (ADL).
Healthy older adults (17) and patients with PD (22) wore a triaxial accelerometer on their lower back during short walks (validation study) and during a walk around the medical center to simulate daily activities (ADL simulation).
The variability (consistency and rhythmicity) of stepping was assessed.
The patients completed the walks before and after taking their anti-Parkinsonian medications.
Frequency-based acceleration measures included dominant frequency, amplitude (strength of signal frequency), width (frequency dispersion), and slope (a combination reflecting amplitude and width) of the main frequency of the power spectral density in the 0.5- to 3.0-Hz band.
A subset of the Unified Parkinson-Disease Rating Scale provided a clinical measure of gait impairment (UPDRS-Gait5).
A PD patient and control wore the sensors for 3 days at home.
The width was larger, and the amplitude and slope were smaller in the PD patients compared to the controls in the validation study and ADL simulation (P < .02).
The width decreased, and the amplitude and slope increased when patients took anti-Parkinsonian medications (P < .007).
Significant correlations were observed between acceleration-derived measures and UPDRS-Gait5.
The data obtained at home was similar to the clinic data.
Frequency-derived measures are valid and sensitive estimates of stride-to-stride variability that can be used to assess the quality and consistency of walking in patients with PD in real-life settings.
PMID: 21989388
Combined STN/SNr-DBS for the treatment of refractory gait disturbances in Parkinson's disease: study protocol for a randomized controlled trial.
BACKGROUND: Severe gait disturbances in idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD) are observed in up to 80% of all patients in advanced disease stages with important impact on quality of life.
There is an unmet need for further symptomatic therapeutic strategies, particularly as gait disturbances generally respond unfavourably to dopaminergic medication and conventional deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus in advanced disease stages.
Recent pathophysiological research pointed to nigro-pontine networks entrained to locomotor integration.
Stimulation of the pedunculopontine nucleus is currently under investigation, however, hitherto remains controversial.
The substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr)--entrained into integrative locomotor networks--is pathologically overactive in PD.
High-frequent stimulation of the substantia nigra pars reticulata preferentially modulated axial symptoms and therefore is suggested as a novel therapeutic candidate target for neuromodulation of refractory gait disturbances in PD.
METHODS: 12 patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease and refractory gait disturbances under best individual subthalamic nucleus stimulation and dopaminergic medication will be enroled into this double-blind 2 × 2 cross-over clinical trial.
The treatment consists of two different stimulation settings using (i) conventional stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus [STNmono] and (ii) combined stimulation of distant electrode contacts located in the subthalamic nucleus and caudal border zone of STN and substantia nigra pars reticulata [STN+SNr].
The primary outcome measure is the change of the cumulative 'axial score' (UPDRS II items '13-15' and UPRDS III items '27-31') at three weeks of constant stimulation in either condition.
Secondary outcome measures include specific scores on freezing of gait, balance function, quality of life, non-motor symptoms, and neuropsychiatric symptoms.
The aim of the present trial is to investigate the efficacy and safety of a three week constant combined stimulation on [STN+SNr] compared to [STNmono].
The results will clarify, whether stimulation on nigral contacts additional to subthalamic stimulation will improve therapeutic response of otherwise refractory gait disturbances in PD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: The trial was registered with the clinical trials register of http://www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT01355835).
PMID: 21988682
Caring for older people at home.
PMID: 21986423
Introduction to induced pluripotent stem cells: advancing the potential for personalized medicine.
Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cell technology has enormous potential to advance medical therapy by personalizing regenerative medicine and creating novel human disease models for research and therapeutic testing.
Before this technology is broadly used in the clinic, we must realistically evaluate its disease modeling and therapeutic potential.
Recent advances including the use of iPS cells to successfully model spinal muscular atrophy in vitro, as well as new techniques in generating iPS cells with recombinant proteins have accelerated the prospects of iPS cells for clinical use in regenerative therapy.
This review explores the development and limitations of iPS cell technology, presents a critical comparison of iPS cells and embryonic stem cells, and discusses potential clinical applications and future research directions.
PMID: 21985233
In vitro anti-plasmodial activity of Dicoma anomala subsp. gerrardii (Asteraceae): identification of its main active constituent, structure-activity relationship studies and gene expression profiling.
Anti-malarial drug resistance threatens to undermine efforts to eliminate this deadly disease.
The resulting omnipresent requirement for drugs with novel modes of action prompted a national consortium initiative to discover new anti-plasmodial agents from South African medicinal plants.
One of the plants selected for investigation was Dicoma anomala subsp.
gerrardii, based on its ethnomedicinal profile.
Standard phytochemical analysis techniques, including solvent-solvent extraction, thin-layer- and column chromatography, were used to isolate the main active constituent of Dicoma anomala subsp.
gerrardii.
The crystallized pure compound was identified using nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, mass spectrometry and X-ray crystallography.
The compound was tested in vitro on Plasmodium falciparum cultures using the parasite lactate dehydrogenase (pLDH) assay and was found to have anti-malarial activity.
To determine the functional groups responsible for the activity, a small collection of synthetic analogues was generated - the aim being to vary features proposed as likely to be related to the anti-malarial activity and to quantify the effect of the modifications in vitro using the pLDH assay.
The effects of the pure compound on the P.
falciparum transcriptome were subsequently investigated by treating ring-stage parasites (alongside untreated controls), followed by oligonucleotide microarray- and data analysis.
The main active constituent was identified as dehydrobrachylaenolide, a eudesmanolide-type sesquiterpene lactone.
The compound demonstrated an in vitro IC50 of 1.865 μM against a chloroquine-sensitive strain (D10) of P.
falciparum.
Synthetic analogues of the compound confirmed an absolute requirement that the α-methylene lactone be present in the eudesmanolide before significant anti-malarial activity was observed.
This feature is absent in the artemisinins and suggests a different mode of action.
Microarray data analysis identified 572 unique genes that were differentially expressed as a result of the treatment and gene ontology analysis identified various biological processes and molecular functions that were significantly affected.
Comparison of the dehydrobrachylaenolide treatment transcriptional dataset with a published artesunate (also a sesquiterpene lactone) dataset revealed little overlap.
These results strengthen the notion that the isolated compound and the artemisinins have differentiated modes of action.
The novel mode of action of dehydrobrachylaenolide, detected during these studies, will play an ongoing role in advancing anti-plasmodial drug discovery efforts.
PMID: 21983723
[The effect of small ubiquitin-like modifier-1 modification on the formation of Lewy body-like inclusions in cytoplasm and apoptosis of HEK293 cell induced by overexpression and mutation of alpha-synuclein].
To investigate the effect of small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO-1) modification on the formation of Lewy body like inclusions in cytoplasm and apoptosis of HEK293 cell induced by overexpression and mutation of alpha-synuclein.
cDNA encoding the human alpha-synuclein without the stop codon was cloned into a pGEM T-easy vector.
Restriction enzyme mapping and DNA sequencing were performed to analyze the plasmid, which was then subcloned into a pEGFP-N1 vector.
The recombinant plasmid alpha-synuclein-pEGFP was transfected into HEK293 cells by lipofectamin method.
Inclusions in the cultured cells were identified with HE staining.
Apoptosis of the HEK293 cell was measured by Hoechst 33258 staining, MTT and Annexin V-PE flow cytometry.
The Lewy-body like inclusions were found in cytoplasm of cultured cells.
Hoechst staining showed that the nuclei of cells were enlarged in the wild-type and A53T mutation groups 48 h after transfection, chromatin were accumulated and appeared spot-like.
The nucleus stain was equitable in the K96R and K96R-A53T groups.
MTT assay showed that the viability of cells transfected with empty plasmid was 96.2%, but it dropped to 53.4% and 56.1% in cells transfected with wild-type alpha-synuclein-pEGFP and A53T mutant group, respectively.
The viability was 72.3% and 69.8% in cells transfected with K96R and K96R-A53T, respectively (P<0.05).
Forty eight hours after transfection, the apoptosis rate was 3.9% in empty plasmid group, 32.2% and 34.1% in cells transfected with wild-type and mutant alpha-synuclein-pEGFP, 19.4% and 20.3% in the K96R and K96R-A53T transfected cells.
There was significant difference between the two groups (P<0.05).
SUMO-1 modification did not have influence on the Lewy body-like inclusions formation in cytoplasm of HEK293 cell in vitro, but had a toxic effect which could increase the apoptosis induced by wild type overexpression and mutation of alpha-synuclein.
PMID: 21983019
Impulse control disorders and depression in Finnish patients with Parkinson's disease.
Impulse control disorders occur frequently in patients with Parkinson's disease.
However, the frequencies have been investigated mainly in patients from secondary or tertiary care centers, and thus, the prevalence rates in general community are not known.
Our objective was to study the prevalence rates of impulse control disorders and related factors in a large, non-selected sample of Parkinson's disease patients.
We conducted a cross-sectional survey among Parkinson's disease patients from Finnish Parkinson Association [n = 575; 365 men, 240 women, median age 64 (range 43-90) years].
Problem and pathological gambling were estimated with the South Oaks Gambling Screen, risk for impulse control disorders with the validated Questionnaire for Impulsive-Compulsive Disorders in Parkinson's Disease, and depression with the Beck Depression Inventory.
The frequency of pathological gambling was 7.0%.
The overall frequency of a positive screen for an impulse control disorder was 34.8%, and 12.5% of the patients screened positive for multiple disorders.
Depressive symptoms were statistically the most important factor in explaining variance in impulse control disorder risk, even more than sex, age, age of disease onset, alcohol use, or medication.
The high proportion of patients screened positive for impulse control disorders in a non-selected sample emphasize the importance of routine screening of these disorders in Parkinson's disease.
Pathological gambling prevalence in Parkinson's disease is seven times higher than in the general population in Finland.
The results underline the importance of depression in impulse control disorders associated with Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21982566
Evaluation of striatal oxidative stress in patients with Parkinson's disease using [62Cu]ATSM PET.
To clarify the role of oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease (PD) in living patients, positron emission tomography (PET) with [(62)Cu]diacetyl-bis(N(4)-methylthiosemicarbazone) ([(62)Cu]ATSM) was applied to functional imaging of oxidative stress mainly due to mitochondrial dysfunction in the striata of patients with PD.
Fifteen PD patients who presented with lateral dominant symptoms at onset and six healthy controls underwent [(62)Cu]ATSM PET.
Dynamic PET data acquisition was performed, and standardized uptake values (SUVs) were obtained from the delayed phase of dynamic data by means of region of interest analysis.
The striatum-to-cerebellum SUV ratio (S/C ratio) was calculated from the SUV in all subjects of the striatum and the cerebellar cortex.
The mean S/C ratio of the bilateral striata of the patients (1.15±0.10) was significantly increased compared with that of the controls (1.08±0.02) (P<.05).
In the patients, the S/C ratio of the bilateral striata showed a positive correlation with the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) rating (r=0.52, P<.05), and the S/C ratio of the striatum contralateral to the initially affected body side showed a strong positive correlation with the UPDRS rating (r=0.62, P<.05).
[(62)Cu]ATSM PET imaging demonstrated that striatal oxidative stress was enhanced in PD patients compared with the controls and increased with the progression of disease severity, particularly in the contralateral striatum.
These findings indicated that oxidative stress associates with striatal neurodegeneration in PD.
PMID: 21981780
Absence of an orphan mitochondrial protein, c19orf12, causes a distinct clinical subtype of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation.
The disease classification neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) comprises a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of progressive neurodegenerative disorders characterized by brain iron deposits in the basal ganglia.
For about half of the cases, the molecular basis is currently unknown.
We used homozygosity mapping followed by candidate gene sequencing to identify a homozygous 11 bp deletion in the orphan gene C19orf12.
Mutation screening of 23 ideopathic NBIA index cases revealed two mutated alleles in 18 of them, and one loss-of-function mutation is the most prevalent.
We also identified compound heterozygous missense mutations in a case initially diagnosed with Parkinson disease at age 49.
Psychiatric signs, optic atrophy, and motor axonal neuropathy were common findings.
Compared to the most prevalent NBIA subtype, pantothenate kinase associated neurodegeneration (PKAN), individuals with two C19orf12 mutations were older at age of onset and the disease progressed more slowly.
A polyclonal antibody against the predicted membrane spanning protein showed a mitochondrial localization.
A histopathological examination in a single autopsy case detected Lewy bodies, tangles, spheroids, and tau pathology.
The mitochondrial localization together with the immunohistopathological findings suggests a pathomechanistic overlap with common forms of neurodegenerative disorders.
PMID: 21981324
Artistic productivity and creative thinking in Parkinson's disease.
Background and purpose:  Creative drive and enhanced artistic-like production may emerge in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) during dopaminergic therapy.
However, it has not been described to date whether this artistic-like production results from dopaminergic drugs triggering innate skills or it could be considered as a repeated behavior possibly associated with impulse control disorders (ICDs).
Methods:  We investigated creative drive in a cohort of cognitively preserved patients with PD by means of the Torrance Test of Creative Thinking (TTCT).
We also investigated a putative association between creative drive and ICDs in 36 PD patients with (PD-c) or without (PD-nc) increased artistic-like production and 36 healthy controls (HC).
We considered artistic-like productivity to be enhanced if patients reported working on any form of art more than 2 h per day after the introduction of dopaminergic treatment.
The TTCT, the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS-11A), the Minnesota Impulsive Disorders Interview (MIDI), and the Punding Rating Scale were applied.
Results:  Mean TTCT score of PD-c was found to be similar to HC (169.4 ± 51.6 vs.
170.2 ± 69.7, respectively), and both PD-c and HC had significantly higher TTCT scores than patients with PD-nc (125.4 ± 46.1 P < 0.05).
TTCT did not correlate with any demographic or clinical data in both PD subgroups.
No correlation was found between TTCT, BIS-11A, and MIDI.
Conclusions:  Our study suggests that newly acquired artistic-like production in patients with PD is not associated with impulsivity or ICDs.
Artistic-like production might represent the emerging of innate skills in a subset of predisposed patients with PD on dopaminergic therapy.
PMID: 21980675
Acute psychosis after paclitaxel infusion.
Paclitaxel (PTX) is a widely used antineoplastic agent against a variety of cancers.
The common side effects are myelosuppression and peripheral neurotoxicity.
There have been occasional instances of central nervous system toxicity after PTX treatment though the syndrome is not well described.
We report a patient undergoing treatment for laryngeal cancer who experienced mental status changes and psychosis after each cycle of PTX and carboplatin, lasting for less than a day.
In a subsequent cycle excluding PTX, these symptoms did not recur.
PMID: 21980177
Exercise and Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21978795
Switching on the deep brain stimulation: effects on cardiovascular regulation and respiration.
Objective of this study was to evaluate the acute cardiovascular and respiratory effects of switching on the deep brain stimulation in the follow up of nine Parkinson's disease patients with subthalamic nucleus stimulation and six cluster headache patients with posterior hypothalamic area stimulation.
Systolic and diastolic blood pressure, heart rate, and respiratory rate were monitored continuously during supine rest in both groups.
Each patient was assessed in two conditions: resting supine with stimulator off and with stimulator on.
In supine resting condition switching on the DBS induced no significant changes (p>0.05) in systolic and diastolic blood pressure as well as in heart rate and respiratory rate, in both groups of patients, either taking 1 min or 10 heartbeats as a sample for analysis.
Switching on the DBS does not modify heart rate, blood pressure nor respiratory rate in both Parkinson and cluster headache patients under resting conditions.
PMID: 21977026
Swallowing in Parkinson Patients versus Healthy Controls: Reliability of Measurements in Videofluoroscopy.
Objective.
To determine and describe the pathophysiological aspects of oropharyngeal swallowing in patients with Parkinson's disease more accurately, a pilot study of qualitative as well as quantitative parameters of swallowing was performed using videofluoroscopy (VFS).
Methods.
Ten patients with a diagnosis of idiopathic Parkinson's disease having dysphagic complaints and ten healthy age- and gender-matched control subjects underwent a standardized videofluoroscopic swallowing protocol.
Information on the swallowing function was derived from temporal, spatial, and descriptive visuoperceptual parameters.
Intra- and interrater reliability was calculated.
Results.
No significant differences were found between Parkinson patients and healthy control subjects for the majority of the reliable variables.
Conclusions.
It was concluded that swallowing function seemed to be preserved in the early stages of Parkinson's disease.
Furthermore, the reliability of many quantitative as well as qualitative swallowing parameters proved insufficient, raising questions about the interpretation of study outcomes in videofluoroscopy.
PMID: 21975386
Quantitative evaluation of striatal I-123-FP-CIT uptake in essential tremor and parkinsonism.
The aim of this study was to quantitatively evaluate the striatal uptake in 3 groups of patients: essential tremor (ET), drug-induced parkinsonism (DIP), and Parkinson disease (PD), using a voxel-based methodology and volumes of interests (VOIs) analysis.
Sixty patients from the Neurology Department Movement Disorders outpatient clinic in a tertiary hospital with I-123-FP-CIT SPECT were selected.
After a clinical follow-up period of 2 years, a final clinical diagnosis of DIP was established for 20 patients (first group); 20 patients were diagnosed with ET (second group), and the third group was made up of 20 patients with a qualitatively pathologic SPECT who were diagnosed with PD.Once processed, DIP studies were spatially normalized to Montreal Neurologic Institute space and an average image was computed to create an I-123-FP-CIT SPECT template using statistical parametric mapping (SPM).
Then all the I-123-FP-CIT images from all groups (DIP, ET, and PD) were registered to the new template.
VOIs were defined in a digital atlas in Montreal Neurologic Institute space (caudate nucleus, putamen, and occipital cortex).
Finally, mean counts were extracted from all VOIs and putamen-occipital and caudate-occipital ratios were computed.
Analysis of variance tests were performed with all ratios.A SPM study of patterns evaluated the efficacy of the automated technique to determine whether the significant differences among groups corresponded to the same regions that the method purported to evaluate.
The analysis of variance test revealed significant differences between DIP and ET as compared with PD, both in the putamen and in the caudate nucleus.
There were significant differences between DIP and ET populations only in the putamen but not in the caudate.The SPM found a lower uptake in the PD group in comparison with the ET and DIP groups.
Therefore, in the organic parkinsonism cases, the most significant changes in uptake decrease were found in the putamen nuclei when compared with the DIP and the ET cases.
No significant changes were observed between the ET and DIP groups.
This study provides a fairly simple, reproducible, and useful methodology to be applied in everyday practice to quantify the studies of dopamine transporters using FP-CIT.We present the different ratios for putamen and caudate nucleus for 3 different groups with FP-CIT images.
We obtained an optimal discrimination threshold value between the reference population and the pathologic population for the putamen ratio.
PMID: 21971352
Therapeutic high-frequency stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson's disease produces global increases in cerebral blood flow.
Chronic, high-frequency electrical stimulation of the subthalamic nuclei (STNs) has become an effective and widely used therapy in Parkinson's disease (PD), but the therapeutic mechanism is not understood.
Stimulation of the STN is believed to reorganize neurophysiological activity patterns within the basal ganglia, whereas local field effects extending to tracts adjacent to the STN are viewed as sources of nontherapeutic side effects.
This study is part of a larger project investigating the effects of STN stimulation on speech and regional cerebral blood flow (CBF) in human subjects with PD.
While generating measures of global CBF (gCBF) to normalize regional CBF values for a subsequent combined analysis of regional CBF and speech data, we observed a third effect of this therapy: a gCBF increase.
This effect was present across three estimates of gCBF ranging from values based on the highest activity voxels to those based on all voxels.
The magnitude of the gCBF increase was related to the subject's duration of PD.
It is not clear whether this CBF effect has a therapeutic role, but the impact of deep brain stimulation on cerebrovascular control warrants study from neuroscience, pathophysiological, and therapeutic perspectives.
PMID: 21970092
Treatment of Parkinson's disease. Psychological disorders: striking a balance in order to optimise antiparkinsonian treatment.
Parkinson's disease is frequently associated with psychological disorders, especially depression, psychotic disorders, and dementia.
We examined the management of psychological disorders in Parkinson's disease, including the use of psychotropic drugs, by reviewing the literature using the standard Prescrire methodology.
About one-third of patients with Parkinson's disease experience visual hallucinations.
Other hallucinations and delusions can also occur.
Dose reduction or withdrawal of certain antiparkinsonian drugs sometimes improves psychotic disorders, providing an acceptable level of symptom control.
Clozapine is effective and does not worsen parkinsonian symptoms, but it carries a risk of severe adverse effects, including agranulocytosis.
Other neuroleptics are ineffective or worsen motor status.
Mood disorders and depression are frequent during the course of Parkinson's disease.
Pramipexole, an antiparkinsonian dopamine agonist, improved depressive symptoms in patients with Parkinson's disease in one trial.
Its main adverse effects are ocular disorders.
Several trials have shown that some tricyclic antidepressants improve depression in Parkinson's patients, but these drugs can worsen cognitive status and cause postural hypotension.
Data on selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor antidepressants (SSRIs) are unconvincing.
A meta-analysis of three trials showed that treatment withdrawals due to adverse events were similarly frequent with tricyclics and SSRIs.
Dementia is frequent in end-stage Parkinson's disease.
When severe cognitive disorders occur, it is advisable to withdraw any drugs capable of worsening the situation, especially drugs with antimuscarinic effects and benzodiazepines.
Cholinesterase inhibitors have a negative harm-benefit balance in this setting.
When a Parkinson's patient presents with a psychological disorder, the first step is to optimise antiparkinsonian treatment by striking a balance between motor control and psychological adverse effects.
In the few situations in which drug treatment is likely to be beneficial, it should be remembered that psychotropic drugs are at best only moderately effective and should be used with care, monitoring patients for adverse effects.
PMID: 21969043
A new (old) treatment option for depression in Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21967281
Move for Change Part I: a European survey evaluating the impact of the EPDA Charter for People with Parkinson's disease.
Background and purpose:  The 1997 European Parkinson's Disease Association's (EPDA) Charter for People with Parkinson's disease (PD) outlines their rights in terms of standards of care.
It states that all patients have the right to: be referred to a doctor with a special interest in PD; receive an accurate diagnosis; have access to support services; receive continuous care; and take part in managing their illness.
Move for Change is a three-part series of pan-European patient surveys based on this Charter.
Methods:  This first survey, consisting of 23 questions, focusing on the initial two points of the Charter, was administered online through the EPDA and affiliated patient associations' Web sites.
Of 2149 forms received from 35 European countries, 2068 (96.2%) were analyzed, with the remainder excluded, mainly due to incomplete responses.
Results:  The majority of patients were diagnosed within 2 years from the onset of first symptoms (82.7%; range, <1 year to ≥5 years).
In relation to diagnosis delivery, 45.3% of patients stated that it was 'poor' or 'very poor'.
During the 2 years following diagnosis, 43.8% of respondents had never seen a PD specialist.
Care was usually overseen by generically active neurologists (92.5%) or family doctors (81.0%), with considerable overlap between the two.
Conclusions:  These data highlight challenges that patients with PD face during the period of diagnosis, despite introduction of the Charter.
These findings can assist healthcare professionals and policy makers in improving the level of care for patients and their families across Europe, and we offer suggestions about how this can be achieved.
PMID: 21966866
[Evidence-based therapeutic algorithms in the treatment of depression, dementia and psychosis in Parkinson's disease].
PMID: 21966751
Cigarette smoking and Parkinson's disease: a meta-analysis.
Many but not all studies have indicated that smoking is inversely associated with Parkinson's disease (PD).
Meta-analysis of epidemiological studies on smoking and PD was performed to summarize data from published studies.
Fifty-four epidemiological studies (48 case-control and 6 cohort studies, 53 publications) were identified for potential inclusion in meta-analysis.
The summary risk estimates for current smokers, former smokers, and ever (current and former) smokers were 0.31 (95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.25-0.38), 0.72 (95% CI = 0.63-0.83) and 0.55 (95% CI = 0.51-0.59), respectively.
In stratified analysis by study design, smoking had a somewhat greater impact on PD risk in cohort studies than in case-control studies.
However, meta-regression indicated that the study design did not significantly contribute to heterogeneity.
Additional analyses were restricted to case-control studies because of the sufficient number of studies.
Stratified analysis by ethnicity indicated that the summary OR for ever-smokers was nonsignificantly smaller in Asian populations than in Caucasian populations.
In stratified analysis by source of controls, former smoking was significantly associated with a decreased risk of PD in hospital-based case-control studies but was marginally associated with a decreased risk in population-based case-control studies.
The source of controls did not contribute significantly to heterogeneity.
PD risk associated with ever-smoking was significantly lower for a hospital-based approach than a population-based approach.
Among current smokers, the association held true to the same extent for both approaches.
This meta-analysis indicated that smokers have a lower risk of PD.
As PD is a multifactorial disease, further investigation of the smoking-gene interaction on PD risk may lead to a better understanding of the pathogenesis of PD.
PMID: 21964848
Nervous system lyme disease: is there a controversy?
Infection with the tick-borne spirochete, BORRELIA BURGDORFERI, affects the nervous system in well-defined ways.
Accurate diagnostic tools and effective therapeutic regimens are now well established.
Persistent misconceptions about (1) the role and interpretation of laboratory tests, (2) what is and is not evidence of nervous system infection, and (3) what constitutes an expected response to treatment have fostered widespread perceptions that this disease is highly controversial.
Infection causes the classically described triad of meningitis, radiculoneuritis, and cranial neuritis; however, virtually every known neurologic disorder has been blamed on this infection.
For most (multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease), evidence is scant, nonexistent, or coincidental.
For some (cerebral vasculitis with stroke, optic neuritis) a few case reports suggest a rare possible causal link.
PMID: 21963735
Pramipexole reduces the prevalence of fatigue in patients with Parkinson's disease.
The aim of this multicenter cross-sectional study was to assess the relation between fatigue in a large number of Japanese patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) and drugs taken to treat PD.
We used the 16-item Parkinson Fatigue Scale (PFS-16), which was designed to assess fatigue exclusively associated with PD.
Multiple logistic regression analyses were used to assess the relation between antiparkinson drugs and fatigue in PD.
A total of 350 non-demented PD patients were enrolled.
Fatigue (PFS score of ≥4) was revealed in 319 patients (91%).
Pramipexole was administered to 24% of PD patients.
Multiple logistic regression analysis revealed that the administration of Pramipexole was significantly related to low rates of fatigue in PD patients with Hoehn and Yahr stage <3 (p=0.011, odds ratio=5.23, 95% confidence interval; 1.47-18.63).
The reduced fatigue in PD patients was observed in taking Pramipexole.
PMID: 21961647
Kinetic, mechanistic, and structural modeling studies of truncated wild-type leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 and the G2019S mutant.
Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), a large and complex protein that possesses two enzymatic properties, kinase and GTPase, is one of the major genetic factors in Parkinson's disease (PD).
Here, we characterize the kinetic and catalytic mechanisms of truncated wild-type (t-wt) LRRK2 and its most common mutant, G2019S (t-G2019S), with a structural interpretation of the kinase domain.
First, the substitution of threonine with serine in the LRRKtide peptide results in a much less efficient substrate as demonstrated by a 26-fold decrease in k(cat) and a 6-fold decrease in binding affinity.
The significant decrease in k(cat) is attributed to a slow chemical transfer step as evidenced by the inverse solvent kinetic isotope effect in the proton inventory and pL (pH or pD)-dependent studies.
The shape of the proton inventory and pL profile clearly signals the involvement of a general base (pK(a) = 7.5) in the catalysis with a low fractionation factor in the ground state.
We report for the first time that the increased kinase activity of the G2019S mutant is substrate-dependent.
Homology modeling of the kinase domain (open and closed forms) and structural analysis of the docked peptide substrates suggest that electrostatic interactions play an important role in substrate recognition, which is affected by G2019S and may directly influence the kinetic properties of the enzyme.
Finally, the GTPase activity of the t-G2019S mutant was characterized, and the mutation modestly decreases GTPase activity without significantly affecting GTP binding affinity.
PMID: 21961290
[Content of chaperon Hsp70 in dopaminergic neurons of the black substance increases in proteasome dysfunstion].
In Wistar rats, specific inhibitor UPS lactacystin induced degeneration of 24% of the dopaminergic neurons in the black substance.
The work shows that a moderate weakening of the UPS function is characterized by an enhanced activity of the shaperon system.
This process seems to restore and maintain population of the dopaminergic neurons.
PMID: 21961105
Duodopa infusion treatment: a point of view from the gastroenterologist.
In patients with advanced Parkinson's disease, the continuous delivery to the small intestine via a jejunal tube of levodopa/carbidopa, formulated as a gel suspension (Duodopa) represents a new treatment method.
The continuous release results in less variability in levodopa concentrations and fewer motor fluctuations and dyskinesias than with oral administration.
The method which requires a very good collaboration between the neurologist and the gastroenterologist is used with increasing frequency in selected centres especially in severe patients.
First, a classic PEG gastrostomy kit is placed under propofol sedation.
This allows the passage of a pig tail catheter which is deployed in the jejunum and it is attached to a portable pump via a special tubing system.
We present our experience of seven cases (5 males, mean age 60 years) with a follow up of one year.
One patient died due to respiratory failure and aspiration pneumonia probably related to the endoscopic procedure.
At one year, all patients agreed that the neurological benefit offsets the procedure related problems and the technical issues related to the enteral infusion system.
PMID: 21960305
The motor functions of the basal ganglia.
The past 25 years have seen a resurgence of interest in the basal ganglia.
In the 1980s, a series of studies yielded the now classic descriptions of basal ganglia connectivity and information flow that now dominates textbook descriptions.
This was followed by the appearance of reward-based learning theories of corticostriatal function in which dopamine played a critical role in modulating corticostriatal connectivity.
These advances have contributed enormously to our understanding of the basic principles of some of the circuits within these structures, and have dominated novel approaches to treatment of basal ganglia diseases.
Yet even so, many of the common symptoms of Parkinson's disease or dystonia are incompletely understood, suggesting that these "dark basements of the brain" still harbor hidden secrets.
PMID: 21960214
Measuring the activity of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2: a kinase involved in Parkinson's disease.
Mutations in the LRRK2 (Leucine-Rich Repeat Kinase 2) gene are the most common cause of autosomal dominant Parkinson's disease.
LRRK2 has multiple functional domains including a kinase domain.
The kinase activity of LRRK2 is implicated in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease.
Developing an assay to understand the mechanisms of LRRK2 kinase activity is important for the development of pharmacologic and therapeutic applications.
Here, we describe how to measure in vitro LRRK2 kinase activity and its inhibition.
PMID: 21960008
Heterogenous mechanisms of mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease.
Mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson disease (PD-MCI) shows heterogeneity in the clinical presentation, neuropsychology, neuroimaging, and neuropathology, suggesting abnormal metabolic network activities involving several cortical and subcortical systems.
Prospective studies using specific biomarkers, including amyloid imaging and CSF biomarkers are important for the diagnosis and prognostic assessment of early cognitive deficits in PD patients.
PMID: 21959675
Randomized controlled trial of community-based dancing to modify disease progression in Parkinson disease.
Tango dancing has been effective in improving measures of physical function in people with Parkinson disease (PD).
However, all previous studies were institution-based, tested participants on medication, and employed short-term interventions.
To determine the effects of a 12-month community-based tango program for individuals with PD on disease severity and physical function.
Sixty-two participants were randomly assigned to a twice weekly, community-based Argentine Tango program or a Control group (no intervention).
Participants were assessed off anti-Parkinson medication at baseline, 3, 6, and 12 months.
The primary outcome measure was the Movement Disorders Society-Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale 3 (MDS-UPDRS-3).
Secondary outcome measures were the MDS-UPDRS-1, MDS-UPDRS-2, MiniBESTest balance test; Freezing of Gait Questionnaire (FOG_Q); 6-Minute Walk Test (6MWT); gait velocity for comfortable forward, fast as possible forward, dual task, and backward walking; and Nine-Hole Peg Test (9HPT).
Groups were not different at baseline.
Overall, the Tango group improved whereas the Control group showed little change on most measures.
For the MDS-UPDRS-3, there was no significant change in the Control group from baseline to 12 months, whereas the Tango group had a reduction of 28.7% (12.8 points).
There were significant group by time interactions for MDS-UPDRS-3, MiniBESTest, FOG_Q, 6MWT, forward and dual task walking velocities, and 9HPT in favor of the dance group.
Improvements in the Tango group were apparent off medication, suggesting that long-term participation in tango may modify progression of disability in PD.
PMID: 21959370
Ocular motor and sensory function in Parkinson's disease.
To evaluate the effect of dopaminergic medication and deep brain stimulation on ocular function in Parkinson's disease (PD) and to measure vision-related quality of life in subjects with PD.
Prospective, comparative case series.
Twenty-seven PD and 16 control subjects were recruited.
Visual acuity, ocular motor function, convergence, and vision-related quality of life using the 25-item National Eye Institute Visual Function Questionnaire (VFQ-25) were measured.
Visual sensory and motor measurements were obtained during the on and off states of PD dopaminergic treatment.
Convergence ability and vision-related quality of life.
The PD subjects had a mean age of 58.8 years; 30% were female.
Their mean duration of PD was 10.9 ± 6.8 years.
The control subjects had a mean age of 61.6 years; 56% were female.
There was no difference in visual acuity, contrast sensitivity, or color vision of the PD subjects in their on state compared with controls.
Convergence amplitudes measured with base-out prism were significantly poorer in PD subjects in their on state compared with controls (24.1 ± 8 Δ vs.
14.8 ± 10.3 Δ; P = 0.003).
The mean composite VFQ-25 score was significantly worse in the PD subjects compared with the controls (87.1 ± 8.69 vs.
96.6 ± 3.05; P = 0.0001).
Comparing the PD subjects in their on with their off states, there was no difference in distance exodeviation, near exodeviation, or ocular ductions.
Mean convergence amplitudes and near point of convergence were better in the on state compared with the off state: 14.8 ± 10.3 Δ versus 10.7 ± 9.0 Δ (P = 0.0006) and 13.1 ± 9.1 cm versus 18.1 ± 12.2 cm (P = 0.002), respectively.
Convergence ability is significantly poorer in PD subjects in both the on and off states compared with controls, but improves significantly with systemic dopaminergic treatment.
Ocular motor function in PD subjects fluctuates in response to treatment, which complicates ophthalmic management.
Parkinson's disease subjects have a significant reduction in vision-related quality of life, especially with near activities, that is not associated with visual acuity.
The author(s) have no proprietary or commercial interest in any materials discussed in this article.
PMID: 21957415
Anesthesia implications in emergency oncologic surgery in a case of untreated Parkinsonism.
Oncologic surgery has made tremendous advancements in the last two decades.
The prognosis of once thought to be irreversible and incurable diseases has improved dramatically with these advancements, which have given a fresh lease of hope to the general population.
But there are certain factors that are still unfavorable for achieving improved outcome of surgery in various cancers.
The associated comorbid diseases do determine to a large extent the actual outcome of all the interventions to treat oncologic disease.
The untreated coexisting disease makes the task of the attending anesthesiologist very challenging as numerous complications are anticipated, especially during emergency surgery.
We are describing a case of a patient with endometrial carcinoma who presented with unstoppable bleeding per-vaginum and was suffering from Parkinson disease since 1½ years, for which no treatment was ever sought.
Vaginal hysterectomy was performed under graded epidural anesthesia; and after a smooth and uneventful postoperative period of 8 days, she was referred to radiotherapy unit for further management.
PMID: 21956541
Reproductive factors and Parkinson's disease: a multicenter case-control study.
The objective of this study was to evaluate the possible association between endogenous and exogenous estrogens and Parkinson's disease (PD).
The FRAGAMP study is a large Italian multicenter case-control study.
PD was diagnosed according to Gelb's criteria.
A standardized questionnaire was administered to record demographic, epidemiological, and clinical data.
Adjusted ORs and 95% CIs were estimated using multivariate analysis (logistic regression).
Two hundred PD women (mean age, 68.0 ± 9.5 years) and 299 control women (mean age, 61.8 ± 9.9 years) were enrolled in the study.
Age at menarche, age at menopause, fertile life duration, cumulative duration of pregnancies, hormone replacement therapy, and surgical menopause were not significantly associated with PD.
Multivariate analysis showed a significant positive association between use of oral contraceptives and PD, with an adjusted OR of 3.27 (95% CI, 1.24-8.59; P = .01).
Our data suggest that oral contraceptives could increase the risk of PD.
PMID: 21955729
Reduced expression of choline acetyltransferase in vagal motoneurons and gastric motor dysfunction in a 6-OHDA rat model of Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease (PD) has been characterized by dopaminergic neuron degeneration in the substantia nigra (SN) accompanied by pathology of the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (DMV).
PD patients have often experienced gastrointestinal dysfunctions, such as gastroparesis.
However, the mechanism underlying these symptoms in PD patients is not clear.
In the present study, we investigated alterations of cholinergic and catecholaminergic neurons in the DMV and gastric motor function in rats microinjected with 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) bilaterally into the SN (referred to as 6-OHDA rats) and explored possible mechanisms.
A strain gauge force transducer was used to record gastric motility in vivo.
Expression of choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) was evaluated by immunofluorescence and western blot analysis.
Acetylcholine (Ach) content was measured using ultra-performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC/MS/MS) analysis.
After treatment with 6-OHDA for 6weeks, 6-OHDA rats exhibited decreased ChAT and enhanced TH expression in the DMV and decreased Ach content in the gastric muscular layer.
Delayed gastric emptying and impaired gastric motility in vivo were observed in 6-OHDA rats.
The results of the present study indicated that decreased ChAT and enhanced TH expression in the DMV may be correlated with the development of delayed gastric emptying and impaired gastric motility, which may be partly due to the decreased Ach release from the vagus.
PMID: 21954089
High frequency and reduced penetrance of LRRK2 G2019S mutation among Parkinson's disease patients in Cantabria (Spain).
The frequency and penetrance of the LRRK2 G2019S mutation varies considerably in different Parkinson disease (PD) populations.
This information is essential both for clinical purposes and genetic counseling.
The objective of this study was to estimate the prevalence and penetrance of the G2019S mutation of the LRRK2 gene in a small region in northern Spain (Cantabria).
The G2019S mutation was tested in 367 consecutive patients with PD attended as outpatients in a tertiary Hospital in Northern Spain, and 126 at-risk family members of probands were also investigated for G2019S mutation and disease status.
The gene penetrance was estimated in terms of cumulative age-specific incidence of PD by the Kaplan-Meier method.
Thirty-two PD patients (8.7%) carried the G2019S mutation.
Penetrance estimation of the G2019S mutation was 2% at 50 years, 12% at 60 years, 26% at 70 years, and 47% at 80 years.
The frequency of the G2019S mutation of the LRRK2 gene in PD patients from Cantabria is among the highest reported so far after North African Arabs and Ashkenazi Jews.
At the age of 80 years only one-half of G2019S mutation carriers manifest motor symptoms of PD.
PMID: 21953897
Camptocormia in Japanese patients with Parkinson's disease: a multicenter study.
The aim of this work was to investigate the prevalence of camptocormia and the clinical characteristics of patients with camptocormia in a large population of PD patients.
Although camptocormia has been recognized as a prominent phenomenon in PD, the previous epidemiological reports were limited, especially in terms of sample size.
We evaluated 531 PD patients (disease duration: 7.0 ± 5.5 years, mean ± standard deviation).
We examined their clinical features and the prevalence of camptocormia.
Camptocormia was detected in 22 patients (4.1%) and found in patients who were older and had more severe motor symptoms and a higher levodopa (L-dopa) dose (P < 0.05), compared to the patients without camptocormia.
Patients with camptocormia showed significantly higher frequencies of autonomic symptoms, such as constipation and urinary incontinence (P < 0.05).
Camptocormia is uncommon in PD and is associated with disease severity, higher L-dopa dose and higher frequencies of autonomic symptoms.
PMID: 21953863
Association of SNCA with Parkinson: replication in the Harvard NeuroDiscovery Center Biomarker Study.
Mutations in the α-synuclein gene (SNCA) cause autosomal dominant forms of Parkinson's disease, but the substantial risk conferred by this locus to the common sporadic disease has only recently emerged from genome-wide association studies.
We genotyped a prioritized noncoding variant in SNCA intron 4 in 344 patients with Parkinson's disease and 275 controls from the longitudinal Harvard NeuroDiscovery Center Biomarker Study.
The common minor allele of rs2736990 was associated with elevated disease susceptibility (odds ratio, 1.40; P = .0032).
This result increases confidence in the notion that in many clinically well-characterized patients, genetic variation in SNCA contributes to "sporadic" disease.
PMID: 21953789
Differential response of speed, amplitude, and rhythm to dopaminergic medications in Parkinson's disease.
Although movement impairment in Parkinson's disease includes slowness (bradykinesia), decreased amplitude (hypokinesia), and dysrhythmia, clinicians are instructed to rate them in a combined 0-4 severity scale using the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale motor subscale.
The objective was to evaluate whether bradykinesia, hypokinesia, and dysrhythmia are associated with differential motor impairment and response to dopaminergic medications in patients with Parkinson's disease.
Eighty five Parkinson's disease patients performed finger-tapping (item 23), hand-grasping (item 24), and pronation-supination (item 25) tasks OFF and ON medication while wearing motion sensors on the most affected hand.
Speed, amplitude, and rhythm were rated using the Modified Bradykinesia Rating Scale.
Quantitative variables representing speed (root mean square angular velocity), amplitude (excursion angle), and rhythm (coefficient of variation) were extracted from kinematic data.
Fatigue was measured as decrements in speed and amplitude during the last 5 seconds compared with the first 5 seconds of movement.
Amplitude impairments were worse and more prevalent than speed or rhythm impairments across all tasks (P < .001); however, in the ON state, speed scores improved exclusively by clinical (P < 10(-6) ) and predominantly by quantitative (P < .05) measures.
Motor scores from OFF to ON improved in subjects who were strictly bradykinetic (P < .01) and both bradykinetic and hypokinetic (P < 10(-6) ), but not in those strictly hypokinetic.
Fatigue in speed and amplitude was not improved by medication.
Hypokinesia is more prevalent than bradykinesia, but dopaminergic medications predominantly improve the latter.
Parkinson's disease patients may show different degrees of impairment in these movement components, which deserve separate measurement in research studies.
© 2011 Movement Disorder Society.
PMID: 21953697
Ubiquitin ligase Nedd4 promotes alpha-synuclein degradation by the endosomal-lysosomal pathway.
α-Synuclein is an abundant brain protein that binds to lipid membranes and is involved in the recycling of presynaptic vesicles.
In Parkinson disease, α-synuclein accumulates in intraneuronal inclusions often containing ubiquitin chains.
Here we show that the ubiquitin ligase Nedd4, which functions in the endosomal-lysosomal pathway, robustly ubiquitinates α-synuclein, unlike ligases previously implicated in its degradation.
Purified Nedd4 recognizes the carboxyl terminus of α-synuclein (residues 120-133) and attaches K63-linked ubiquitin chains.
In human cells, Nedd4 overexpression enhances α-synuclein ubiquitination and clearance by a lysosomal process requiring components of the endosomal-sorting complex required for transport.
Conversely, Nedd4 down-regulation increases α-synuclein content.
In yeast, disruption of the Nedd4 ortholog Rsp5p decreases α-synuclein degradation and enhances inclusion formation and α-synuclein toxicity.
In human brains, Nedd4 is present in pigmented neurons and is expressed especially strongly in neurons containing Lewy bodies.
Thus, ubiquitination by Nedd4 targets α-synuclein to the endosomal-lysosomal pathway and, by reducing α-synuclein content, may help protect against the pathogenesis of Parkinson disease and other α-synucleinopathies.
PMID: 21952405
Effect of level of presentation to listeners on scaled speech intelligibility of speakers with dysarthria.
This study examined the effect of intensity level of presentation on scaling of speech intelligibility in speakers with and without dysarthria.
A total of 50 utterances produced by speakers with dysarthria and healthy speakers were played to 60 listeners in four conditions, which consisted of two different presentation levels (‘high’ vs.
‘low’) and equalization of levels across utterances (‘adjusted’ vs.
‘unadjusted’).
Speech intelligibility was scaled by using a direct magnitude estimation technique with and without modulus.
A significant decrease in speech intelligibility was indicated when the stimuli were adjusted to have fixed intensity on the most intense vocalic nuclei of each word, while no significant change was found between ‘high’ and ‘low’ presentation level conditions.
The findings suggest that an increase in presentation level alone does not result in significant improvement in speech intelligibility ratings.
The results are discussed by considering clinical implications in conducting speech therapy with emphasis on intensity variation.
PMID: 21952071
Reorganization of motor system in Parkinson's disease.
We investigated adaptive reorganization in Parkinson's disease (PD) by fMRI using a passive movement task and compared the brain activation patterns of 10 patients with left- versus right-sided dominant symptoms.
Five healthy controls were also investigated with the same settings.
We grouped patients according to the predominant side of symptoms; thus, a right-sided dominant and a left-sided dominant group was formed.
The paradigm consisted of a 4-finger passive movement task, which altered with resting states.
For each subject, this examination was performed twice: on the left and on the right hand separately.
In healthy controls, motor-related areas contralateral to the moving fingers showed activation on fMRI.
Concerning PD patients, motor-related areas of the ipsilateral hemisphere - including the primary motor cortex, supplementary motor area, and basal ganglia - seemed to be involved in the motor reorganization in PD.
However, we could only demonstrate this reorganization in patients with right-sided dominant symptoms.
We suggest that the human brain in PD tries to compensate for the failure of the basal ganglia motor loop by employing alternative (ipsilateral) motor pathways, indicating that a complex reorganization can also take place in disorders like PD which affect the whole motor-related network.
PMID: 21951713
An evaluation of the patient education programme for Parkinson's disease in clinical practice.
The Patient Education Programme for Parkinson's disease (PEPP) was assessed in a recent randomised controlled trial (RCT).
In this study, a trend was identified towards significant improvement of patients' quality of life (Qol) as well as a significant reduction of caregivers' psychosocial burden and need for help.
This study is aimed at evaluating the effectiveness of the PEPP in clinical practice as compared with the RCT in an academic setting.
The second aim is to assess its effectiveness in clinical practice at 6-month follow-up.
Fifty-five patients and 50 caregivers from nine clinical settings participated in the PEPP consisting of eight weekly sessions of 90 min.
Self-report questionnaires were used to assess patients' Qol (PDQ-39) and caregivers' psychosocial burden and need for help (BELA-A-k) at baseline, directly after the programme and at 6-month follow-up.
To compare the baseline data and short-term effects, data were used from an RCT study which included 64 Parkinson's disease patients and 46 caregivers.
Compared with the RCT control group, significant effects, after Bonferoni adjustment, were found for patients' Qol as well as for caregivers' psychosocial burden and need for help.
No significant changes were found between baseline scores compared with 6-month follow-up.
Scores returned to baseline levels at 6-month follow-up.
Effects from the RCT study were replicated and the effect on patients' Qol was now significant.
However, at 6-month follow-up, scores returned to baseline levels, indicating the need for some form of a booster session.
PMID: 21951066
The oxysterol 27-hydroxycholesterol regulates α-synuclein and tyrosine hydroxylase expression levels in human neuroblastoma cells through modulation of liver X receptors and estrogen receptors--relevance to Parkinson's disease.
Loss of dopaminergic neurons and α-synuclein accumulation are the two major pathological hallmarks of Parkinson's disease.
Currently, the mechanisms governing depletion of dopamine content and α-synuclein accumulation are not well understood.
We showed that the oxysterol 27-hydroxycholesterol (27-OHC) reduces the expression of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), the rate-limiting enzyme in dopamine synthesis, and increases α-synuclein levels in SH-SY5Y cells.
However, the cellular mechanisms involved in 27-OHC effects were not elucidated.
In this study, we demonstrate that 27-OHC regulates TH and α-synuclein expression levels through the estrogen receptors (ER) and liver X receptors (LXR).
We specifically show that inhibition of ERβ mediates 27-OHC-induced decrease in TH expression, an effect reversed by the ER agonist estradiol.
We also show that 27-OHC and the LXR agonist GW3965 increase α-synuclein while the LXR antagonist 5α-6α-epoxycholesterol-3-sulfate significantly attenuated the 27-OHC-induced increase in α-synuclein expression.
We further demonstrate that LXRβ positively regulates α-synuclein expression and 27-OHC increases LXRβ-mediated α-synuclein transcription.
Our results demonstrate the involvement of two distinct pathways that are involved in the 27-OHC regulation of TH and α-synuclein levels.
Concomitant activation of ERβ and inhibition of LXRβ prevent 27-OHC effects and may therefore reduce the progression of Parkinson's disease by precluding TH reduction and α-synuclein accumulation.
PMID: 21951056
A novel compound PTIQ protects the nigral dopaminergic neurons in MPTP-induced animal model of Parkinson's disease.
Background and purpose:  In Parkinson disease (PD), the dopaminergic (DAergic) neurons in the substantia nigra undergo degeneration.
While the exact mechanism for the degeneration is not completely understood, neuronal apoptosis and neuroinflammation are thought to be key contributers.
We have recently established that matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-3 plays crucial roles in DAergic cell death and microglial activation.
Experimental approach:  We tested the effects of 7-hydroxy-6-methoxy-2-propionyl-1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinoline (PTIQ) on expression of MMP-3 and inflammatory molecules and DAergic cell death in vitro and in animal model of PD as well as on PD-related motor deficits.
PTIQ's pharmacokinetic profile was also evaluated.
Key results:  PTIQ effectively suppressed the production of MMP-3 induced in response to cellular stress in the DAergic CATH.a cells and prevented the resulting cell death.
In BV-2 microglial cells activated with lipopolysaccharide, PTIQ downregulated expression of MMP-3 along with interleukin-1β, tumor necrosis factor-α and cyclooxygenase-2 and blocked nuclear translocation of nuclear factor kappa B.
In 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine-induced mouse model of PD, PTIQ attenuated the associated motor deficits, prevented neurodegeneration, and suppressed microglial activation in the substantia nigra.
PTIQ showed a good pharmacokinetic profile, as it was relatively stable against liver microsomal enzymes, showed no apparent inhibitory effect on the cytochrome p450 subtypes or human ether-à-go-go related gene (hERG) channel, exhibited no cytotoxicity on liver cells or lethality when administered at 1,000 mg/kg, and entered the brain rather rapidly at 28% brain to plasma ratio after intraperitoneal administration.
Conclusion and implication:  These results suggest PTIQ as a potential candidate of disease-modifying therapy for PD.
PMID: 21950984
Memory-based smooth pursuit: neuronal mechanisms and preliminary results of clinical application.
Using a memory-based smooth-pursuit task, macaque monkeys were trained to pursue (i.e., go) or not pursue (i.e., no-go), a cued direction, based on the memory of visual motion-direction and a go/no-go instruction.
Task-related neuronal activity was examined in the supplementary eye fields, caudal frontal eye fields, cerebellar floccular region, dorsal vermis lobules VI-VII, and caudal fastigial nuclei.
Different cerebral and cerebellar areas carried distinctly different signals during memory-based smooth pursuit.
Chemical inactivation of these areas produced effects consistent with the differences in signals represented in each area.
This task was applied to patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD), because impaired visual working memory has been reported during cognitive tasks in PD.
None of the PD patients tested exhibited impaired working memory of motion-direction and/or go/no-go selection, but they had difficulty in preparing for and executing smooth-pursuit eye movements, suggesting a selective motor-related disturbance in Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21950532
Caries and periodontal disease in patients with Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease (PD) has been associated with aging, reduced fine motor skills, and malnutrition caused by eating soft sticky foods and a decreased liquid intake, which may contribute to the onset of caries, periodontal disease, and tooth loss.
The objective of this study was to investigate the oral health of 101 patients with PD (mean age: 66.2 ± 10.5 years) and compare them to 75 control subjects (CO) (mean age 71 ± 10.53).
Patients with PD had poorer oral health than the control group (papilla bleeding index: PD 6.97 ± 8.34; CO 2.12 ± 2.73).
Lower frequencies of daily toothbrushing (PD: 1.69 ± 0.83; CO: 2.08 ± 0.80), longer time since the last dentist visit (PD: 1.94 ± 1.49; CO: 1.21 ± 0.60 years), and reduced salivary flow (PD: 2.69 ± 0.94; CO: 3.53 ± 1.11 ml).
All of these factors may be related to the gingival recession and tooth mobility found in our patients with PD.
Individuals with PD, their caregivers, and their physicians need to focus more on their oral health and quality of oral hygiene.
PMID: 21950529
Accidental aspiration in a patient with Parkinson's disease during implant-supported prosthesis construction: a case report.
This article reports on a case history of an elderly patient with Parkinson's disease (PD) who sought treatment at a private dental office.
His chief complaint was "difficulty in eating due to an illfitting prosthesis." Laboratory tests and oral radiographs were made.
The surgical placement of an implant was done and, subsequently, an implant-supported prosthesis was fitted for the patient.
During the impression for the construction of the implant-supported prosthesis, the patient accidentally aspirated the implant screwdriver.
The object was found in the lower right lobe of the bronchus, and its removal was necessary in a hospital using bronchoscopy under general anesthesia.
Patients with PD are considered at risk of aspirating and/or ingesting dental instruments.
Short treatment periods are recommended, preferably during the morning, when the medication prescribed for PD is most effective.
When treating patients who have a risk for aspirating and ingesting small objects, it is important to treat them in a more vertical position, and small-sized objects should be secured with dental floss to aid retrieval.
PMID: 21950265
Rotenone-mediated changes in intracellular coenzyme A thioester levels: implications for mitochondrial dysfunction.
Rotenone, an organic pesticide and potent mitochondrial complex I inhibitor, causes Parkinson-like neurodegeneration in rodents and is implicated in human Parkinson's disease.
In this rapid report, rotenone induced a dose-dependent decrease in succinyl-coenzyme A (CoA) and increase in β-hydroxybutyryl-CoA in multiple human cell lines (IC(50) < 100 nM).
Rotenone also inhibited [U-(13)C(6)]-glucose-derived [(13)C]-acetyl-CoA and [(13)C]-succinyl-CoA biosynthesis in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells.
These changes are compatible with a compensatory metabolic rearrangement.
Stable isotope dilution liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry and CoA thioester isotopomer analysis provided insight into mechanisms of rotenone toxicity, which will facilitate the development of new biomarkers of mitochondrial dysfunction.
PMID: 21948915
Impulsivity is associated with decision-making deficits in de-novo Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21948912
A parameter selection for differentiating between healthy and parkinsonian gait through modeling Parkinson's disease from a chaotic viewpoint.
PMID: 21948911
Panic attack-like episodes possibly induced by pramipexole in a patient with young-onset Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21948012
[Neurology of laughter and humour: pathological laughing and crying].
Laughter, which is usually a healthy biological phenomenon, may be also a symptom of several severe brain pathologies.
To review the neurobiological bases of laughter and humour, as well as those of pathological laughing and crying syndrome.
At the mesencephalic-pontine junction there is a central coordinator of the nuclei that innervate the muscles involved in laughter (facial expression, respiratory and phonatory).
This centre receives connections from three systems: inhibitory (pre-motor and motor cortex), excitatory (temporal cortex, amygdala, hypothalamus) and modulator (cerebellum).
Humour is a complex phenomenon with a range of components: the perception of the unexpected incongruence (occipitotemporal area, prefrontal cortex), emotional (reward circuit) and volitional (temporal and frontal cortex).
Functional magnetic resonance imaging studies do not reveal a markedly prominent role of the right frontal lobe in processing humour, as had been suggested in the classical studies.
The causes of pathological laughing and crying syndrome can be classified in two groups: altered behaviour with unmotivated happiness (Angelman syndrome, schizophrenia, manias, dementia) and interference with the inhibitory/excitatory mechanisms (gelastic epilepsy, fou rire prodromique in strokes, multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinson's disease and Parkinson-plus, traumatic injuries, tumours).
Serotonin and noradrenalin reuptake inhibitors, levodopa, lamotrigine and the association of dextromethorphan/quinidine can be effective in certain cases of pathological laughing and crying.
As human neurobiological phenomena, laughter and humour also belong to the field of clinical neurology; their processing is affected in a number of different diseases and, in certain cases, effective treatment can be established.
PMID: 21947534
Disparities in NIH funding for epilepsy research.
Using data from NIH Research Portfolio Online Reporting Tools (RePORT) and recently assembled prevalence estimates of 6 major neurologic diseases, we compared the relative prevalences and the annual NIH support levels for 6 major neurologic disorders: Alzheimer disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), epilepsy, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson disease, and stroke.
Compared to these other major neurologic disorders, epilepsy research is funded at a persistently lower rate based on relative disease prevalences.
Relative NIH funding for these other disorders in 2010 adjusted for prevalence ranged from 1.7x (stroke) to 61.1x (ALS) greater than epilepsy.
The disparity cannot be explained by differences in the overall impact of these diseases on US citizens.
Greater transparency in the review and funding process is needed to disclose the reason for this disparity.
PMID: 21946741
Off-label use of atypical antipsychotic medications in Canterbury, New Zealand.
To estimate the frequency and characteristics of "off-label" use of atypical antipsychotic medications (AAPs) by psychiatrists in Canterbury, New Zealand.
Data on "off-label" prescribing of AAPs including the choice of medication, frequency of prescribing, and the indications for its use was collected using a postal survey of psychiatrists registered with the NZ Medical Council in the Canterbury region.
48 psychiatrists (71%) completed the survey.
Forty-six (96%) prescribed AAPs "off-label".
By far the most common agent was quetiapine (94%).
Twenty-eight respondents (58%) prescribed "off-label" at least once a week.
The most common reasons for the use of these agents was: anxiety (89%), sedation (79%), post-traumatic stress disorder (57%), treatment augmentation of another antipsychotic agent (48%) and behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia (33%).
"Off-label" prescribing, particularly of quetiapine is very common in the Canterbury region, despite little scientific evidence for this kind of use, increasing evidence of abuse and potential for significant side-effects.
PMID: 21946325
Subthalamic nucleus stimulation reverses mediofrontal influence over decision threshold.
It takes effort and time to tame one's impulses.
Although medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) is broadly implicated in effortful control over behavior, the subthalamic nucleus (STN) is specifically thought to contribute by acting as a brake on cortico-striatal function during decision conflict, buying time until the right decision can be made.
Using the drift diffusion model of decision making, we found that trial-to-trial increases in mPFC activity (EEG theta power, 4-8 Hz) were related to an increased threshold for evidence accumulation (decision threshold) as a function of conflict.
Deep brain stimulation of the STN in individuals with Parkinson's disease reversed this relationship, resulting in impulsive choice.
In addition, intracranial recordings of the STN area revealed increased activity (2.5-5 Hz) during these same high-conflict decisions.
Activity in these slow frequency bands may reflect a neural substrate for cortico-basal ganglia communication regulating decision processes.
PMID: 21945983
Ideational apraxia in Parkinson disease.
: The objective of the study was to determine whether ideational apraxia (IA), a loss of ability to plan the sequence of actions needed to achieve a goal, is associated with Parkinson disease (PD).
: The frontal lobes play an important role in planning and sequencing, and many patients with PD have frontal lobe dysfunction.
: Ten right-handed patients with PD and 10 right-handed neurologically and psychiatrically healthy people participated.
To assess for IA, participants were given sets of pictures that showed the steps in completing a task, but the steps were shown out of order.
The participants were required to point to the pictures in the correct sequence to complete each task.
The participants also performed a control task of sequencing randomly arranged printed single words to create a sentence that described an accompanying picture.
: The patients with PD performed more poorly than the controls on the action-sequencing tasks (P<0.05).
Errors were predominantly in sequencing rather than repetition or omission, indicating that the poor performance was not caused by perseveration.
There were no group differences in the task of sequencing words to make a sentence.
: These results indicate that patients with PD do have IA, an action-sequence planning deficit.
Further research is needed to better understand mechanisms, ecological implications, and potential treatments.
PMID: 21941841
[Neurotransmitter disorders in children--special reference to Segawa disease].
Aminergic neurotransmitter disorders occurring in childhood include metabolic disorders of pteridine and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH).
Pteridine metabolic disorders cause a deficiency of serotonin (5-HT) and dopamine (DA) and TH disorder causes a deficiency of noradrenaline (NA) and DA in the terminals of each aminergic neuron.
The activities of TH or DA in the terminals are marked in early childhood, and then they show an exponential age-dependent decrement and achieve stationary or minimal levels in the twenties.
As observed in Segawa disease, TH or DA activities in these disorders follow this age-related decrease with levels around 20% of normal, and patients develop symptoms age-dependently, with onset in childhood, progression by the late teens, and a stationary period after the twenties, but this does not cause morphological changes.
These phenomena may occur with other neurotransmitters.
So replacement therapies are effective irrespective of the clinical course.
However, early-onset cases in infancy or early childhood showing a marked decrement of 5-HT or NA activities show postural hypotonia and failed locomotion.
These cause failure in atonia restriction in the REM stage and induce dysfunction of the pedunculopontine nucleus, and, consequently induce dysfunction or failure in the development of DA neurons in the sutbstantia nigra and ventrotegmental area.
These relate to failure in the development of higher cortical functions.
Thus, assessing of ages at onset and activities of antigravity muscles and locomotion in infancy is cardinal for the treatment the neurotransmitter disorders occurring in infancy and early childhood.
PARK2 with deficiency of DA in the substantia nigra leads to dystonia in the teens and Parkinson disease after 20 years, although these respond to 1-Dopa favorably but induce D2 receptor upregulation and intractable dyskinesia.
A decrease of DA in the perikaryon leads to symptoms after 10 years and causes dysfunction of the target structures.
PMID: 21941068
A young adult with progressive limb shaking and slowness.
PMID: 21940621
Mild cognitive impairment in drug-naive patients with PD is associated with cerebral hypometabolism.
To characterize brain metabolic changes associated with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) in drug-naive patients with Parkinson disease (PD) using (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) and PET (FDG-PET).
This cross-sectional study included newly diagnosed patients with PD with MCI in single or multiple domain (PD-MCI; n =12) and without MCI (PD-nMCI; n =12), and healthy controls (n =12).
The groups were matched for age.
Moreover, the patient groups were matched for motor disability.
All subjects underwent a FDG-PET study.
Cerebral regional relative metabolic maps were compared in PD-MCI, PD-nMCI, and controls using regions of interest analysis (ROIs) and voxel-based analysis with statistical parametric mapping.
ROIs and voxel-based analyses revealed significant relative hypometabolism in the prefrontal, superior/inferior parietal, and associative occipital cortices as well as in the striatum in patients with PD-MCI relative to controls (p < 0.05) and to a lesser extent in patients with PD-nMCI.
In contrast, patients with PD-nMCI did not show significant metabolic changes as compared to controls.
MCI in patients with PD is associated with cortical hypometabolism since the earliest stage, independent of therapy or motor disability.
The early involvement of posterior cortical region, a pattern shared by advanced stages of PD-MCI and PD with dementia, could represent an early marker of dementia.
The relevance of this pattern in predicting prodromal dementia has to be evaluated in longitudinal studies.
PMID: 21940614
Family history of neurodegenerative and vascular diseases in ALS: a population-based study.
To determine whether the frequency of Parkinson disease (PD), dementia, and vascular diseases in relatives of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) differs from the frequency of those diseases in relatives of controls, providing further information about the association between these diseases.
We studied the occurrence of neurodegenerative and vascular diseases in families of patients with ALS in a prospective, population-based, case-control study in the Netherlands between 2006 and 2009, using the recurrence risk λ.
Family history data were obtained by asking participants to fill in questionnaires.
A total of 635 patients and 1,616 controls were included.
The frequency of dementia was mildly increased only among parents and siblings of patients with sporadic ALS (λ1.32; 95 confidence interval [CI] 1.10-1.59), not among grandparents, or aunts and uncles.
The risk of PD was not elevated (any relative: λ 0.91; 95% CI 0.70-1.17).
Among relatives of patients with familial ALS, no significantly increased risk of neurodegenerative diseases was found.
A reduced risk of vascular diseases was found in relatives of patients with sporadic ALS (stroke: λ 0.90; 95% CI 0.80-1.01 and myocardial infarction: λ 0.86; 95% CI 0.79-0.94), and in relatives of patients with familial ALS (stroke: λ 0.88; 95% CI 0.61-1.27 and myocardial infarction: λ 0.61; 95% CI 0.43-0.86).
This large, prospective, population-based study showed that familial aggregation of ALS, dementia, and PD is substantially lower than previously thought.
The lowered risk of vascular diseases in relatives of patients with ALS supports the view that a beneficial vascular risk profile increases ALS susceptibility.
PMID: 21939547
Controversies in neurology: why monoamine oxidase B inhibitors could be a good choice for the initial treatment of Parkinson's disease.
Early initiation of pharmacotherapy in Parkinson's disease (PD) is nowadays widely advocated by experts since the delay of treatment has shown to be associated with a significant deterioration of health related quality of life in affected patients.
Due to marked advances in PD treatment during the last decades, physicians are nowadays fortunately equipped with a variety of substances that can effectively ameliorate emerging motor symptoms of the disease, among them levodopa, dopamine agonists and monoamine oxidase type B (MAO-B) inhibitors.
Despite numerous drug intervention trials in early PD, there is however still ongoing controversy among neurologists which substance to use for the initial treatment of the disease.
In multiple studies, MAO-B inhibitors, such as selegiline and rasagiline, have shown to provide mild symptomatic effects, delay the need for levodopa, and to reduce the incidence of motor fluctuations.
Although their symptomatic efficacy is inferior compared to dopamine agonists and levodopa, MAO-B inhibitors undoubtedly have fewer side effects and are easy to administer.
In contrary to their competitors, MAO-B inhibitors may furthermore offer a chance for disease modification, which so far remains a major unmet need in the management of PD and eventually makes them ideal candidates for the early treatment of the disease.
MAO-B inhibitors may constitute a preferable therapeutic option for early PD, mainly due to their favourable safety profile and their putative neuroprotective capabilities.
Since the symptomatic effects of MAO-B inhibitors are comparatively mild, dopamine agonists and levodopa should however be considered for initial treatment in those PD patients, in whom robust and immediate symptomatic relief needs to be prioritized.
PMID: 21937912
Synphilin-1-binding protein NUB1 is colocalized with nonfibrillar, proteinase K-resistant α-synuclein in presynapses in Lewy body disease.
α-Synuclein is a major component of Lewy bodies in Parkinson disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).
We recently showed that abnormal α-synuclein with resistance to proteinase K (PK) is deposited at presynapses of distinct brain anatomic regions from the early stages of PD and DLB.
NUB1, a synphilin-1-binding protein, also accumulates in Lewy bodies, but it is not known whether abnormal α-synuclein is associated with NUB1.
Here, we demonstrate that, in the brain of patients with PD and DLB, NUB1 accumulates in the presynapses in the hippocampus, cerebral neocortex, and substantia nigra in which PK-resistant α-synuclein is deposited.
Endogenous NUB1 also accumulated with PK-resistant α-synuclein in the presynapses of transgenic mice that express human α-synuclein with an A53T mutation.
Immunoelectron microscopy showed that NUB1 is localized to presynaptic nerve terminals where no abnormal filaments are seen.
Biochemical analyses showed that NUB1 coexists with abnormal α-synuclein in the brain of DLB patients.
These findings suggest that NUB1 along with abnormal α-synuclein is involved in the pathogenesis of Lewy body disease.
PMID: 21936964
Induced pluripotent stem cells in the study of neurological diseases.
ABSTRACT: Five years after their initial derivation from mouse somatic cells, induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells are an important tool for the study of neurological diseases.
By offering an unlimited source of patient-specific disease-relevant neuronal and glial cells, iPS cell-based disease models hold enormous promise for identification of disease mechanisms, discovery of molecular targets and development of phenotypic screens for drug discovery.
The present review focuses on the recent advancements in modeling neurological disorders, including the demonstration of disease-specific phenotypes in iPS cell-derived neurons generated from patients with spinal muscular atrophy, familial dysautonomia, Rett syndrome, schizophrenia and Parkinson disease.
The ability of this approach to detect treatment effects from known therapeutic compounds has also been demonstrated, providing proof of principle for the use of iPS cell-derived cells in drug discovery.
PMID: 21936884
Validation of 24-hour ambulatory gait assessment in Parkinson's disease with simultaneous video observation.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder resulting in motor disturbances that can impact normal gait.
Although PD initially responds well to pharmacological treatment, as the disease progresses efficacy often fluctuates over the course of the day, and clinical management would benefit from long-term objective measures of gait.
We have previously described a small device worn on the shank that uses acceleration and angular velocity sensors to calculate stride length and identify freezing of gait in PD patients.
In this study we extend validation of the gait monitor to 24-h using simultaneous video observation of PD patients.
A sleep laboratory was adapted to perform 24-hr video monitoring of patients while wearing the device.
Continuous video monitoring of a sleep lab, hallway, kitchen and conference room was performed using a 4-camera security system and recorded to hard disk.
Subjects (3) wore the gait monitor on the left shank (just above the ankle) for a 24-h period beginning around 5 pm in the evening.
Accuracy of stride length measures were assessed at the beginning and end of the 24-h epoch.
Two independent observers rated the video logs to identify when subjects were walking or lying down.
The mean error in stride length at the start of recording was 0.05 m (SD 0) and at the conclusion of the 24 h epoch was 0.06 m (SD 0.026).
There was full agreement between observer coding of the video logs and the output from the gait monitor software; that is, for every video observation of the subject walking there was a corresponding pulse in the monitor data that indicated gait.
The accuracy of ambulatory stride length measurement was maintained over the 24-h period, and there was 100% agreement between the autonomous detection of locomotion by the gait monitor and video observation.
PMID: 21936837
Aggresome formation and segregation of inclusions influence toxicity of α-synuclein and synphilin-1 in yeast.
PD (Parkinson's disease) is a neurodegenerative disorder, caused by a selective loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra, which affects an increasing number of the elderly population worldwide.
One of the major hallmarks of PD is the occurrence of intracellular protein deposits in the dying neurons, termed Lewy bodies, which contain different proteins, including aggregated α-synuclein and its interacting protein synphilin-1.
During the last decade, a number of groups developed yeast models that reproduced important features of PD and allowed the deciphering of pathways underlying the cytotoxicity triggered by α-synuclein.
Here, we review the recent contributions obtained with yeast models designed to study the presumed pathobiology of synphilin-1.
These models pointed towards a crucial role of the sirtuin Sir2 and the chaperonin complex TRiC (TCP-1 ring complex)/CCT (chaperonin containing TCP-1) in handling misfolded and aggregated proteins.
PMID: 21935799
Impact of para-neurologic and para-mental premorbidities on burn injury patients.
The aim of this article was to determine whether there are differences in the progression, mortality and morbidity of these premorbid patients compared to normal burn injury patients.
In this study, 26 premorbid cases (8 males, 18 females; mean age: 30.8 years; range: 3-74 years) hospitalized in the Dicle University Burn Center between July 2007 and November 2009 were evaluated.
Appreciation of the pathophysiological basis of the premorbidity in burn patients is important.
When the treatment for premorbid burn patients is planned, the associated co- or premorbidity must be kept in mind.
To improve the outcome of the treatment, considerable attention must be paid to these patients.
This article gives an overview of the current literature regarding premorbid patients in the Turkish population and draws attention to this specific topic.
PMID: 21934377
Intervention that challenges the nervous system confronts the challenge of real-world clinical practice.
PMID: 21934376
Feasibility of intensive mobility training to improve gait, balance, and mobility in persons with chronic neurological conditions: a case series.
Intensive mobility training (IMT) is a rehabilitative approach aimed at improving gait, balance, and mobility through the incorporation of task-specific, massed practice.
The purpose of this case series was to examine the feasibility and benefits of the IMT protocol across a sample of 4 individuals with diverse chronic neurological diagnoses, including incomplete spinal cord injury, Parkinson's disease, stroke, and cerebral hemispherectomy.
The 4 participants enrolled in the IMT protocol and followed an intensive treatment schedule of 3 h/d sessions for 10 consecutive weekdays totaling 30 hours.
Each session allocated 1 hour each to (1) body weight-supported treadmill-based locomotor training, (2) balance interventions, and (3) activities to improve coordination, strength, and range of motion.
Interventions emphasized repetitive, task-specific training of lower-extremity movements in a massed practice schedule.
Pain, fatigue, and time in activity were used to assess feasibility of the treatment.
Temporal-spatial gait parameters, Berg Balance Scale, Dynamic Gait Index, Timed Up and Go test, and 6-Minute Walk test were used to assess changes in performance.
Participants were able to complete an average of 144 of 180 minutes of activity per day for 10 days.
Participants demonstrated modest improvements after the intervention on at least one outcome measure for each target area of gait, mobility, and balance.
Some improvements were maintained for 1 to 6 months after participation.
Despite differences in diagnosis among these participants with chronic neurological disorders, on average they were able to complete 80% of an intensive treatment schedule of 3 hours/day for 10 days with no adverse effects.
It appears that some gains made during participation are maintained for a period of time after the end of training.
IMT is a feasible intervention incorporating an intensive training approach to improve gait, balance, and mobility; however, a randomized trial is needed to further investigate the effects of the intervention.
PMID: 21934373
Long-term group exercise for people with Parkinson's disease: a feasibility study.
Aerobic and strengthening exercises have been shown to benefit people with Parkinson's disease (PD) on the basis of highly structured, short-term, clinical protocols.
This study extended previous research by investigating feasibility of an ongoing, community-based, group exercise program for people with PD on the basis of short-term (10 weeks) and long-term (14 months) data.
Twenty people with PD (Hoehn and Yahr stages I to III) participated in at least one of four 10-week sessions.
Classes were held twice weekly for 1 hour and included strength, flexibility, and balance and walking exercises.
Evaluations were done 1.5 hours after medication intake 1 week before and 1 week after each session.
Gait speed, 6-Minute Walk test (6MWT), "Timed Up and Go" test, and grip strength were used to assess physical function.
Analysis of short-term results were based on 18 participants (2 dropped out prior to posttest), and long-term results were based on 8 participants who started in the first session continued through the 14-month period.
Attendance rates were moderate to high (73% overall).
No injuries were reported.
Wilcoxon signed ranks tests based on each participant's first 10-week session demonstrated significant improvements in 6MWT, and grip strength.
Long-term participants showed significant improvements in grip strength, and a trend toward improved 6MWT.
Gait speed and Timed Up and Go test did not change significantly in the short or long terms.
Our community-based group exercise program was safe, feasible, and appears to be effective.
While some measures showed no improvement, there was no evidence of decline.
This is an important outcome for persons with progressive neurological disorders, and suggests community-based group exercise is a promising option for people with PD.
PMID: 21934364
Utility of the Mini-BESTest, BESTest, and BESTest sections for balance assessments in individuals with Parkinson disease.
The Balance Evaluation Systems Test(BESTest) has been shown to be a reliable and valid measure of balance in individuals with Parkinson disease (PD).
A less time-consuming assessment may increase clinical utility.
We compared the discriminative fall risk ability of the Mini-BESTest with that of the BESTest and determined the reliability and normal distribution of scores for each section of the BESTest and the Mini-BESTest in individuals with PD.
Eighty individuals with idiopathic PD were assessed using the BESTest and Mini-BESTest.
A faller was defined as an individual with 2 or more falls in the prior 6 months.
Subsets of individuals were used to determine interrater (n = 15) and test-retest reliability (n = 24).
The Mini-BESTest, total BESTest score, and all sections of the BESTest showed a significant difference between the average scores of fallers and nonfallers.
For both the Mini-BESTest and BESTest, interrater (intraclass correlation ICC ≥ 0.91) and test-retest (ICC ≥ 0.88) reliability was high.
The Mini-BESTest and BESTest were highly correlated (r = 0.955).
Accuracy of identifying a faller was comparable for the Mini-BESTest and BESTest (area under the receiver operating characteristic plots = 0.86 and 0.84, respectively).
No specific section of the BESTest captured the primary balance deficit for individuals with PD.
The posttest probabilities for discriminating fallers versus nonfallers were comparable-to-slightly stronger when using the Mini-BESTest.
Although the Mini-BESTest has fewer than half of the items in the BESTest and takes only 15 minutes to complete, it is as reliable as the BESTest and has comparable-to-slightly greater discriminative properties for identifying fallers in individuals with PD.
PMID: 21931820
Pre-fibrillar α-synuclein mutants cause Parkinson's disease-like non-motor symptoms in Drosophila.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is linked to the formation of insoluble fibrillar aggregates of the presynaptic protein α-Synuclein (αS) in neurons.
The appearance of such aggregates coincides with severe motor deficits in human patients.
These deficits are often preceded by non-motor symptoms such as sleep-related problems in the patients.
PD-like motor deficits can be recapitulated in model organisms such as Drosophila melanogaster when αS is pan-neurally expressed.
Interestingly, both these deficits are more severe when αS mutants with reduced aggregation properties are expressed in flies.
This indicates that that αS aggregation is not the primary cause of the PD-like motor symptoms.
Here we describe a model for PD in Drosophila which utilizes the targeted expression of αS mutants in a subset of dopadecarboxylase expressing serotonergic and dopaminergic (DA) neurons.
Our results show that targeted expression of pre-fibrillar αS mutants not only recapitulates PD-like motor symptoms but also the preceding non-motor symptoms such as an abnormal sleep-like behavior, altered locomotor activity and abnormal circadian periodicity.
Further, the results suggest that the observed non-motor symptoms in flies are caused by an early impairment of neuronal functions rather than by the loss of neurons due to cell death.
PMID: 21931353
Is GDNF beneficial in Parkinson disease?
PMID: 21931347
Parkinson disease: Induced pluripotent stem cells-a new in vitro model to investigate α-synuclein dysfunction in Parkinson disease.
PMID: 21931254
Quicker, easier, and cheaper? The promise of automated hand hygiene monitoring.
PMID: 21930938
Parkin, a p53 target gene, mediates the role of p53 in glucose metabolism and the Warburg effect.
Regulation of energy metabolism is a novel function of p53 in tumor suppression.
Parkin (PARK2), a Parkinson disease-associated gene, is a potential tumor suppressor whose expression is frequently diminished in tumors.
Here Parkin was identified as a p53 target gene that is an important mediator of p53's function in regulating energy metabolism.
The human and mouse Parkin genes contain functional p53 responsive elements, and p53 increases the transcription of Parkin in both humans and mice.
Parkin contributes to the function of p53 in glucose metabolism; Parkin deficiency activates glycolysis and reduces mitochondrial respiration, leading to the Warburg effect.
Restoration of Parkin expression reverses the Warburg effect in cells.
Thus, Parkin deficiency is a novel mechanism for the Warburg effect in tumors.
Parkin also contributes to the function of p53 in antioxidant defense.
Furthermore, Parkin deficiency sensitizes mice to γ-irradiation-induced tumorigenesis, which provides further direct evidence to support a role of Parkin in tumor suppression.
Our results suggest that as a novel component in the p53 pathway, Parkin contributes to the functions of p53 in regulating energy metabolism, especially the Warburg effect, and antioxidant defense, and thus the function of p53 in tumor suppression.
PMID: 21930414
Screening questionnaires for parkinsonism: A systematic review.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common, treatable movement disorder that often remains undiagnosed despite clinically manifest symptoms.
Screening for parkinsonism could lead to improved detection and earlier treatment, and facilitate research studies of PD prevalence.
In order to determine the feasibility of screening, this study evaluated the validity of previously developed screening questionnaires.
We systematically searched online databases PubMed and EMBASE for English-language studies published between 1980 and 2009.
In each database a "Parkinson(s) disease" or "parkinsonism" term was combined with a screening term ("screening instrument," "screening questionnaire," "screen" or "prevalence survey") and a validity term ("validation," "sensitivity" and "specificity").
Included studies reported the psychometric properties of at least one self-report questionnaire for parkinsonism.
Twenty-seven studies met the inclusion criteria.
From these studies, 9 screening questionnaires were identified.
Sensitivity and specificity estimates varied widely.
Sensitivity estimates were as high as 100% when questionnaires were tested among previously diagnosed PD patients and included a high number of parkinsonism specific items, but were as low as 48% when tested among early cases in a community-based sample.
Specificity estimates were lower, ranging from 22 to 100%.
An older sample, presence of multiple co-morbid conditions and lower literacy led to lower specificity estimates.
Higher specificity estimates were seen when the screening questionnaires were administered by a physician.
Screening questionnaires can detect symptomatic parkinsonism.
However, the performance of these questionnaires varied based on the individual items, study sample, and method of administration.
The performance of screening questionnaires in the detection of early or mild parkinsonism was modest.
PMID: 21930184
The Parkinson Progression Marker Initiative (PPMI).
The Parkinson Progression Marker Initiative (PPMI) is a comprehensive observational, international, multi-center study designed to identify PD progression biomarkers both to improve understanding of disease etiology and course and to provide crucial tools to enhance the likelihood of success of PD modifying therapeutic trials.
The PPMI cohort will comprise 400 recently diagnosed PD and 200 healthy subjects followed longitudinally for clinical, imaging and biospecimen biomarker assessment using standardized data acquisition protocols at twenty-one clinical sites.
All study data will be integrated in the PPMI study database and will be rapidly and publically available through the PPMI web site- www.ppmi-info.org.
Biological samples including longitudinal collection of blood, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and urine will be available to scientists by application to an independent PPMI biospecimen review committee also through the PPMI web site.
PPMI will rely on a partnership of government, PD foundations, industry and academics working cooperatively.
This approach is crucial to enhance the potential for success of this ambitious strategy to develop PD progression biomarkers that will accelerate research in disease modifying therapeutics.
PMID: 21929495
Practical neurology: a case-based series.
PMID: 21928905
Metamemory and prospective memory in Parkinson's disease.
Metamemory is integral for strategizing about memory intentions.
This study investigated the prospective memory (PM) deficit in Parkinson's disease (PD) from a metamemory viewpoint, with the aim of examining whether metamemory deficits might contribute to PM deficits in PD.
Sixteen patients with PD and 16 healthy older adult controls completed a time-based PM task (initiating a key press at two specified times during an ongoing task), and an event-based PM task (initiating a key press in response to animal words during an ongoing task).
To measure metamemory participants were asked to predict and postdict their memory performance before and after completing the tasks, as well as complete a self-report questionnaire regarding their everyday memory function.
The PD group had no impairment, relative to controls, on the event-based task, but had prospective (initiating the key press) and retrospective (recalling the instructions) impairments on the time-based task.
The PD group also had metamemory impairments on the time-based task; they were inaccurate at predicting their performance before doing the task but, became accurate when making postdictions.
This suggests impaired metamemory knowledge but preserved metamemory monitoring.
There were no group differences regarding PD patients' self-reported PM performance on the questionnaire.
These results reinforce previous findings that PM impairments in PD are dependent on task type.
Several accounts of PM failures in time-based tasks are presented, in particular, ways in which mnemonic and metacognitive deficits may contribute to the difficulties observed on the time-based task.
PMID: 21928541
[Severe confusion caused by Scopoderm patch!].
PMID: 21925152
Anti-Parkinsonian effects of Bacopa monnieri: insights from transgenic and pharmacological Caenorhabditis elegans models of Parkinson's disease.
Neurodegenerative Parkinson's disease (PD) is associated with aggregation of protein alpha synuclein and selective death of dopaminergic neurons, thereby leading to cognitive and motor impairment in patients.
The disease has no complete cure yet; the current therapeutic strategies involve prescription of dopamine agonist drugs which turn ineffective after prolonged use.
The present study utilized the powerful genetics of model system Caenorhabditis elegans towards exploring the anti-Parkinsonian effects of a neuro-protective botanical Bacopa monnieri.
Two different strains of C.
elegans; a transgenic model expressing "human" alpha synuclein [NL5901 (P(unc-54)::alphasynuclein::YFP+unc-119)], and a pharmacological model expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP) specifically in the dopaminergic neurons [BZ555 (P(dat-1)::GFP)] treated with selective catecholaminergic neurotoxin 6-hydroxy dopamine (6-OHDA), were employed for the study.
B.
monnieri was chosen for its known neuroprotective and cognition enhancing effects.
The study examined the effect of the botanical, on aggregation of alpha synuclein, degeneration of dopaminergic neurons, content of lipids and longevity of the nematodes.
Our studies show that B.
monnieri reduces alpha synuclein aggregation, prevents dopaminergic neurodegeneration and restores the lipid content in nematodes, thereby proving its potential as a possible anti-Parkinsonian agent.
These findings encourage further investigations on the botanical, and its active constituent compounds, as possible therapeutic intervention against Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21924950
Cortical sources of resting state electroencephalographic rhythms in Parkinson's disease related dementia and Alzheimer's disease.
Here we test the hypothesis that cortical source mapping of resting state electroencephalographic (EEG) rhythms could characterize neurodegenerative disorders inducing cognitive impairment such as Parkinson's disease related dementia (PDD) and Alzheimer's disease (AD).
To address this issue, eyes-closed resting state EEG rhythms were recorded in 13 PDD, 20 AD, and 20 normal elderly (Nold) subjects.
Age, gender, and education were carefully matched across the three groups.
Mini Mental State Evaluation (MMSE) score probed subjects' global cognitive status, and was matched between the PDD and AD groups.
EEG rhythms of interest were delta (2-4 Hz), theta (4-8 Hz), alpha1 (8-10.5 Hz), alpha2 (10.5-13 Hz), beta1 (13-20 Hz), and beta2 (20-30 Hz).
EEG cortical sources were estimated by low resolution brain electromagnetic source tomography (LORETA).
With respect to the Nold and AD groups, the PPD group was characterized by peculiar abnormalities of central delta sources and posterior cortical sources of theta and beta1 rhythms.
With respect to the Nold group, the PDD and AD groups mainly pointed to lower posterior cortical sources of alpha1 rhythms, which were positively correlated to MMSE score across all PDD and AD subjects as a whole (the lower the alpha sources, the lower the MMSE score).
This alpha decrease was greater in the AD than PPD patients.
The results suggest that topography and frequency of eyes-closed resting state cortical EEG rhythms distinguished PDD and AD groups.
We report the existence of different effects of neurodegeneration on the cortical neural synchronization mechanisms generating resting state EEG rhythms in PDD and AD patients.
PMID: 21924367
Reliability analysis of the resting state can sensitively and specifically identify the presence of Parkinson disease.
Parkinson disease (PD) is characterized by a number of motor and behavioral abnormalities that could be considered deficits of a "no task" or "resting" state, including resting motor findings and defects in emerging from a resting state (e.g., resting tremor, elevated resting tone, abulia, akinesia, apathy).
PET imaging, and recently, the MRI technique of continuous arterial spin labeling (CASL) have shown evidence of changes in metabolic patterns in individuals with PD.
The purpose of this study was to learn if the presence of PD could be "predicted" based on resting fluctuations of the BOLD signal.
Participants were 15 healthy controls, 14 subjects with PD, and 1 subject who presented as a control but later developed PD.
The amplitude of the low frequency fluctuation (ALFF) was used as an index of brain activity level in the resting state.
Participants with PD using this index showed a reliable decrease in activity in a number of regions, including the supplementary motor cortex, the mesial prefrontal cortex, the right middle frontal gyrus, and the left cerebellum (lobule VII/VIII) as well as increased activity in the right cerebellum (lobule IV/V).
Using a cross validation approach we term "Reliability Mapping of Regional Differences" (RMRD) to analyze our sample, we were able to reliably distinguish participants with PD from controls with 92% sensitivity and 87% specificity.
Our "pre-diagnostic" subject segregated in our analysis with the PD group.
These results suggest that resting fMRI should be considered for development as a biomarker and analytical tool for evaluation of PD.
PMID: 21922512
Role of microRNAs in central nervous system development and pathology.
Gene expression regulation is essential for correct functioning of the cell.
Complex processes such as development, apoptosis, cell differentiation, and cell cycling require a fine tuning of gene expression.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small RNAs that have been recognized as key components of the gene expression regulatory machinery.
By sequence complementarity, miRNAs recognize target mRNAs and inhibit their function through degradation or by repressing their translation.
The development of the central nervous system (CNS) requires precise and exquisitely regulated gene expression patterns.
It is now widely recognized that miRNAs have the capacity to provide such fine regulation both in time and in space.
High-throughput analyses as well as classical molecular biology approaches have allowed the identification of essential miRNAs for CNS development and function.
Moreover, recent studies in several model organisms are beginning to show intricate regulatory networks involving miRNAs, transcription factors, and epigenetic regulators during CNS development.
Here we review recent findings on the role that miRNAs play in the development of the CNS as well as in neuropathologies such as schizophrenia, Parkinson disease, and Alzheimer's disease, among others.
PMID: 21921840
Pimavanserin, a 5-HT2A inverse agonist, reverses psychosis-like behaviors in a rodent model of Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease psychosis (PDP) is a condition for which a safe, tolerated, and effective therapy is lacking.
Treatment with typical or atypical antipsychotics may be contraindicated in patients with PDP because of the potential for aggravating motor symptoms.
This study used a novel animal model with features of both Parkinson's disease (PD) and psychosis to examine a potential mechanism for reversing PDP.
Animals with bilateral 6-hydroxydopamine lesions of the substantia nigra displayed motoric impairments characteristic of humans with PD.
In addition, they displayed augmented head twitches, augmented amphetamine-induced locomotor activity, and disrupted prepulse inhibition compared with sham controls, behavioral indices frequently used to assess antipsychotic activity in animal models.
Pimavanserin, a selective 5-HT2A antagonist/inverse agonist, reversed the psychotic-like behavioral deficits, suggesting that nigrostriatal (6-hydroxydopamine) lesions induced alterations in 5-HT2A-mediated signaling.
The selective 5-HT2A inverse agonist M100907, but not the selective 5-HT2C inverse agonist SB 252084 paralleled the effects of pimavanserin.
Of note, the reversal of psychotic-like behaviors produced by 5-HT2A inverse agonists occurred without disrupting motor behaviors in lesioned subjects, suggesting that 5HT2A antagonism/inverse agonism may be beneficial in the treatment of PDP.
PMID: 21921694
Ambra1: A Parkin-binding protein involved in mitophagy.
Mutations in the gene for the E3 ubiquitin ligase Parkin are the most prevalent cause of autosomal recessive Parkinson disease (PD), an incurable neurodegenerative disorder.
Parkin surveys mitochondrial quality by translocating to depolarized mitochondria and inducing their selective macroautophagic removal (mitophagy).
We recently reported that Parkin interacts with Ambra1 (activating molecule in Beclin 1-regulated autophagy), a protein that promotes autophagy in the vertebrate central nervous system.
We discovered that prolonged mitochondrial depolarization strongly increases the interaction of Parkin with Ambra1.
Ambra1 is recruited in a Parkin-dependent manner to perinuclear clusters of depolarized mitochondria, activates the class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PtdIns3K) complex around these mitochondria and contributes to their selective autophagic clearance.
Here, we discuss these findings and suggest a model where translocated Parkin efficiently triggers mitophagy through combined recruitment of Ambra1 and ubiquitination of outer mitochondrial membrane proteins.
PMID: 21921019
Testing an aetiological model of visual hallucinations in Parkinson's disease.
The exact pathogenesis of visual hallucinations in Parkinson's disease is not known but an integrated model has been proposed that includes impaired visual input and central visual processing, impaired brainstem regulation of sleep-wake cycle with fluctuating vigilance, intrusion of rapid eye movement dream imagery into wakefulness and emergence of internally generated imagery, cognitive dysfunction and influence of dopaminergic drugs.
In a clinical study, we assessed motor and non-motor function, including sleep, mood, autonomic and global, frontal and visuoperceptive cognitive function in patients with and without visual hallucinations.
A subgroup of patients underwent detailed ophthalmological assessment.
In a separate pathological study, histological specimens were obtained from cases of pathologically proven Parkinson's disease and a retrospective case notes review was made for reporting of persistent formed visual hallucinations.
An assessment of Lewy body and Lewy neurite pathology was carried out in five cortical regions as recommended by diagnostic criteria for dementia with Lewy Bodies and in brainstem nuclei.
Ninety-four patients (mean age 67.5 ± 9.5 years) participated in the clinical study of whom 32% experienced visual hallucinations.
When corrected for multiple comparisons, patients with visual hallucinations had significantly greater disease duration, treatment duration, motor severity and complications, sleep disturbances, in particular excessive daytime somnolence and rapid eye movement sleep behavioural disorder, disorders of mood, autonomic dysfunction and global, frontal and visuoperceptive cognitive dysfunction.
Of the 94 patients, 50 (53%) underwent ophthalmological assessment.
There were no differences in ocular pathology between the visual hallucination and non-visual hallucination groups.
In a logistic regression model the four independent determinants of visual hallucinations were rapid eye movement sleep behavioural disorder (P = 0.026), autonomic function (P = 0.004), frontal cognitive function (P = 0.020) and a test of visuoperceptive function (object decision; P = 0.031).
In a separate study, post-mortem analysis was performed in 91 subjects (mean age at death 75.5 ± 8.0 years) and persistent visual hallucinations were documented in 63%.
Patients in the visual hallucinations group had similar disease duration but had significantly higher Lewy body densities in the middle frontal (P = 0.002) and middle temporal gyri (P = 0.033) and transentorhinal (P = 0.005) and anterior cingulate (P = 0.020) cortices but not parietal cortex (P = 0.22).
Using a comprehensive assessment of the clinical, demographic and ophthalmological correlates of visual hallucinations in Parkinson's disease, the combined data support the hypothesized model of impaired visual processing, sleep-wake dysregulation and brainstem dysfunction, and cognitive, particularly frontal, impairment all independently contributing to the pathogenesis of visual hallucinations in Parkinson's disease.
These clinical data are supported by the pathological study, in which higher overall cortical Lewy body counts, and in particular areas implicated in visuoperception and executive function, were associated with visual hallucinations.
PMID: 21921011
Parkinson's facies.
PMID: 21920231
Skin ulceration secondary to deep brain stimulation device leads.
PMID: 21919541
Early retirement and income loss in patients with early and advanced Parkinson's disease.
The indirect costs of Parkinson's disease (PD) may be larger than direct healthcare costs, and the largest component of indirect costs is income loss related to early retirement.
No recent retrospective analysis details PD-related early retirement and income loss in the US.
We used an observational, matched cohort to study wages and labour force participation over 4 years and to simulate lifetime income losses conditional on being newly diagnosed with PD (naive) or having evidence of increasing disability.
Actively employed primary beneficiaries of private insurance policies aged 18-64 years with more than two PD diagnoses (International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification [ICD-9-CM]: 332.x) or one diagnosis and a prescription of an antiparkinsonian drug were selected from a privately insured claims database.
Continuous health coverage during analysis periods was required.
Naive patients were defined as having no claims history indicative of PD during the year prior to first diagnosis or prescription use.
A PD with ambulatory assistance devices (PDAAD) cohort was also followed from the date of first evidence of a wheelchair or walker.
Controls without PD were matched on age, sex and region.
Survival analysis and Wilcoxon rank sum tests were used to compare rates of early retirement and income loss.
A simulation of projected economic loss was conducted for PD cohorts diagnosed at different ages using Bureau of Labor Statistics labour force participation and income data.
Naive PD patients (n = 278) and PDAAD patients (n = 28) were on average aged 53 years and had significantly higher rates of co-morbidities at baseline versus controls.
Conditional on being employed, there was no statistical difference in earnings.
However, the hazard of early retirement associated with PD was 2.08 (p < 0.001) for the naive cohort and 5.01 (p < 0.001) for the PDAAD cohort.
From age 40 to 79 years, earnings losses in year 2009 values were $US569 393, $US188 590, $US35 496 and $US2451 for those diagnosed at age 45, 55, 65 and 75 years, respectively.
Estimates increased by 9% to 37% when using expected 2018 labour force participation estimates.
The cost of early retirement associated with patients with PD was substantial.
Given that the proportion of Americans participating in the labour force in older age groups is expected to increase, PD-related early retirement costs will likely rise.
PMID: 21917799
Feedback timing modulates brain systems for learning in humans.
The ability to learn from the consequences of actions--no matter when those consequences take place--is central to adaptive behavior.
Despite major advances in understanding how immediate feedback drives learning, it remains unknown precisely how the brain learns from delayed feedback.
Here, we present converging evidence from neuropsychology and neuroimaging for distinct roles for the striatum and the hippocampus in learning, depending on whether feedback is immediate or delayed.
We show that individuals with striatal dysfunction due to Parkinson's disease are impaired at learning when feedback is immediate, but not when feedback is delayed by a few seconds.
Using functional imaging (fMRI) combined with computational model-derived analyses, we further demonstrate that healthy individuals show activation in the striatum during learning from immediate feedback and activation in the hippocampus during learning from delayed feedback.
Additionally, later episodic memory for delayed feedback events was enhanced, suggesting that engaging distinct neural systems during learning had consequences for the representation of what was learned.
Together, these findings provide direct evidence from humans that striatal systems are necessary for learning from immediate feedback and that delaying feedback leads to a shift in learning from the striatum to the hippocampus.
The results provide a link between learning impairments in Parkinson's disease and evidence from single-unit recordings demonstrating that the timing of reinforcement modulates activity of midbrain dopamine neurons.
Collectively, these findings indicate that relatively small changes in the circumstances under which information is learned can shift learning from one brain system to another.
PMID: 21917780
Is levodopa toxic? Insights from a brain bank.
PMID: 21917774
Levodopa toxicity and Parkinson disease: still a need for equipoise.
PMID: 21917769
Does levodopa accelerate the pathologic process in Parkinson disease brain?
Several in vitro studies have suggested levodopa (L-dopa) to be toxic to dopaminergic neurons and that it can modulate the aggregation process of α-synuclein.
We investigated the relationship between cumulative lifetime dose of l-dopa and nigral neuronal count and Lewy body (LB) pathology in Parkinson disease (PD).
Density of pigmented neurons was measured unilaterally in a single section of substantia nigra (SN) with delineation of the dorsal and ventral tiers in 96 cases of PD with well-documented clinical records relating to antiparkinsonian drug treatment.
Cortical and nigral LB densities were determined using a morphometric approach.
Mean lifetime dose of L-dopa correlated significantly (p < 0.001) with duration of PD in the entire study population (n = 96) and it was not possible to disentangle their individual effect.
This was not the case in a subgroup analysis of younger onset patients with a longer duration of PD (n = 40) who showed no significant correlation between L-dopa and total SN neuronal density (p = 0.07), after adjustment for duration of illness.
There was, however, a lower neuronal density in the ventral (p = 0.02) but not in the dorsal (p = 0.27) tier detected with the cumulative dose of L-dopa.
We found no difference in L-dopa dose between Braak PD stages (p = 0.58).
Furthermore, the subgroup analysis showed no relationship of L-dopa dose to either cortical (p = 0.47) or nigral (p = 0.48) LB density.
Chronic use of L-dopa in PD does not enhance progression of PD pathology as far as can be determined by our observations with SN neuronal counts and LB densities.
PMID: 21917765
Editor's note: does levodopa accelerate the pathologic process in Parkinson disease brain?
PMID: 21917501
Validation of the non-motor symptoms questionnaire (NMS-Quest).
Although non-motor manifestations of Parkinson's disease are common and can cause severe disability, they are often under-recognized, leading to missed treatment opportunities.
Screening tools for non-motor symptoms are urgently needed.
Recently a 30-item screening Non Motor Symptoms Questionnaire was developed.
Although some psychometric properties have been evaluated, sensitivity and specificity of the questionnaire have not been systematically assessed.
Parkinson patients completed Non Motor Symptoms Questionnaire, then underwent a gold-standard clinical evaluation of non-motor symptoms and signs that included extensive standardized questionnaires, cognitive/behavioural assessment, and neurological examination to determine whether each manifestation was present or absent.
The sensitivity and specificity of each non-motor symptom, in relation to the gold-standard were estimated.
For the 70 participants, the mean age was 66.7+/-9.3, 64% were men, and disease duration was 3.8+/-2.8 years.
From the gold-standard evaluation, the prevalence of non-motor manifestations ranged from 8.7% (hallucinations) to 78.3% (nocturia).
The mean sensitivity of all Non Motor Symptoms was 63.4%.
This varied considerably among different manifestations, ranging from 24% (sleepiness, hyposmia) to 100% (diplopia).
By restricting analysis to clinically significant non-motor problems (i.e.
those serious enough to warrant treatment), the mean sensitivity increased to 71.8%.
The specificity for most items was high, with an overall mean specificity of 88.5%.
For many non-motor manifestations Non Motor Symptoms Questionnaire is an effective screen; however, for manifestations such as somnolence, olfactory loss and apathy, sensitivity is suboptimal.
Overall, this questionnaire can be a useful clinical tool for screening non-motor problems in an office setting.
PMID: 21915907
Temporal stability of the Unified Dyskinesia Rating Scale.
The objective of this study was to establish temporal stability characteristics for objective components of the Unified Dyskinesia Rating Scale (UDysRS).
The UDysRS has strong internal consistency and a reliable factor structure, but the important issue of temporal stability has not been established.
Using intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) analyses, we examined UDysRS temporal stability for the objective scale components (Part III and IV) over an 8-hour observation period.
We assessed ICCs for the single centralized rater, the on-site raters, and the agreement between the single centralized rater and the on-site raters.
Kappa statistic assessed agreement between the single centralized and on-site raters for clinical state (ON vs OFF).
For both the single centralized rater and the on-site raters, there was high temporal stability of the UDysRS Part III, Part IV, and Total Objective UDysRS in both ON and OFF states, with ICCs ranging from 0.822 (P < .0005) to 0.513 (P < .013).
The agreement between the 2 rating techniques (centralized vs on-site) was significant for ON and OFF ratings of Part III, Part IV, and Total Objective UDysRS, ranging from 0.821 (P < .0005) to 0.703 (P < .0005).
The UDysRS is highly stable for ON and OFF.
Our data suggest that a single UDysRS evaluation for ON and for OFF states is highly representative of that state regardless of time.
Likewise, if appropriate protocols need to assess dyskinesia in a field or community setting, the UDysRS can be filmed without an on-site rater and rated centrally with retained validity.
PMID: 21915906
Mortality from Parkinson's disease: a population-based prospective study (NEDICES).
Most studies of mortality in Parkinson's disease have been clinical studies, yielding results that are not representative of the general population.
We assessed the risk of mortality from Parkinson's disease in the Neurological Disorders in Central Spain (NEDICES) study, a prospective population-based study in which Parkinson's disease patients who were not ascertained through medical practitioners were also included.
The cohort consisted of 5262 elderly subjects (mean baseline age, 73.0 years), including 81 with Parkinson's disease at baseline (1994-1995).
Thirteen-year mortality was assessed.
Two thousand seven hundred and one of 5262 subjects (51.3%) died over a median follow-up of 12.0 years (range, 0.04-14.8 years), including 66 of 81 subjects (81.5%) with Parkinson's disease at baseline and 2635 of 5181 subjects (50.8%) without Parkinson's disease at baseline.
In an unadjusted Cox model, the hazard ratio of mortality was increased in subjects with Parkinson's disease (hazard ratio, 2.29; 95% confidence interval, 1.80-2.93; P < .001) versus subjects without Parkinson's disease (reference group).
In a Cox model that adjusted for a variety of demographic factors and comorbidities, the risk of mortality remained elevated in subjects with Parkinson's disease (hazard ratio, 1.75; 95% CI, 1.32-2.31, P < .001).
In additional Cox models, Parkinson's disease patients with dementia had particularly high risks of mortality (adjusted hazard ratio, 2.62; 95% CI, 1.40-4.90; P < .001).
In this prospective population-based study, Parkinson's disease was an independent predictor of mortality in the elderly.
Parkinson's disease patients with dementia had particularly high risks of mortality.
PMID: 21915226
Neurofilamentopathy in neurodegenerative diseases.
Neurofilament protein alterations are found in many neurodegenerative diseases, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinson, Alzheimer, and Charcot-Marie-Tooth.
Abnormal modifications of neurofilament, such as mutation, oxidation and phosphorylation, are linked to the disease-related alteration.
In this review, the most recent discovery and central arguments about functions, pathological modifications, and genetic mutations related to neurofilaments in neurodegenerative diseases is presented.
PMID: 21912704
Impairment of gradual muscle adjustment during wrist circumduction in Parkinson's disease.
Purposeful movements are attained by gradually adjusted activity of opposite muscles, or synergists.
This requires a motor system that adequately modulates initiation and inhibition of movement and selectively activates the appropriate muscles.
In patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) initiation and inhibition of movements are impaired which may manifest itself in e.g.
difficulty to start and stop walking.
At single-joint level, impaired movement initiation is further accompanied by insufficient inhibition of antagonist muscle activity.
As the motor symptoms in PD primarily result from cerebral dysfunction, quantitative investigation of gradually adjusted muscle activity during execution of purposeful movement is a first step to gain more insight in the link between impaired modulation of initiation and inhibition at the levels of (i) cerebrally coded task performance and (ii) final execution by the musculoskeletal system.
To that end, the present study investigated changes in gradual adjustment of muscle synergists using a manipulandum that enabled standardized smooth movement by continuous wrist circumduction.
Differences between PD patients (N = 15, off-medication) and healthy subjects (N = 16) concerning the relation between muscle activity and movement performance in these groups were assessed using kinematic and electromyographic (EMG) recordings.
The variability in the extent to which a particular muscle was active during wrist circumduction--defined as muscle activity differentiation--was quantified by EMG.
We demonstrated that more differentiated muscle activity indeed correlated positively with improved movement performance, i.e.
higher movement speed and increased smoothness of movement.
Additionally, patients employed a less differentiated muscle activity pattern than healthy subjects.
These specific changes during wrist circumduction imply that patients have a decreased ability to gradually adjust muscles causing a decline in movement performance.
We propose that less differentiated muscle use in PD patients reflects impaired control of modulated initiation and inhibition due to decreased ability to selectively and jointly activate muscles.
PMID: 21912625
An exploratory study on CLU, CR1 and PICALM and Parkinson disease.
Recent GWAS and subsequent confirmation studies reported several single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at the CLU, CR1 and PICALM loci in association with late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Parkinson disease (PD) shares several clinical and pathologic characteristics with AD; we therefore explored whether these SNPs were also associated with PD risk.
791 non-Hispanic Whites cases and 1,580 matched controls were included in the study.
Odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were obtained from logistic regression models.
rs11136000 at the CLU locus was associated with PD risk under the recessive model (comparing TT versus CC+CT: OR = 0.71, 95% CI: 0.55-0.92, p = 0.008) after adjusting for year of birth, gender, smoking, and caffeine intake.
Further adjustment for family history of PD and ApoE ε4 status did not change the result.
In addition, we did not find evidence for effect modification by ApoE or known PD risk factors.
The association, however, appeared to be stronger for PD with dementia (OR = 0.49, 95% CI: 0.27-0.91) than for PD without dementia (OR = 0.81, 95% CI: 0.61-1.06).
The two other SNPs, rs6656401 from CR1, and rs3851179 from PICALM region were not associated with PD (p>0.05).
Our exploratory analysis suggests an association of CLU with PD.
This exploratory finding and the role of dementia in explaining this finding needs further investigation.
PMID: 21912409
Parkinson disease: impulsive choice-Parkinson disease and dopaminergic therapy.
PMID: 21911417
The effect of striatal dopaminergic grafts on the neuronal activity in the substantia nigra pars reticulata and subthalamic nucleus in hemiparkinsonian rats.
The electrophysiological correlates of parkinsonism in the basal ganglia have been well studied in patients with Parkinson's disease and animal models.
Separately, striatal dopaminergic cell transplantation has shown promise in ameliorating parkinsonian motor symptoms.
However, the effect of dopaminergic grafts on basal ganglia electrophysiology has not thoroughly been investigated.
In this study, we transplanted murine foetal ventral mesencephalic cells into rats rendered hemiparkinsonian by 6-hydroxydopamine injection.
Three months after transplantation, extracellular and local field potential recordings were taken under urethane anaesthesia from the substantia nigra pars reticulata and subthalamic nucleus along with cortical electroencephalograms and were compared to recordings from normal and hemiparkinsonian controls.
Recordings from cortical slow-wave activity and global activation states were analysed separately.
Rats with histologically confirmed xenografts showed behavioural improvement measured by counting apomorphine-induced rotations and with the extended body axis test.
Firing rates in both nuclei were not significantly different between control and grafted groups.
However, burst firing patterns in both nuclei in the slow-wave activity state were significantly reduced (P < 0.05) in rats with large surviving grafts, compared to hemiparkinsonian controls.
The neuronal firing entropies and oscillations in both nuclei were restored to normal levels in the large-graft group.
Electroencephalogram spike-triggered averages also showed normalization in the slow-wave activity state (P < 0.05).
These results suggest that local continuous dopaminergic stimulation exerts a normalizing effect on the downstream parkinsonian basal ganglia firing patterns.
This novel finding is relevant to future preclinical and clinical investigations of cell transplantation and the development of next-generation therapies for Parkinson's disease that ameliorate pathophysiological neural activity and provide optimal recovery of function.
PMID: 21910444
Structural impact of proline-directed pseudophosphorylation at AT8, AT100, and PHF1 epitopes on 441-residue tau.
The intrinsically disordered protein tau becomes excessively phosphorylated and aggregates into neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer's disease.
To obtain insight into the structural consequences of phosphorylation, we characterized a mutant protein of tau in which epitopes recognized by Alzheimer diagnostic antibodies were mimicked by mutation to glutamic acid [AT8 (S199E, S202E, T205E), AT100 (T212E and S214E), and PHF1 (S396E and S404E)].
A large number of distance restraints obtained from NMR paramagnetic relaxation enhancement in combination with ensemble conformer calculations demonstrate that pseudophosphorylation causes an opening of the transient folding of tau.
Together with previous studies on the Parkinson-related protein α-synuclein, our data indicate that networks of transient long-range interactions are common properties of intrinsically disordered proteins and that their modulation is important for aggregation.
PMID: 21908227
SCOPA-AUT scale in different parkinsonisms and its correlation with (123) I-MIBG cardiac scintigraphy.
Our objective was to assess the usefulness of the Scales for Outcomes in Parkinson's disease - Autonomic (SCOPA-AUT) in the differential diagnosis of Parkinsonisms and clarify its relation with 123-I-MIBG cardiac scintigraphy.
A total of 112 patients with Parkinson's disease (PD), 12 with multiple system atrophy parkinsonian variant (MSA-P) and 20 with progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) participated in the study.
The following variables were collected: age, sex, age at onset, length of illness, type and dose of anti-Parkinson medication, and score on the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale.
The Unified Multiple System Atrophy Rating Scale was administered to patients with MSA and the Progressive Supranuclear Palsy Rating Scale to those with PSP.
Finally, the SCOPA-AUT was administered to all the patients.
Cardiac 123I-MIBG SPECT scans were performed on a subset of patients (25 with PD and 5 with MSA-P).
Statistically significant differences were observed (p < 0.01) in the SCOPA-AUT scores between patients with PD (14.75+/-8.09) and those with MSA (21.07+/-5.56), the latter having higher scores on the bowel function (20.07+/-13.40 vs 34.92+/-14.91) and urinary domains (30.21+/-21.55 vs 49.26+/-21.40) (p < 0.01).
No correlation was found between the SCOPA-AUT score and anti-Parkinson's medication and heart:mediastinum (H/M) MIBG uptake ratio in the cardiac SPECT (at 4 h).
Severity of dysautonomia as measured by the SCOPA-AUT was not correlated with clinical severity, time since onset or the H/M ratio.
In the patients with PD, the only variable associated with the H/M ratio was age at onset of the disease.
PMID: 21908226
Risk assessment and follow-up of valvular regurgitation in Parkinson patients treated with cabergoline.
PMID: 21907175
Apolipoprotein E and LRP1 Increase Early in Parkinson's Disease Pathogenesis.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by α-synuclein-containing Lewy bodies (LBs) and loss of melanized neurons in the substantia nigra (SN).
Recently, a link between apolipoprotein E (ApoE) expression, α-synuclein aggregation, and neurodegeneration was suggested.
Here, we report on ApoE expression appearing in melanized neurons of the SN and in LBs in both PD and incidental LB disease cases.
Interestingly, increased expression of the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (the receptor for ApoE) was also observed in incidental LB disease and PD.
Our data suggest that alterations in lipoprotein homeostasis/signaling in melanized neurons of the SN are an early event during PD pathogenesis.
PMID: 21907067
A case of abrupt-onset apathy, psychosis, and depression following deep brain stimulation in a patient with Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21907011
Translation initiator EIF4G1 mutations in familial Parkinson disease.
Genome-wide analysis of a multi-incident family with autosomal-dominant parkinsonism has implicated a locus on chromosomal region 3q26-q28.
Linkage and disease segregation is explained by a missense mutation c.3614G>A (p.Arg1205His) in eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4-gamma (EIF4G1).
Subsequent sequence and genotype analysis identified EIF4G1 c.1505C>T (p.Ala502Val), c.2056G>T (p.Gly686Cys), c.3490A>C (p.Ser1164Arg), c.3589C>T (p.Arg1197Trp) and c.3614G>A (p.Arg1205His) substitutions in affected subjects with familial parkinsonism and idiopathic Lewy body disease but not in control subjects.
Despite different countries of origin, persons with EIF4G1 c.1505C>T (p.Ala502Val) or c.3614G>A (p.Arg1205His) mutations appear to share haplotypes consistent with ancestral founders.
eIF4G1 p.Ala502Val and p.Arg1205His disrupt eIF4E or eIF3e binding, although the wild-type protein does not, and render mutant cells more vulnerable to reactive oxidative species.
EIF4G1 mutations implicate mRNA translation initiation in familial parkinsonism and highlight a convergent pathway for monogenic, toxin and perhaps virally-induced Parkinson disease.
PMID: 21906920
Anthropometric indices of fat distribution and cardiometabolic risk in Parkinson's disease.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: To investigate the association between anthropometric indices of body fat distribution and cardiometabolic risk factors in a population of Parkinson's disease (PD) patients.
METHODS & RESULTS: One hundred and fifty-seven PD patients (57.3% males) were studied measuring: waist circumference (WC), waist-hip ratio (WHR), waist-to-height ratio (WtHR), body fat percentage (BF%) by impedance, fasting glucose, serum lipids.
Information was collected also on diabetes, hypertension and metabolic syndrome (MetS).
Increased cardiometabolic risk was defined by ≥2 MetS component traits other than abdominal adiposity.
In the whole population, prevalence of overweight and obesity were 35.0% and 19.2%, respectively.
However, prevalence of MetS and elevated cardiometabolic risk were 14.6% and 18.5%, respectively.
Prevalence was similar between genders, with one exception: adverse fat distribution according to WC and WHR was more common in females (P < 0.001).
Using a multivariable model (adjustments: age, smoking status and disease duration), indices were highly correlated with BF% in both genders.
WC and WtHR were associated with the number of MetS criteria and elevated risk.
The only cardiometabolic parameters associated with anthropometric indices were HDL in men and triglycerides in women.
After adjusting also for BMI all the associations found with anthropometric indices disappeared.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite their correlation with BF%, anthropometric indices of body fat distribution appear to poorly account for the reduced cardiometabolic risk of the PD patient.
This finding suggests a low metabolic activity within the adipose tissue.
The implications of fat distribution on the cardiometabolic risk of PD patients clearly deserves further investigation.
PMID: 21906664
Isotopic reinforcement of essential polyunsaturated fatty acids diminishes nigrostriatal degeneration in a mouse model of Parkinson's disease.
Oxidative damage of membrane polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) is thought to play a major role in mitochondrial dysfunction related to Parkinson's disease (PD).
The toxic products formed by PUFA oxidation inflict further damage on cellular components and contribute to neuronal degeneration.
Here, we tested the hypothesis that isotopic reinforcement, by deuteration of the bisallylic sites most susceptible to oxidation in PUFA may provide at least partial protection against nigrostriatal injury in a mouse model of oxidative stress and cell death, the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) model.
Mice were fed a fat-free diet supplemented with saturated acids, oleic acid and essential PUFA: either normal, hydrogenated linoleic (LA, 18:2n-6) and α-linolenic (ALA, 18:3n-3) or deuterated 11,11-D2-LA and 11,11,14,14-D4-ALA in a ratio of 1:1 (to a total of 10% mass fat) for 6 days; each group was divided into two cohorts receiving either MPTP or saline and then continued on respective diets for 6 days.
Brain homogenates from mice receiving deuterated PUFA (D-PUFA) vs.
hydrogenated PUFA (H-PUFA) demonstrated a significant incorporation of deuterium as measured by isotope ratio mass-spectrometry.
Following MPTP exposure, mice fed H-PUFA revealed 78.7% striatal dopamine (DA) depletion compared to a 46.8% reduction in the D-PUFA cohort (as compared to their respective saline-treated controls), indicating a significant improvement in DA concentration with D-PUFA.
Similarly, higher levels of the DA metabolite 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC) were detected in MPTP-exposure mice administered D-PUFA; however, saline-treated mice revealed no change in DA or DOPAC levels.
Western blot analyses of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) confirmed neuroprotection with D-PUFA, as striatal homogenates showed higher levels of TH immunoreactivity in D-PUFA (88.5% control) vs.
H-PUFA (50.4% control) in the MPTP-treated cohorts.
In the substantia nigra, a significant improvement was noted in the number of nigral dopaminergic neurons following MPTP exposure in the D-PUFA (79.5% control) vs.
H-PUFA (58.8% control) mice using unbiased stereological cell counting.
Taken together, these findings indicate that dietary isotopic reinforcement with D-PUFA partially protects against nigrostriatal damage from oxidative injury elicited by MPTP in mice.
PMID: 21906659
Macroautophagy and the proteasome are differently involved in the degradation of alpha-synuclein wild type and mutated A30P in an in vitro inducible model (PC12/TetOn).
Many data suggest that alpha synuclein (α-syn) aggregation is involved in Parkinson's disease (PD) neurotoxicity and is accelerated by the pathogenetic point mutation A30P.
The triplication of α-syn gene has been linked to early-onset familial PD, suggesting that the cellular dosage of α-syn is an important modulator of its toxicity.
To verify this point, we developed an inducible model of α-syn expression (both wild type [WT] and mutated A30P) in rat PC12/TetOn cells.
At low expression level, both α-syn(WT) and (A30P) did not aggregate, were not toxic, and displayed a protective action against oxidative stress triggered by hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)).
By increasing α-syn expression, its antioxidant function was no longer detectable as for the A30P form, but again no aggregation and cell death were present both for the WT and the mutated protein.
To clarify why α-syn did not accumulate at high expression level, we inhibited macroautophagy by 3-methyladenine (3-MA) and the proteasome by MG132.
In presence of 3-MA, α-syn(WT) accumulated, A11 anti-oligomer antibody-positive aggregates were detectable, and cell toxicity was evident, while proteasome inhibition did not increase α-syn(WT) accumulation.
Macroautophagy or proteasome inhibition slightly increased α-syn(A30P) toxicity, with no detectable aggregation.
This model can provide useful details about α-syn function, aggregation, and degradation pathways.
PMID: 21905799
Subthalamic nucleus stimulation for attenuation of pain related to Parkinson disease.
The objective of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of chronic subthalamic nucleus (STN) stimulation for alleviating pain related to Parkinson disease (PD).
Among 163 consecutive patients undergoing STN stimulation, 69 were identified as experiencing pain preoperatively that was related to their PD.
All 69 patients suffering from pain were followed up prospectively for 12 months after surgery.
All patients described the severity of their pain according to a visual analog scale (VAS) preoperatively and at 2 weeks, 6 months, and 12 months postoperatively.
Pain unrelated to PD was not studied.
Several types of pain related to PD, the categories of which were based on a modification of 2 previous classifications (Ford and Honey), can occur in such patients: 1) musculoskeletal pain, 2) dystonic pain, 3) somatic pain exacerbated by PD, 4) radicular/peripheral neuropathic pain, and 5) central pain.
The overall mean VAS score was significantly decreased postoperatively by 75% and 69% at 2 weeks and 6 months, respectively (p < 0.001).
The mean VAS score at 12 months was also decreased by 80%, but 6 instances of pain (3 reports of somatic back pain and 3 reports of radicular/peripheral neuropathic pain) required additional spinal surgery to alleviate the pain severity.
The results were analyzed using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test and demonstrated a significant reduction in VAS scores at all follow-up assessments (p < 0.001).
Musculoskeletal pain and dystonic pain were well alleviated by STN stimulation.
In contrast, somatic pain exacerbated by PD and peripheral neuropathic pain originating from lumbar spinal diseases, such as spondylosis deformans and/or canal stenosis, often deteriorated postoperatively despite attenuation of the patients' motor disability.
Patients with central pain were poor responders.
This study found that STN stimulation produced significant improvement of overall pain related to PD in patients with advanced PD, and the efficacy continued for at least 1 year.
The present results indicate that musculoskeletal pain and dystonic pain responded well to STN stimulation, but patients with back pain (somatic pain) and radicular/peripheral neuropathic pain originating from spinal disease have a potential risk for postoperative deterioration of their pain.
PMID: 21905078
Stem cell technology for neurodegenerative diseases.
Over the past 20 years, stem cell technologies have become an increasingly attractive option to investigate and treat neurodegenerative diseases.
In the current review, we discuss the process of extending basic stem cell research into translational therapies for patients suffering from neurodegenerative diseases.
We begin with a discussion of the burden of these diseases on society, emphasizing the need for increased attention toward advancing stem cell therapies.
We then explain the various types of stem cells utilized in neurodegenerative disease research, and outline important issues to consider in the transition of stem cell therapy from bench to bedside.
Finally, we detail the current progress regarding the applications of stem cell therapies to specific neurodegenerative diseases, focusing on Parkinson disease, Huntington disease, Alzheimer disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and spinal muscular atrophy.
With a greater understanding of the capacity of stem cell technologies, there is growing public hope that stem cell therapies will continue to progress into realistic and efficacious treatments for neurodegenerative diseases.
PMID: 21904896
Effects of unilateral pedunculopontine stimulation on electromyographic activation patterns during gait in individual patients with Parkinson's disease.
In Parkinson's disease (PD), the effects of deep brain stimulation of the pedunculopontine nucleus (PPTg-DBS) on gait has been object of international debate.
Some evidence demonstrated that, in the late swing-early stance phase of gait cycle, a reduced surface electromyographic activation (sEMG) of tibialis anterior (TA) is linked to the striatal dopamine deficiency in PD patients.
In the present study we report preliminary results on the effect of PPTg-DBS on electromyographic patterns during gait in individual PD patients.
To evaluate the sEMG amplitude of TA, the root mean square (RMS) of the TA burst in late swing-early stance phase (RMS-A) was normalized as a percent of the RMS of the TA burst in late stance-early swing (RMS-B).
We studied three male patients in the following conditions: on PPTg-DBS/on L: -dopa, on PPTg-DBS/off L: -dopa, off PPTg-DBS/on L: -dopa, off PPTg-DBS/off L: -dopa.
For each assessment the UPDRS III was filled in.
We observed no difference between on PPTg-DBS/off L: -dopa and off PPTg-DBS/off L: -dopa in UPDRS III scores.
In off PPTg-DBS/off L: -dopa, patient A (right implant) showed absence of the right and left RMSA, respectively, in 80% and 83% of gait cycles.
Patient B (right implant) showed absence of the right RMS-A in 86% of cycles.
RMS-A of the patient C (left implant) was bilaterally normal.
In on PPTg- DBS/off L: -dopa, no patient showed reduced RMS-A.
Although the very low number of subjects we evaluated, our observations suggest that PPTg plays a role in modulating TA activation pattern during the steady state of gait.
PMID: 21904267
Gamma Knife Thalamotomy for Parkinson Disease and Essential Tremor: A Prospective Multicenter Study.
BACKGROUND:: No prospective study of gamma knife thalamotomy for intractable tremor has previously been reported.
OBJECTIVE:: To clarify the safety and optimally effective conditions for performing unilateral gamma knife (GK) thalamotomy for tremors of Parkinson disease (PD) and essential tremor (ET), a systematic postirradiation 24-month follow-up study was conducted at 6 institutions.
We present the results of this multicenter collaborative trial.
METHODS:: In total, 72 patients (PD characterized by tremor, n = 59; ET, n = 13) were registered at 6 Japanese institutions.
Following our selective thalamotomy procedure, the lateral part of the ventralis intermedius nucleus, 45% of the thalamic length from the anterior tip, was selected as the GK isocenter.
A single 130-Gy shot was applied using a 4-mm collimator.
Evaluation included neurological examination, magnetic resonance imaging and/or computerized tomography, the unified Parkinson's disease rating scale (UPDRS), electromyography, medication change, and video observations.
RESULTS:: Final clinical effects were favorable.
Of 53 patients who completed 24 months of follow-up, 43 were evaluated as having excellent or good results (81.1%).
UPDRS scores showed tremor improvement (parts II and III).
Thalamic lesion size fluctuated but converged to either an almost spherical shape (65.6%), a sphere with streaking (23.4%), or an extended high-signal zone (10.9%).
No permanent clinical complications were observed.
CONCLUSION:: GK thalamotomy is an alternative treatment for intractable tremors of PD as well as for ET.
Less invasive intervention may be beneficial to patients.
PMID: 21902084
Sleep disturbance and neurological disease.
PMID: 21901502
The pedunculopontine nucleus: from basic neuroscience to translational applications for Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21898597
The interplay of cholinergic function, attention, and falls in Parkinson's disease.
Dopamine loss in the substantia nigra causes several of the motor signs seen in Parkinson's disease, but there is now increasing evidence highlighting the importance of cholinergic loss in the pathophysiology of nonmotor symptoms.
The nucleus basalis of Meynert supplies the majority of the cholinergic input to the cerebral cortex, with the pedunculopontine nucleus providing many subcortical structures with acetylcholine.
Both these structures undergo degeneration in Parkinson's disease (PD), with more severe loss associated with cognitive impairment.
The risk of dementia in PD is greater than that in control subjects, with impairments in attention, visuospatial function, and executive control dominating.
Imaging studies have demonstrated degeneration of the cholinergic system in PD, Parkinson's disease dementia, and dementia with Lewy bodies, with improvements in attention seen following the introduction of cholinesterase inhibitors.
Conversely, anticholinergic drugs are associated with cognitive decline, with neuropathology studies indicating the presence of increased neurofibrillary tangles and senile plaque formation.
In addition, these drugs are also known to precipitate visual hallucinations, lending support to a cholinergic basis for visual hallucinations in PD.
Gait, falls, and cognition may also be related, as evidenced by the findings that fallers perform less well on test of attention than nonfallers and that greater postural instability is associated with worse scores on attention and executive function.
It is therefore feasible that cognition (namely, attention), visual hallucinations, falls, and gait are subserved by acetylcholine, and this is further explored in this clinically orientated review.
PMID: 21895584
PatientsLikeMe and the tale of three brothers.
PMID: 21894670
Parkinson's care under threat.
PMID: 21894604
[Differential effects of dual tasks on emotional processing in non-medicated patients with Parkinson's disease].
Previous research has shown that correct identification of emotional facial expressions (EFE) depends on the cognitive resources that are available.
In this study, we examine whether the capacity to identify EFE in a dual task paradigm is affected in Parkinson's disease (PD).
To investigate the interference generated by introducing a secondary task in EFE processing during the encoding and recovery of the facial expression in non-medicated PD patients.
A total of 14 patients with de novo PD and 28 healthy adults identified 24 EFE under two conditions: simultaneous encoding along with a secondary task and introduction of the secondary task between the time that spans the encoding of the primary task and the response time latency.
Results showed that identification of EFE by patients with PD was significantly worse than by healthy adults in the simultaneous encoding condition.
In contrast, no differences were found when the interference of the secondary task took place in the phase involving recovery of information of the primary task.
Patients with PD only display specific deficits in processing EFE when the task consumes high levels of the resources required for divided attention, as occurs in everyday situations.
PMID: 21894020
Directional asymmetries of saccadic hypometria in patients with early Parkinson's disease and unilateral symptoms.
Saccade may be abnormal in Parkinson's disease (PD), but there have been no systematic studies on directional asymmetries of horizontal saccades in early PD.
The aims of this study were to determine the saccadic abnormalities and their directional asymmetries.
We recorded visually guided horizontal prosaccades with random (random amplitudes and irregular time intervals) and regular (fixed amplitude and regular time interval) paradigms using video-oculography in 44 patients with unilateral symptoms and signs from early PD and in 26 controls.
PD patients showed decreased saccadic amplitude compared to the controls, especially during regular paradigm while the saccadic latency did not differ between the groups.
Patients with unilateral PD tended to show more severe saccadic hypometria toward the symptomatic side during the regu- lar paradigm, compared to normal control.
Even in early PD patients, saccadic accuracy may be abnormal.
Asymmetries in saccadic hypometria are more likely to be detected during the anticipatable saccadic paradigm, which could be a useful adjunct in the diagnosis of early-stage PD.
PMID: 21893629
No question of denial.
PMID: 21893323
Idiopathic Parkinson's syndrome. Preface.
PMID: 21892895
Pharmacokinetic evaluation of pramipexole.
INTRODUCTION: Immediate-release (IR) pramipexole dihydrochloride is indicated for the treatment of signs and symptoms of idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD).
It is administered alone (without levodopa) or in combination with levodopa, during the entire progress of the disease, up to an advanced stage.
Currently, it is also indicated for the treatment of moderate-to-severe primary restless legs syndrome (RLS).
An extended-release (ER) formulation of pramipexole has been developed to allow a once-daily administration and to provide more stable dopaminergic stimulation in PD patients.
AREAS COVERED: This review summarizes the overall pharmacokinetic profile of pramipexole for both the IR and ER formulations.
Also discussed are the clinically relevant determinants of pramipexole peripheral pharmacokinetics and the potential role of genetic and clinical determinants in drug efficacy.
EXPERT OPINION: Pramipexole is a non-ergot agonist with selective affinity for dopamine receptors of the D2 subfamily, in particular D3.
Pramipexole has a very low affinity for serotoninergic 5-HT2A and 5-HT2B receptors, as well as D1-type receptors.
Furthermore, it does not carry the risk to induce valvular heart disease or pulmonary and retroperitoneal fibrosis, seen with long-term use of the ergot-derived dopamine agonists.
The recent introduction of a once-daily formulation poses significant advantages for patients, reflected by relatively stable plasma levels.
The most obvious benefit is convenience of use and better adherence to treatment schedule.
Additional advantages could include the opportunity to provide more continuous drug delivery in a fashion that could help minimize dyskinesia risk, if the drug is used early in the disease course.
PMID: 21890575
Deep brain stimulation in early stage Parkinson's disease: operative experience from a prospective randomised clinical trial.
Recent evidence suggests that deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus (STN-DBS) may have a disease modifying effect in early Parkinson's disease (PD).
A randomised, prospective study is underway to determine whether STN-DBS in early PD is safe and tolerable.
15 of 30 early PD patients were randomised to receive STN-DBS implants in an institutional review board approved protocol.
Operative technique, location of DBS leads and perioperative adverse events are reported.
Active contact used for stimulation in these patients was compared with 47 advanced PD patients undergoing an identical procedure by the same surgeon.
14 of the 15 patients did not sustain any long term (>3 months) complications from the surgery.
One subject suffered a stroke resulting in mild cognitive changes and slight right arm and face weakness.
The average optimal contact used in symptomatic treatment of early PD patients was: anterior -1.1±1.7 mm, lateral 10.7±1.7 mm and superior -3.3±2.5 mm (anterior and posterior commissure coordinates).
This location is statistically no different (0.77 mm, p>0.05) than the optimal contact used in the treatment of 47 advanced PD patients.
The perioperative adverse events in this trial of subjects with early stage PD are comparable with those reported for STN-DBS in advanced PD.
The active contact position used in early PD is not significantly different from that used in late stage disease.
This is the first report of the operative experience from a randomised, surgical versus best medical therapy trial for the early treatment of PD.
PMID: 21890574
Grey matter atrophy in cognitively impaired Parkinson's disease.
Mild cognitive impairment and dementia are common non-motor features of Parkinson's disease (PD).
The aim of this study was to characterise grey matter changes associated with clearly defined stages of cognitive impairment in PD using structural MRI.
96 PD subjects were classified using detailed cognitive testing as PD with normal cognition (PD-N, n=57), PD with mild cognitive impairment (PD-MCI, n=23) or PD with dementia (PD-D, n=16); 34 controls matched for mean age and sex ratio also participated.
Grey matter volume differences were evaluated using voxel based morphometry of grey matter segments derived from T1 weighted 3 T MRI, and multiple linear regression assessed the relationship between cognitive and motor impairments and grey matter concentration.
Compared with controls, no grey matter differences were found in PD-N.
PD-MCI showed limited grey matter atrophy in the temporal, parietal and frontal cortex as well as the bilateral caudal hippocampus, amygdala and right putamen.
PD-D subjects exhibited far more extensive atrophy in regions involved in PD-MCI but also had reduced grey matter volume in other large areas of the temporal lobe (including the parahippocampi), the intracalcarine and lingual gyri, posterior cingulate gyrus, frontal regions and bilateral caudate.
Grey matter loss in PD correlated with global cognitive score but not motor impairment in most of these regions.
Marked grey matter atrophy occurs in PD with dementia but far less extensive changes are evident in PD-MCI.
Some grey matter atrophy precedes the development of dementia but may be accelerated once frank dementia begins.
PMID: 21889984
The modulation of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis risk by ataxin-2 intermediate polyglutamine expansions is a specific effect.
Full expansions of the polyglutamine domain (polyQ≥34) within the polysome-associated protein ataxin-2 (ATXN2) are the cause of a multi-system neurodegenerative disorder, which usually presents as a Spino-Cerebellar Ataxia and is therefore known as SCA2, but may rarely manifest as Levodopa-responsive Parkinson syndrome or as motor neuron disease.
Intermediate expansions (27≤polyQ≤33) were reported to modify the risk of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS).
We have now tested the reproducibility and the specificity of this observation.
In 559 independent ALS patients from Central Europe, the association of ATXN2 expansions (30≤polyQ≤35) with ALS was highly significant.
The study of 1490 patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) showed an enrichment of ATXN2 alleles 27/28 in a subgroup with familial cases, but the overall risk of sporadic PD was unchanged.
No association was found between polyQ expansions in Ataxin-3 (ATXN3) and ALS risk.
These data indicate a specific interaction between ATXN2 expansions and the causes of ALS, possibly through altered RNA-processing as a common pathogenic factor.
PMID: 21889494
Sir-2.1 modulates 'calorie-restriction-mediated' prevention of neurodegeneration in Caenorhabditis elegans: implications for Parkinson's disease.
The phenomenon of aging is known to modulate many disease conditions including neurodegenerative ailments like Parkinson's disease (PD) which is characterized by selective loss of dopaminergic neurons.
Recent studies have reported on such effects, as calorie restriction, in modulating aging in living systems.
We reason that PD, being an age-associated neurodegenerative disease might be modulated by interventions like calorie restriction.
In the present study we employed the transgenic Caenorhabditis elegans model (P(dat-1)::GFP) expressing green fluorescence protein (GFP) specifically in eight dopaminergic (DA) neurons.
Selective degeneration of dopaminergic neurons was induced by treatment of worms with 6-hydroxy dopamine (6-OHDA), a selective catecholaminergic neurotoxin, followed by studies on effect of calorie restriction on the neurodegeneration.
Employing confocal microscopy of the dopaminergic neurons and HPLC analysis of dopamine levels in the nematodes, we found that calorie restriction has a preventive effect on dopaminergic neurodegeneration in the worm model.
We further studied the role of sirtuin, sir-2.1, in modulating such an effect.
Studies employing RNAi induced gene silencing of nematode sir-2.1, revealed that presence of Sir-2.1 is necessary for achieving the protective effect of calorie restriction on dopaminergic neurodegeneration.
Our studies provide evidence that calorie restriction affords, an sir-2.1 mediated, protection against the dopaminergic neurodegeneration, that might have implications for neurodegenerative Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21889169
A study of the prevalence of restless legs syndrome in previously untreated Parkinson's disease patients: absence of co-morbid association.
The co-morbidity between Parkinson's disease (PD) and restless legs syndrome (RLS) is currently controversial, mainly because in most of the studies so far conducted, the patients were already on therapy with dopamine(DA)ergic drugs.
This study has been carried out to assess the prevalence of RLS in de novo PD patients previously unexposed to DAergic drugs.
One hundred nine cognitively unimpaired outpatients with PD (70M/39F), mean age 66.89 years±9.37 SD were included in the study.
The mean duration of PD was 15.81 months±11.24 SD, and the median Hoehn and Yahr (H&Y) stage was 2 (range 1.5-3).
All patients underwent interview to assess the occurrence of overall life-time and current "primary" form of RLS according to the criteria of the International RLS Study Group (IRLSSG).
One hundred sixteen age and sex matched subjects (74M/42F, mean age 66.52.years±8.65 SD) free from a history of neurological diseases, were taken as controls and likewise interviewed.
"Secondary" forms of RLS in both patients and controls were subsequently excluded.
No significant difference was found (chi-square test) in the frequency of overall life-time and of current "primary" RLS between PD patients and controls (6 out of 109 versus 5 out of 116 and 3 out of 109 versus 3 out of 116, respectively).
This survey does not support the concept of a co-morbid association between the two conditions and confirm indirectly the findings of previous studies reporting the onset of RLS after diagnosis of PD has been made in the great majority of patients and so likely on ongoing DAergic treatment.
Therefore, we speculate that RLS occurring in these patients could be related to DAergic therapy for PD.
PMID: 21887844
Clinical heterogeneity in patients with early-stage Parkinson's disease: a cluster analysis.
The aim of this study was to investigate the clinical heterogeneity of Parkinson's disease (PD) among a cohort of Chinese patients in early stages.
Clinical data on demographics, motor variables, motor phenotypes, disease progression, global cognitive function, depression, apathy, sleep quality, constipation, fatigue, and L-dopa complications were collected from 138 Chinese PD subjects in early stages (Hoehn and Yahr stages 1-3).
The PD subject subtypes were classified using k-means cluster analysis according to the clinical data from five- to three-cluster consecutively.
Kappa statistical analysis was performed to evaluate the consistency among different subtype solutions.
The cluster analysis indicated four main subtypes: the non-tremor dominant subtype (NTD, n=28, 20.3%), rapid disease progression subtype (RDP, n=7, 5.1%), young-onset subtype (YO, n=50, 36.2%), and tremor dominant subtype (TD, n=53, 38.4%).
Overall, 78.3% (108/138) of subjects were always classified between the same three groups (52 always in TD, 7 in RDP, and 49 in NTD), and 98.6% (136/138) between five- and four-cluster solutions.
However, subjects classified as NTD in the four-cluster analysis were dispersed into different subtypes in the three-cluster analysis, with low concordance between four- and three-cluster solutions (kappa value=-0.139, P=0.001).
This study defines clinical heterogeneity of PD patients in early stages using a data-driven approach.
The subtypes generated by the four-cluster solution appear to exhibit ideal internal cohesion and external isolation.
PMID: 21887350
Early presymptomatic and long-term changes of rest activity cycles and cognitive behavior in a MPTP-monkey model of Parkinson's disease.
It is increasingly recognized that non-motor symptoms are a prominent feature of Parkinson's disease and in the case of cognitive deficits can precede onset of the characteristic motor symptoms.
Here, we examine in 4 monkeys chronically treated with low doses of the neurotoxin MPTP the early and long-term alterations of rest-activity rhythms in relationship to the appearance of motor and cognitive symptoms.
Behavioral activity recordings as well as motor and cognitive assessments were carried out continuously and in parallel before, during and for several months following MPTP-treatment (12-56 weeks).
Cognitive abilities were assessed using a task that is dependent on the functional integrity of the fronto-striatal axis.
Rest-activity cycles were monitored continuously using infrared movement detectors of locomotor activity.
Motor impairment was evaluated using standardized scales for primates.
Results show that MPTP treatment led to an immediate alteration (within one week) of rest-activity cycles and cognitive deficits.
Parkinsonian motor deficits only became apparent 3 to 5 weeks after initiating chronic MPTP administration.
In three of the four animals studied, clinical scores returned to control levels 5-7 weeks following cessation of MPTP treatment.
In contrast, both cognitive deficits and chronobiological alterations persisted for many months.
Levodopa treatment led to an improvement of cognitive performance but did not affect rest-activity rhythms in the two cases tested.
Present results show that i) changes in the rest activity cycles constituted early detectable consequences of MPTP treatment and, along with cognitive alterations, characterize the presymptomatic stage; ii) following motor recovery there is a long-term persistence of non-motor symptoms that could reflect differential underlying compensatory mechanisms in these domains; iii) the progressive MPTP-monkey model of presymptomatic ongoing parkinsonism offers possibilities for in-depth studies of early non-motor symptoms including sleep alterations and cognitive deficits.
PMID: 21885347
Association of LRRK2 exonic variants with susceptibility to Parkinson's disease: a case-control study.
Background The leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 gene (LRRK2) harbours highly penetrant mutations that are linked to familial parkinsonism.
However, the extent of its polymorphic variability in relation to risk of Parkinson's disease (PD) has not been assessed systematically.
We therefore assessed the frequency of LRRK2 exonic variants in individuals with and without PD, to investigate the role of the variants in PD susceptibility.
LRRK2 was genotyped in patients with PD and controls from three series (white, Asian, and Arab-Berber) from sites participating in the Genetic Epidemiology of Parkinson's Disease Consortium.
Genotyping was done for exonic variants of LRRK2 that were identified through searches of literature and the personal communications of consortium members.
Associations with PD were assessed by use of logistic regression models.
For variants that had a minor allele frequency of 0·5% or greater, single variant associations were assessed, whereas for rarer variants information was collapsed across variants.
121 exonic LRRK2 variants were assessed in 15 540 individuals: 6995 white patients with PD and 5595 controls, 1376 Asian patients and 962 controls, and 240 Arab-Berber patients and 372 controls.
After exclusion of carriers of known pathogenic mutations, new independent risk associations were identified for polymorphic variants in white individuals (M1646T, odds ratio 1·43, 95% CI 1·15-1·78; p=0·0012) and Asian individuals (A419V, 2·27, 1·35-3·83; p=0·0011).
A protective haplotype (N551K-R1398H-K1423K) was noted at a frequency greater than 5% in the white and Asian series, with a similar finding in the Arab-Berber series (combined odds ratio 0·82, 0·72-0·94; p=0·0043).
Of the two previously reported Asian risk variants, G2385R was associated with disease (1·73, 1·20-2·49; p=0·0026), but no association was noted for R1628P (0·62, 0·36-1·07; p=0·087).
In the Arab-Berber series, Y2189C showed potential evidence of risk association with PD (4·48, 1·33-15·09; p=0·012).
The results for LRRK2 show that several rare and common genetic variants in the same gene can have independent effects on disease risk.
LRRK2, and the pathway in which it functions, is important in the cause and pathogenesis of PD in a greater proportion of patients with this disease than previously believed.
These results will help discriminate those patients who will benefit most from therapies targeted at LRRK2 pathogenic activity.
Michael J Fox Foundation and National Institutes of Health.
PMID: 21885346
Rare and common LRRK2 exonic variants in Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21884507
Patients as a scientific resource: comments on receiving the Ahrens award.
PMID: 21884132
Prevalence of malnutrition in Parkinson's disease: a systematic review.
Parkinson's disease (PD) patients may be at higher risk of malnutrition because of the symptoms associated with the disease and the side effects of the medication used to manage it.
A decline in nutritional status is associated with many adverse outcomes related to health and quality of life.
It is not clear, however, to what extent this population is currently affected by malnutrition.
The objective of this review was to systematically assess the methodology and outcomes of studies reporting the prevalence of malnutrition in PD patients.
Studies that attempted to classify participants with PD into nutritional risk and/or malnutrition categories using body mass index, weight change, anthropometric measures, and nutritional screening and assessment scores were included.
The prevalence of malnutrition ranged from 0% to 24% in PD patients, while 3-60% of PD patients were reported to be at risk of malnutrition.
There was a large degree of variation among studies in the methods chosen, the definition of malnutrition using those methods, and the detail in which the methodological protocols were reported.
The true extent of malnutrition in the PD population has yet to be accurately quantified.
It is important, however, to screen for malnutrition at the time of PD diagnosis.
PMID: 21881837
Brain tissue echogenicity-implications for substantia nigra studies in parkinsonian patients.
The aim of the present study was to assess the origin of the substantia nigra hyperechogenicity in Parkinson disease patients.
The cause of hyperechogenicity was tested on an animal model.
Fresh porcine brains were injected consecutively with ferritin, apoferritin and water.
Then, glioma samples were inserted into animal model.
The echogenicity of the region of interest was assessed before and after experimental procedures.
We observed the same echogenicity of porcine brain before and after injections of iron-loaded ferritin, apoferritin and water.
Increased echogenicity of glioma samples compared to surrounding porcine brain tissue could be clearly seen.
We postulate that the relative gliosis might be, at least partially, responsible for the increased echogenicity of the substantia nigra in Parkinson disease patients.
Keeping in mind all limitations and inaccuracies of animal model used, it seems that hyperechogenicity of substantia nigra is caused rather by structural changes within the brain tissue than by increased iron concentration.
PMID: 21881474
A coincidental case of young-onset Parkinson disease and multiple sclerosis.
Parkinsonism in patients with multiple sclerosis is rare.
Some patients have 2 coincidental diseases, whereas others have a Parkinsonian syndrome symptomatic to demyelinating lesions.
We describe a 42-year-old female patient who developed left akinetic-rigid Parkinsonian syndrome at the age of 38 years.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging revealed multiple white matter hyperintense T2-weighted lesions.
DaTSCAN revealed reduced uptake of dopamine transporter in the right striatum.
Intravenous corticosteroids were inefficacious.
She had major clinical improvement with levodopa and 6 months later developed peak-dose dyskinesias.
At the age of 41 years, she presented with a brainstem attack, with complete symptom resolution after intravenous corticosteroids.
Subsequent brain magnetic resonance imagings disclosed new inflammatory lesions.
Immunomodulatory treatment was started with β-interferon.
In this patient, the presence of an asymmetrical Parkinsonian syndrome, with good response to levodopa, peak-dose dyskinesias, and abnormal DaTSCAN, supports the diagnosis of young-onset Parkinson disease.
The multiple sclerosis diagnosis was established based on clinical evidence of time and space dissemination of demyelinating lesions.
PMID: 21881473
Unilateral GPi-DBS as a treatment for levodopa-induced respiratory dyskinesia in Parkinson disease.
Respiratory dyskinesia is a rare but disabling complication of levodopa therapy for Parkinson disease; however, its treatment has been limited to medication optimization.
A 72-year-old woman with a 6-year history of Parkinson disease presented with severe and debilitating levodopa-induced respiratory dyskinesia, which manifested with a short and shallow breathing pattern and panting.
These symptoms were observed coincident with limb and truncal dyskinesias.
Both respiratory and limb/trunk dyskinesias were addressed by the implantation of a unilateral globus pallidus interna deep brain stimulator (GPi-DBS).
Although the mechanism of involvement of the respiratory system in dyskinesia is unknown, GPi-DBS seems to be a potentially viable treatment option for these patients.
PMID: 21881468
DBS candidates that fall short on a levodopa challenge test: alternative and important indications.
Candidacy for deep brain stimulation (DBS) in Parkinson disease (PD) is typically assessed by the preoperative motor response to levodopa along with an interdisciplinary evaluation.
However, recent cases treated at our institution have achieved good outcomes with DBS despite a sub-30% improvement in motor scores.
The aim of this study was to examine the outcomes of DBS in a subset of patients who failed to reach the 30% motor improvement threshold.
A review of all DBS patients treated at the University of Florida Movement Disorders Center between 2002 and 2009 was performed utilizing a DBS database.
All patients with sub-30% improvement in Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale Part III after dopaminergic medication administration were included.
Nine patients were identified; DBS was performed for severe dyskinesia (n=5), "on/off motor" fluctuations (n=1) and medication-refractory tremor (n=3).
The target symptoms were improved in all patients.
Postoperatively, scores on the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale Part II and III and subscores on Parkinson disease questionnaire-39 improved (P<0.05).
Although motor response to levodopa remains the primary selection criteria for DBS candidacy in Parkinson disease, patients who do not meet the 30% threshold and have disabling symptoms may still benefit from DBS.
Select patients with severe dyskinesia, "on/off" motor fluctuations, and/or medication-refractory tremor may experience significant benefits from DBS and should be considered on a case by case basis through an interdisciplinary team evaluation.
PMID: 21880913
Dopamine-dependent long-term depression is expressed in striatal spiny neurons of both direct and indirect pathways: implications for Parkinson's disease.
Striatal medium spiny neurons (MSNs) are divided into two subpopulations exerting distinct effects on motor behavior.
Transgenic mice carrying bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) able to confer cell type-specific expression of enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) for dopamine (DA) receptors have been developed to characterize differences between these subpopulations.
Analysis of these mice, in contrast with original pioneering studies, showed that striatal long-term depression (LTD) was expressed in indirect but not in the direct pathway MSNs.
To address this mismatch, we applied a new approach using combined BAC technology and receptor immunohistochemistry.
We demonstrate that, in physiological conditions, DA-dependent LTD is expressed in both pathways showing that the lack of synaptic plasticity found in D(1) eGFP mice is associated to behavioral deficits.
Our findings suggest caution in the use of this tool and indicate that the "striatal segregation" hypothesis might not explain all synaptic dysfunctions in Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21880335
Initial neuropsychological impairments in patients with the E46K mutation of the α-synuclein gene (PARK 1).
In 2004 we described the mutation E46K of the α-Synuclein (SNCA).
These patients show Parkinson's disease with early cognitive impairment, sleep disorders and autonomic dysfunction.
The main objective is to identify early neuropsychological impairments in patients with the E46K mutation.
This is a longitudinal neuropsychological study of 4 of the 5 surviving patients with E46K mutation by semi-structured interviews and the following scales: Mattis Dementia Rating Scale (MDRS), semantic and phonemic verbal fluency tests (VFT), Benton Visual Retention Test (BVRT), Stroop Test (STROOP), Clock drawing test (CLOCK), WAIS III Letter and Number sequencing (WAIS III LN), Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT) and Benton Judgement of Line Orientation Test (BJLOT).
Motor status was assessed by UPDRS III.
Motor status: Patients 1, 2 and 3 present mild to moderate Parkinson disease of 7, 8 and 3years of evolution respectively, patient 4 is asymptomatic.
Cognitive status: Patient 2 and 3 both refer cognitive decline while patient 1 presents no cognitive complaints, however they all show a progressive cognitive decline across various tasks.
Tests of frontal function showed the first alterations in all patients but fluctuate.
The first cognitive complaints coincide with deterioration of tasks of posterior cortical basis.
Patient 4 presents a normal performance on all tests.
Patient 1, 2 and 3 have all presented visual hallucinations.
A fluctuating frontal impairment is observed at early stages.
Prominent visuospatial alterations and visual hallucinations suggest that posterior cortical dysfunction might be a distinct early feature of the cognitive impairment observed in patients with this mutation.
PMID: 21880334
Sleep-wake changes in the premotor stage of Parkinson disease.
Longitudinal studies in Parkinson disease (PD) have shown that the prevalence of sleep disorders increases with advanced disease.
However, two sleep disorders, namely excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) and REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) have been described to antedate the development of the classical motor signs and symptoms of PD.
One epidemiological study from the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study showed that aging men who reported "being sleepy most of the daily" had a threefold excess risk for developing PD after a seven-year follow-up.
The origin and nature of EDS were not investigated.
This study needs to be replicated.
More robust data exist regarding RBD as the first manifestation of PD.
RBD subjects commonly develop parkinsonism and cognitive impairment with time.
Patients with the idiopathic form of RBD with decreased striatal dopamine transporters imaging, substantia nigra hyperechogenicity and hyposmia have an increased short-term risk for developing the classical motor, dysautonomic and cognitive symptoms of a synucleinopathy.
Patients with idiopathic RBD, particularly those with abnormal subclinical features seen in the synucleinopathies such as decreased striatal dopamine transporters uptake, are the ideal population to be tested with disease-modifying agents in order to stop or slow down neurodegeneration in the brain.
PMID: 21878689
Parkinson's disease influences the structural variations present in the leg swing kinematics.
This study investigated the nature of the structural variations found in the motor output of individuals with Parkinson's disease (PD).
Young (n = 21; 19.9 ± 1.3 yrs.), aged (n = 9; 74.8 ± 6.8 yrs.) and individuals with PD (n = 9; 73.4 ± 6.6 yrs.) swung their leg at a pendular frequency and frequencies that were 20% faster and slower.
This study had three key findings.
First, individuals with PD have greater variability in the leg swing angular kinematics and swing times.
These variations appear to be related to the 0-15 Hz band of the of angular displacement power spectrum.
Second, changes in the structural variations appear to not be derived from a stochastic source.
Third, the magnitude of the variations and the structure of the variations are influenced by the frequency that the leg is swung.
These results are consistent with the viewpoint that changes in the magnitude of the variations and the regularity of the structural variations are dependent upon health and adaptability to the task dynamics.
PMID: 21878363
The serotonergic system in Parkinson's disease.
Although the cardinal manifestations of Parkinson's disease (PD) are attributed to a decline in dopamine levels in the striatum, a breadth of non-motor features and treatment-related complications in which the serotonergic system plays a pivotal role are increasingly recognised.
Serotonin (5-HT)-mediated neurotransmission is altered in PD and the roles of the different 5-HT receptor subtypes in disease manifestations have been investigated.
The aims of this article are to summarise and discuss all published preclinical and clinical studies that have investigated the serotonergic system in PD and related animal models, in order to recapitulate the state of the current knowledge and to identify areas that need further research and understanding.
PMID: 21878213
Five times sit-to-stand test performance in Parkinson's disease.
To (1) determine intrarater and test-retest reliability of the Five times sit-to-stand test (FTSTS) in Parkinson's disease (PD), (2) characterize FTSTS performance in PD at different disease stages, (3) determine predictors of FTSTS performance in PD, and (4) determine the utility of the FTSTS for discriminating between fallers and nonfallers with PD, identifying an appropriate cutoff score to delineate between these groups.
Measurement study of community-dwelling individuals with idiopathic PD.
A medical school laboratory.
Participants (N=82) were recruited via population-based sampling.
The final sample included 80 participants.
Two were excluded because of exclusion criteria and an unrelated illness, respectively.
Not applicable.
FTSTS time (seconds) was the primary outcome measure.
Secondary outcome measures included the Mini-Balance Evaluation Systems Test (Mini-BEST), Maximal Voluntary Isometric Contraction-Quadriceps, 9-Hole Peg Test (9HPT), 6-minute walk, Freezing of Gait Questionnaire, Activities-Specific Balance Confidence Scale, Physical Activity Scale for the Elderly, Parkinson's Disease Questionnaire-39, and Movement Disorders Society-Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale.
Interrater and test-retest reliability for the FTSTS were high (intraclass correlation coefficients: .99 and .76, respectively).
Mean FTSTS performance was 20.25 ± 14.12 seconds.
All mobility measures were significantly correlated with FTSTS (P<.01).
The Mini-BEST and 9HPT together explained 53% of the variance in FTSTS.
Receiver operating characteristic analysis determined a cutoff of 16.0 seconds (sensitivity, .75; specificity, .68) for discriminating between fallers and nonfallers, with an area under the curve of .77.
The FTSTS is a quick, easily administered measure that is useful for gross determination of fall risk in individuals with PD.
PMID: 21877033
Reliability and validity of a scale for measurement of trunk mobility in Parkinson's disease: Trunk Mobility Scale.
Axial rigidity is an important motor manifestation in Parkinson's disease (PD).
Trunk mobility impairment can cause gait, balance and postural problems.
However, only few instruments analyze the trunk mobility in PD patients.
The aim of this study is to present a new Trunk Mobility Scale (TMS) and its validation in PD.
The TMS constituted of dynamic tests involving trunk movements in sagittal, transversal and coronal planes.
Ninety eight PD patients and 31 normal controls were analyzed.
A strong correlation was found between the TMS scores and the Hoehn & Yahr staging scale (r: 0.72; p<0.01), motor Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (r: 0.84; p<0.01) and Schwab and England Activities of Daily Living (r: -0.72; p<0.01).
The scale showed a satisfactory reliability rate (αCronbach: 0.85, ICC: 099).
TMS is a simple and reliable instrument to evaluate trunk mobility impairment in patients with PD.
PMID: 21877023
The Pietà study: epidemiological investigation on successful brain aging in Caeté (MG), Brazil. Methods and baseline cohort characteristics.
To present the methods and baseline characteristics of the Pietà study, a population-based survey investigating successful brain aging in the oldest-old.
The study was conducted in Caeté (MG), Brazil.
In 2007, 1,251 individuals aged 75+ years were living in the city and were invited to participate.
Participants responded to a general health questionnaire and were submitted to clinical, neurological, cognitive, psychiatric and functional evaluations.
A subgroup was submitted to neuropsychological testing, blood tests and magnetic resonance of the skull.
Individuals were classified as having cognitive impairment-no dementia, dementia, parkinsonism, psychiatric disorders or successful brain aging.
We evaluated 639 individuals (51.1% of the target population; 64% women), aged 81.4±5.2 years and with 2.7±2.6 years of schooling.
Almost 30% of the elderly were illiterates and 82.1% belonged to middle/middle-low socioeconomic levels.
Almost 50% were widows, but only 14.3% were living alone.
The Pietà cohort is representative of the oldest-old Brazilian population.
We believe the results of the study may contribute to increase our knowledge about healthy and pathological brain aging in the oldest-old.
PMID: 21876529
Isolating nasal olfactory stem cells from rodents or humans.
The olfactory mucosa, located in the nasal cavity, is in charge of detecting odours.
It is also the only nervous tissue that is exposed to the external environment and easily accessible in every living individual.
As a result, this tissue is unique for anyone aiming to identify molecular anomalies in the pathological brain or isolate adult stem cells for cell therapy.
Molecular abnormalities in brain diseases are often studied using nervous tissue samples collected post-mortem.
However, this material has numerous limitations.
In contrast, the olfactory mucosa is readily accessible and can be biopsied safely without any loss of sense of smell(1).
Accordingly, the olfactory mucosa provides an "open window" in the adult human through which one can study developmental (e.g.
autism, schizophrenia)(2-4) or neurodegenerative (e.g.
Parkinson, Alzheimer) diseases(4,5).
Olfactory mucosa can be used for either comparative molecular studies(4,6) or in vitro experiments on neurogenesis(3,7).
The olfactory epithelium is also a nervous tissue that produces new neurons every day to replace those that are damaged by pollution, bacterial of viral infections.
This permanent neurogenesis is sustained by progenitors but also stem cells residing within both compartments of the mucosa, namely the neuroepithelium and the underlying lamina propria(8-10).
We recently developed a method to purify the adult stem cells located in the lamina propria and, after having demonstrated that they are closely related to bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSC), we named them olfactory ecto-mesenchymal stem cells (OE-MSC)(11).
Interestingly, when compared to BM-MSCs, OE-MSCs display a high proliferation rate, an elevated clonogenicity and an inclination to differentiate into neural cells.
We took advantage of these characteristics to perform studies dedicated to unveil new candidate genes in schizophrenia and Parkinson's disease(4).
We and others have also shown that OE-MSCs are promising candidates for cell therapy, after a spinal cord trauma(12,13), a cochlear damage(14) or in an animal models of Parkinson's disease(15) or amnesia(16).
In this study, we present methods to biopsy olfactory mucosa in rats and humans.
After collection, the lamina propria is enzymatically separated from the epithelium and stem cells are purified using an enzymatic or a non-enzymatic method.
Purified olfactory stem cells can then be either grown in large numbers and banked in liquid nitrogen or induced to form spheres or differentiated into neural cells.
These stem cells can also be used for comparative omics (genomic, transcriptomic, epigenomic, proteomic) studies.
PMID: 21876465
Choice-option evaluation is preserved in early Huntington and Parkinson's disease.
The ability to choose effectively when faced with potential risks and rewards is fundamental for adaptive survival.
The striatum has a well-established role supporting learning from the outcomes of decisions, but it remains unclear whether this structure is also necessary for computing expected value (i.e., advantageousness of potential decisions) when all information is explicitly given.
We addressed this question presenting simple monetary gambles, where all decisional parameters were given and outcome feedback was absent, to patients with early Huntington's and Parkinson's disease, taken as complementary models of striatal dysfunction.
Behavioural responses and associated times were found to be unaltered.
This negative finding suggests that striatal activity may not be essential for decision-making in situations where all information is provided and learning from outcomes is unnecessary.
PMID: 21876194
Do neurologists make a difference in Parkinson disease care?
PMID: 21875422
Using the BITOLA system to identify candidate genes for Parkinson's disease.
Complexity of multifactorial diseases as Parkinson's disease (PD) often complicate identifying causal genetic factors by traditional approaches such as positional cloning and candidate gene analyses.
PD is etiologically and genetically complex disease and second most common neurodegenerative disorder after Alzheimer's disease.
The most cases of PD are idiopathic and small growing subset of individuals have single gene defect as the cause.
The main goal of this research was to identify the potential candidate genes for idiopathic PD by using biomedical discovery support system (BITOLA).
For detecting the potential candidate genes for PD was used opened system of bioinformatics tool BITOLA.
Data of chromosome location, tissue specific expression of potential candidate genes and their potential association with PD were obtained from Medline, Locus Link, Gene Cards and OMIM.
By using BITOLA system is identified 17 genes as potential candidate genes for PD.
The role of three genes (MAPT, PARK2, UCHL1) in PD were confirmed earlier.
Discovering the novel candidate genes for multifactiorial diseases by using specially mentioned bioinformatics tool BITOLA could offer the new opportunity for researching genetics base of PD without using tissue samples of patients.
PMID: 21872587
A gamma band specific role of the subthalamic nucleus in switching during verbal fluency tasks in Parkinson's disease.
Decline in verbal fluency is the most consistent and persistent cognitive impairment documented after deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson's disease.
The mechanisms of this deficit are unclear.
We aimed to identify and characterise verbal fluency related processing within the subthalamic nucleus through analysis of local field potentials.
Local field potentials were recorded from deep brain stimulation electrodes implanted in the subthalamic nuclei of 8 patients (16 sides) with Parkinson's disease, when patients were on medication.
Patients performed phonemic and semantic verbal fluency tasks and a control word repetition task to control for the motor output involved in response generation.
Significant increases in local field potential Power (p ≤ 0.05) were seen across a broad gamma frequency band (30-95 Hz) during both verbal fluency tasks, after controlling for motor output.
Increases in gamma local field potential Power of +7.5% ± 2.3% (SEM) in the semantic fluency task and +6.9% ± 2.0% in the phonemic fluency task were derived when averaging across all electrode contact pairs.
Gamma changes recorded from contacts lying in the left hemisphere (dominant in verbal fluency) correlated with average number of correct responses generated (r=0.81 p=0.015) and measures of 'switching' (r=0.79 p=0.020) particularly strongly in the semantic fluency task.
Frequency specific power changes observed during task performance are consistent with involvement of the subthalamic nucleus in switching during verbal fluency.
Antagonism of such task-related activity with high frequency stimulation of this nucleus may explain the impairments reported.
PMID: 21872561
Novel method of signal analysis for ablation of Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome.
Identification of the site of successful radiofrequency catheter ablation (RFCA) for Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome may be subjective.
The purpose of this study was to develop an automated signal analysis program to predict a successful ablation site.
Patients who underwent successful RFCA for WPW from 2008- 2010 at our center were analyzed.
Inclusion criteria were age <21 years, loss of preexcitation in <5 seconds, and sustained success at 3 months.
Exclusion criteria were congenital heart disease and pacing during RFCA.
The standard recording system signal was filtered into low frequency (LF 0-≤0.02 Hz) and high frequency (HF >0.02-≤0.45 Hz).
Software identified the beginning of the HF signal, LF and R-wave peaks, LF/HF signal amplitude, and area under the HF/LF signals.
Successful and unsuccessful (radiofrequency energy applied without accessory pathway block) signals were compared.
Thirty patients were analyzed; 16 had both successful and unsuccessful signals, and 14 had a successful ablation with 1 radiofrequency application.
Mean age was 13.7 ± 3.1 years, weight 54.9 ± 22.4 kg, and time to accessory pathway ablation 1.7 ± 1.4 seconds.
Significant differences were found between successful and unsuccessful signals in area under HF signal, LF amplitude, LF to R time, HF ratio, and HF area × HF ratio.
A receiver operating curve of HF area × HF ratio produced an area under the curve of 0.89.
An HF area × HF ratio of 3.1 distinguished successful from unsuccessful signals with 100% specificity and 81% sensitivity.
Automated signal analysis retrospectively differentiated successful from unsuccessful signals in patients undergoing RFCA for WPW.
This software may improve the safety and efficacy of RFCA in children.
PMID: 21872441
Neuroprotection in metabolism-based therapy.
Metabolism-based therapy has been used successfully in the treatment of seizures but study of its use in other neurodegenerative disorders is growing.
Data demonstrating the use of different forms of metabolism-based therapy in human trials of Alzheimer disease and Parkinson disease are discussed.
Animal and in vitro studies have shed light on metabolism-based therapy's mechanisms in these diseases, as well as ALS, aging, ischemia, trauma and mitochondrial cytopathies.
Additional insights may be obtained by considering the role of metabolism-based therapy in cell disability and death (specifically apoptosis, excitotoxicity, and autophagy).
PMID: 21872355
A web application for follow-up of results from a mobile device test battery for Parkinson's disease patients.
This paper describes a web-based system for enabling remote monitoring of patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) and supporting clinicians in treating their patients.
The system consists of a patient node for subjective and objective data collection based on a handheld computer, a service node for data storage and processing, and a web application for data presentation.
Using statistical and machine learning methods, time series of raw data are summarized into scores for conceptual symptom dimensions and an "overall test score" providing a comprehensive profile of patient's health during a test period of about one week.
The handheld unit was used quarterly or biannually by 65 patients with advanced PD for up to four years at nine clinics in Sweden.
The IBM Computer System Usability Questionnaire was administered to assess nurses' satisfaction with the web application.
Results showed that a majority of the nurses were quite satisfied with the usability although a sizeable minority were not.
Our findings support that this system can become an efficient tool to easily access relevant symptom information from the home environment of PD patients.
PMID: 21872276
Clinical approach to nonmotor sensory fluctuations in Parkinson's disease.
Many nonmotor fluctuations (NMFs) may occur in addition to the classic motor fluctuations (MFs) in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) within several years of initiation of dopaminergic treatment.
Patients can experience these NMFs in the "on" and/or "off" periods.
NMFs can be divided into three groups: Autonomic, cognitive/psychiatric, and sensory.
Nonmotor sensory fluctuations (NMSFs) occurring in association with "on" period are more frequently recognized than those in the "off" state.
NMSFs commonly reported include pain, numbness, paresthesia/dysesthesia, akathisia, rest-legs syndrome (RLS), dyspnea, and internal tremor (IT).
Proposed treatments of NMSFs are based on whether they occur during "off" or "on" state.
These include reduction of dopaminergic medication, use of long-acting dopamine agonists or controlled released levodopa (LD), surgical intervention, and/or targeted pharmacological intervention to minimize dopaminergic side effects.
NMSFs might be related to dopaminergic mechanisms although difficulty in managing these symptoms with dopaminergic therapy suggests a different pathway.
Conclusion: Recognition of NMSFs is important in the care of patients with Parkinson disease to prevent unnecessary interventions and for appropriate medication regimen adjustments.
PMID: 21871902
L-Dihydroxyphenylalanine modulates the steady-state expression of mouse striatal tyrosine hydroxylase, aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase, dopamine and its metabolites in an MPTP mouse model of Parkinson's disease.
l-3,4-Dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA) is the most effective symptomatic treatment for Parkinson's disease (PD), but PD patients usually experience a successful response to L-DOPA therapy followed by a progressive loss of response.
L-DOPA efficacy relies on its decarboxylation by aromatic l-amino acid decarboxylase (AAAD) to form dopamine (DA).
So exogenous L-DOPA drives the reaction and AAAD becomes the rate limiting enzyme in the supply of DA.
In turn, exogenous L-DOPA regulates the expression and activity of AAAD as well as the synthesis of DA and its metabolites, changes that may be linked to the efficacy and side-effects of L-DOPA.
One-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) mouse PD model was utilized to study the effects of L-DOPA on the steady-state level and activity of AAAD, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), DA and the metabolites of DA.
The MPTP and control mice were treated twice daily with PBS or with 100mg/kg of L-DOPA for 14days and the expression and activity of AAAD, the expression of TH and the levels of DA and its metabolites were determined 24h after L-DOPA or PBS treatment, when exogenous L-DOPA is eliminated.
In the MPTP model, L-DOPA reduced the steady-state expression and the activity of striatal AAAD by 52% and 50%, respectively, DA and metabolites were also significantly decreased.
The outcome shows that while L-DOPA replenishes striatal DA it also down-regulates AAAD and the steady-state synthesis and metabolic capability of the dopaminergic system.
These findings are important in the precipitation of L-DOPA induced side effects and the management of L-DOPA therapy.
PMID: 21871844
Circadian rhythm of rest activity and autonomic nervous system activity at different stages in Parkinson's disease.
Patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) often suffer from non-motor symptoms, including sleep and autonomic dysfunctions, controlled by circadian regulation.
To evaluate the alteration of circadian rhythm in PD patients, we investigated both rest activities and autonomic functions.
Twenty-seven patients with idiopathic PD and 30 age-matched control subjects were recruited.
Group comparisons of controls (mean age: 68.93 years), early-PD patients classified as Hoehn-Yahr (HY) stage 1&2 (mean age: 70.78 years), and advanced-PD as HY 3&4 (mean age: 68.61 years) were conducted.
Measurement of rest activities was performed using Actigraph for 7 continuous days, and included measuring rhythm patterns (activity patterns recorded in or out of bed) and circadian rhythm amplitudes (power of the cycle being closest to 24h).
A power spectral analysis of heart rate variability (HRV) using 24-hour ambulatory ECG was also performed.
The actigraphic measurements indicated that statistically PD patients have lower activity levels when out of bed and higher activity levels when in bed, and that, the circadian rest-activity rhythm in PD decreases with disease severity.
The HRV analysis showed that the total frequency component and low frequency/high frequency ratio were low in PD patients, suggesting that autonomic activities and the circadian rhythm of the sympathetic nervous system are attenuated in PD.
This study elucidated the disorganization in the rest activities and HRV of PD patients as well as the gradual alterations in the circadian rhythm.
The circadian rhythm disturbances are important to consider the mechanism of non-motor symptoms that occur from early stage of PD.
PMID: 21871538
A mitochondrial etiology of Alzheimer and Parkinson disease.
BACKGROUND: The genetics and pathophysiology of Alzheimer Disease (AD) and Parkinson Disease (PD) appears complex.
However, mitochondrial dysfunction is a common observation in these and other neurodegenerative diseases.
SCOPE OF REVIEW: We argue that the available data on AD and PD can be incorporated into a single integrated paradigm based on mitochondrial genetics and pathophysiology.
MAJOR CONCLUSIONS: Rare chromosomal cases of AD and PD can be interpreted as affecting mitochondrial function, quality control, and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) integrity.
mtDNA lineages, haplogroups, such haplogroup H5a which harbors the mtDNA tRNA(Gln) A8336G variant, are important risk factors for AD and PD.
Somatic mtDNA mutations are elevated in AD, PD, and Down Syndrome and Dementia (DSAD) both in brains and also systemically.
AD, DS, and DSAD brains also have reduced mtDNA ND6 mRNA levels, altered mtDNA copy number, and perturbed Aβ metabolism.
Classical AD genetic changes incorporated into the 3XTg-AD (APP, Tau, PS1) mouse result in reduced forebrain size, life-long reduced mitochondrial respiration in 3XTg-AD males, and initially elevated respiration and complex I and IV activities in 3XTg-AD females which markedly declines with age.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: Therefore, mitochondrial dysfunction provides a unifying genetic and pathophysiology explanation for AD, PD, and other neurodegenerative diseases.
This article is part of a Special Issue entitled Biochemistry of Mitochondria.
PMID: 21870999
Parkinson-like features in ALS with predominant upper motor neuron involvement.
Owing to the frequent observation of poverty of movements, facial hypomimia and balance impairment, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) variant with predominance of upper motor neuron involvement (UMN-ALS) is prone to be diagnosed with Parkinsonism.
A clinical assessment, including the velocity-dependent stretch response test to differentiate between pyramidal and extrapyramidal stiffness; the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale and the Berg Balance Scale to assess degree of bradykinesia and postural instability; and (123)I-FP-CIT scintigraphy evaluation to investigate the nigrostriatal circuit involvement, were carried out to characterize Parkinson-like features in UMN-ALS patients.
Sixteen UMN-ALS patients were included in the study.
The velocity-dependent stretch response indicated spasticity in all the muscles tested.
The degree of stiffness was found to be related to bradykinesia and postural instability.
Eleven patients (70%) showed a reduction in striatal (123)I-FP-CIT uptake found to be related to disease duration and patients' ages but not to scores of the functional scales.
Slowness of movements and postural instability noted in our patients could be mostly attributed to spasticity.
The lack of any correlation between UPDRS or BBS scores and the degree of nigrostriatal impairment on DaTSCAN seems to disprove nigrostriatal circuit involvement in these extrapyramidal-like features.
PMID: 21869721
Limbic and motor function comparison of deep brain stimulation of the zona incerta and subthalamic nucleus.
: Psychiatric and neuropsychological side effects of subthalamic nucleus (STN) stimulation have been increasingly recognized.
Most programming regimens focus on contacts 0 and 1, whereas contact 3, which often is located near or in the zona incerta (ZI), is usually not used.
The question of whether ZI stimulation may limit limbic effects has not been answered.
: To examine the effects of short-term stimulation near or in the ZI (contact 3) compared with stimulation of the STN using standard trajectories and targeting as measured by limbic and motor functions.
: Motor and limbic functions of 11 patients with STN DBS were assessed with the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale-3, structured gait video analysis, Visual Analog Scale mood scales, task testing of impulsivity, and facial recognition under routine STN programming and under stimulation in or near the ZI.
Postoperative magnetic resonance imaging confirmed the location of contact 3 near or in the ZI.
: Data analysis with repeated-measures analysis of variance revealed that motor scores remained stable with both stimulation settings, with specific improvements in finger taps (P = .02) and rapid alternating movements (P = .03) in ZI stimulation.
Stimulation near or in the ZI led to a decrease in self- reported anxiety and depression (P = .03 for both) and an improvement in fear recognition (P = .02).
: We provide preliminary evidence that stimulation in or near the ZI results in maintained motor function while improving self-reported depression and anxiety in patients with bilateral STN DBS.
Stimulation in or near the ZI may provide a useful programming setting for patients prone to psychiatric side effects.
PMID: 21868039
Dopaminergic dysregulation syndrome in Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative condition which requires gradually increasing doses of dopaminergic substances for adequate motor control.
Some vulnerable patients increase their doses beyond those required for motor control.
This may result in a pattern of compulsive drug taking which may be associated with typical behavioural changes which define dopaminergic dysregulation syndrome (DDS).
This is frequently associated with impulse control disorders and a specific behavioural abnormality involving prolonged repetitive tasks, called punding.
The pathophysiology of DDS likely involves a number of factors, including genetic and personality related risk factors, habit formation resulting from unpleasant OFF symptoms, fronto-striatal dysfunction and a sensitisation process due to repeated dopaminergic stimulation.
Management includes attempts to reduce the dopaminergic dose; specific treatment options are currently unknown.
Early detection and prevention are therefore essential.
PMID: 21867400
Rotigotine transdermal patch in combination therapy for Parkinson's disease--observations in routine clinical practice.
The dopamine agonist rotigotine has shown efficacy and safety for the treatment of early and advanced Parkinson's disease (PD) in controlled clinical trials.
This observational study evaluated rotigotine administration in combination with other antiparkinsonian medication in routine clinical practice.
Data were collected by 688 German practice-based neurologists, initiating rotigotine treatment in patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease.
Assessments included rotigotine maintenance dose, changes in concomitant PD medication, changes in sleep quality, and rotigotine tolerability over an observation period of 12-16 weeks.
The median rotigotine maintenance dose was 6 mg/24 h (n = 969, full analysis set).
The proportion of all other prescribed PD medications declined over the observation period; combination therapy decreased by 18.7%.
Daily levodopa intake was markedly reduced by 87 mg (18.9%) in 47.6% of the patients with levodopa documentation; 7% no longer required levodopa after 12-16 weeks.
Mean overall sleep quality (PD Sleep Scale item 1) improved by 21.4 points, the occurrence of nocturias (PDSS item 8) by 13.4 points, and 'turning in bed' (Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale part II) by 0.6 points.
Drug-related adverse events were reported for 7.9% of all patients (n = 1152, safety population).
Application site reactions were the most common adverse events (2.2%) resulting in early discontinuation in 1.4% of patients.
In routine clinical practice, treatment initiation with rotigotine transdermal patch was associated with a reduction of other prescribed PD medications and with an improvement of self-reported sleep quality.
PMID: 21866175
The Parkinson's disease protein LRRK2 impairs proteasome substrate clearance without affecting proteasome catalytic activity.
Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) mutations are the most common known cause of Parkinson's disease (PD).
The clinical features of LRRK2 PD are indistinguishable from idiopathic PD, with accumulation of α-synuclein and/or tau and/or ubiquitin in intraneuronal aggregates.
This suggests that LRRK2 is a key to understanding the aetiology of the disorder.
Although loss-of-function does not appear to be the mechanism causing PD in LRRK2 patients, it is not clear how this protein mediates toxicity.
In this study, we report that LRRK2 overexpression in cells and in vivo impairs the activity of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, and that this accounts for the accumulation of diverse substrates with LRRK2 overexpression.
We show that this is not mediated by large LRRK2 aggregates or sequestration of ubiquitin to the aggregates.
Importantly, such abnormalities are not seen with overexpression of the related protein LRRK1.
Our data suggest that LRRK2 inhibits the clearance of proteasome substrates upstream of proteasome catalytic activity, favouring the accumulation of proteins and aggregate formation.
Thus, we provide a molecular link between LRRK2, the most common known cause of PD, and its previously described phenotype of protein accumulation.
PMID: 21865882
Signaling of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor and its receptor GFRα1 induce Nurr1 and Pitx3 to promote survival of grafted midbrain-derived neural stem cells in a rat model of Parkinson disease.
Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and its receptor GFRα1 have been implicated in the survival of ventral midbrain dopaminergic (DA) neurons, but the molecular mechanisms bywhich GDNF generates DA neurons in grafted midbrain-derived neural stem cells (mNSCs) are not understood.
Midbrain-derived neural stem cells isolated from rat embryonic mesencephalon (embryonic day 12) were treated with GDNF or in combination with GFRα1 small interfering RNA.
Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, Western blot, and immunocytochemistry were used totest the expression of the orphan nuclear receptor Nurr1 and thetranscription factor Pitx3 and newborn tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)-positive cells.
Treatment of mNSCs with GDNF increased mNSCs' sphere diameter, reduced expression of caspase 3, and increased expression of Bcl-2.
Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor-treated mNSCs enhanced Nurr1 and Pitx3 expression and the fraction of TH-, TH/Pitx3-, and TH/Nurr1-positive cells in culture.
Grafted GDNF-treated mNSCs significantly decreased apomorphine-induced rotation behavior in 6-hydroxydopamine-lesioned rats.
Glialcell line-derived neurotrophic factor-treated mNSCs showed increased numbers of TH/Pitx3- and TH/Nurr1-postivie cells.
The effect elicited by GDNF was inhibited by small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of GFRα1.
Our data demonstrate the contribution of GDNF to DA neuron development and may also elucidate pathogenetic mechanisms in Parkinson disease and contribute to the development of novel therapies for the disorder.
PMID: 21865760
Reduced serum caeruloplasmin levels in non-wilsonian movement disorders.
Reduction in caeruloplasmin (Cp) levels is sometimes found in other sporadic movement disorders, not limited to Wilson's disease (WD).
Serum levels of Cp, copper, iron and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase were measured in 71 patients with various diagnoses of movement disorders, including Parkinson's disease (PD), atypical parkinsonian disorders, tardive dyskinesia, essential tremor, and idiopathic focal dystonia, and compared with those of 26 healthy age- and gender-matched controls.
The mean Cp level in the patient group was 20.5 ± 4.2 mg/dl , lower than in controls (23.5 ± 7.2 mg/dl; p = 0.005).
In subgroup analysis, mean Cp level of PD patients (19.6 ± 3.0 mg/dl) was lower than that of controls (p = 0.045).
In a group analysis as neurodegenerative movement disorders (NDD), their mean Cp level was 19.9 ± 3.0 mg/dl, lower than that of controls (p = 0.019).
Linear regression analysis indicated that the presence of NDD was the main factor associated with lower Cp levels.
The finding of reduced serum Cp level in non-Wilsonian movement disorders and selective reduction in the neurodegenerative subgroup supports the notion that Cp might be associated with the cascade of neurotoxicity in NDD.
The variation in Cp level in other non-WD conditions highlights the fact that Cp level is a poor screening test for WD in the absence of clear clinical suspicion.
PMID: 21865652
Parkin is a lipid-responsive regulator of fat uptake in mice and mutant human cells.
It has long been hypothesized that abnormalities in lipid biology contribute to degenerative brain diseases.
Consistent with this, emerging epidemiologic evidence links lipid alterations with Parkinson disease (PD), and disruption of lipid metabolism has been found to predispose to α-synuclein toxicity.
We therefore investigated whether Parkin, an E3 ubiquitin ligase found to be defective in patients with early onset PD, regulates systemic lipid metabolism.
We perturbed lipid levels by exposing Parkin+/+ and Parkin-/- mice to a high-fat and -cholesterol diet (HFD).
Parkin-/- mice resisted weight gain, steatohepatitis, and insulin resistance.
In wild-type mice, the HFD markedly increased hepatic Parkin levels in parallel with lipid transport proteins, including CD36, Sr-B1, and FABP.
These lipid transport proteins were not induced in Parkin-/- mice.
The role of Parkin in fat uptake was confirmed by increased oleate accumulation in hepatocytes overexpressing Parkin and decreased uptake in Parkin-/- mouse embryonic fibroblasts and patient cells harboring complex heterozygous mutations in the Parkin-encoding gene PARK2.
Parkin conferred this effect, in part, via ubiquitin-mediated stabilization of the lipid transporter CD36.
Reconstitution of Parkin restored hepatic fat uptake and CD36 levels in Parkin-/- mice, and Parkin augmented fat accumulation during adipocyte differentiation.
These results demonstrate that Parkin is regulated in a lipid-dependent manner and modulates systemic fat uptake via ubiquitin ligase-dependent effects.
Whether this metabolic regulation contributes to premature Parkinsonism warrants investigation.
PMID: 21865651
Parkin reinvents itself to regulate fatty acid metabolism by tagging CD36.
Parkinson disease (PD) is a relatively common neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the progressive degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra.
About 5%-10% of PD cases are inherited.
Mutations in the Parkin gene, which encodes a protein that can function as an E3 ubiquitin ligase, are a common cause of familial PD.
Such mutations act in a loss-of-function manner and impair the ability of the encoded protein to mediate substrate ubiquitination, although the subsequent molecular pathway that precipitates neuronal degeneration is poorly defined.
In this issue of the JCI, Kim and colleagues describe painstaking evidence using a number of dissecting approaches in intact animals and cultured cells to functionally link Parkin and the class B scavenger receptor CD36, suggesting a novel and complex connection between PD and fatty acid metabolism.
PMID: 21865317
Phosphorylated α-synuclein can be detected in blood plasma and is potentially a useful biomarker for Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by the presence of Lewy bodies containing phosphorylated and aggregated α-synuclein (α-syn).
α-Syn is present in human body fluids, including blood plasma, and is a potential biomarker for PD.
Immunoassays for total and oligomeric forms of both normal and phosphorylated (at Ser-129) α-syn have been used to assay plasma samples from a longitudinal cohort of 32 patients with PD (sampled at mo 0, 1, 2, 3), as well as single plasma samples from a group of 30 healthy control participants.
The levels of α-syn in plasma varied greatly between individuals, but were remarkably consistent over time within the same individual with PD.
The mean level of phospho-α-syn was found to be higher (P=0.053) in the PD samples than the controls, whereas this was not the case for total α-syn (P=0.244), oligo-α-syn (P=0.221), or oligo-phospho-α-syn (P=0.181).
Immunoblots of plasma revealed bands (at 21, 24, and 50-60 kDa) corresponding to phosphorylated α-syn.
Thus, phosphorylated α-syn can be detected in blood plasma and shows more promise as a diagnostic marker than the nonphosphorylated protein.
Longitudinal studies undertaken over a more extended time period will be required to determine whether α-syn can act as a marker of disease progression.
PMID: 21864849
Brain structural MRI correlates of cognitive dysfunctions in Parkinson's disease.
Cognitive dysfunction occurs at early stages of Parkinson's disease (PD).
Initial studies reported that cognitive dysfunction in early PD only affected fronto-striatal circuits, provoking a marked executive dysfunction.
Memory impairment in PD was thought to depend on a problem in retrieving stored information, therefore also reflecting a fronto-striatal dysfunction.
However, there is increasing structural MRI evidence of medial temporal lobe atrophy in PD, which may be responsible for memory dysfunction.
Other neuropsychological functions usually impaired in PD are semantic fluency, visuoperceptual and visuospatial functions, decision-making and recognition of facial emotions; and impairments in these functions are associated with cortical structural changes assessed by MRI.
Overall, although the literature on the topic is scarce, there is increasing evidence of brain structural changes, detectable by MRI, which can explain the neuropsychological deficits early in the clinical disease course before dementia develops.
In this review, we summarize the papers that have used structural MRI to study the neuroanatomical correlates of cognitive dysfunctions in PD.
PMID: 21864557
Role of paraoxonase 1 (PON1) in organophosphate metabolism: implications in neurodegenerative diseases.
Organophosphate pesticides are a class of compounds that are widely used in agricultural and rural areas.
Paraoxonase 1 (PON1) is a phase-I enzyme that is involved in the hydrolysis of organophosphate esters.
Environmental poisoning by organophosphate compounds has been the main driving force of previous research on PON1 enzymes.
Recent discoveries in animal models have revealed the important role of the enzyme in lipid metabolism.
However although PON1 function is well established in experimental models, the contribution of PON1 in neurodegenerative diseases remains unclear.
In this minireview we summarize the involvement of PON1 genotypes in the occurrence of Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
A brief overview of latest epidemiological studies, regarding the two most important PON1 coding region polymorphisms PON1-L55M and PON1-Q192R is presented.
Positive and negative associations of PON1 with disease occurrence are reported.
Notably the MM and RR alleles contribute a risk enhancing effect for the development of some neurodegenerative diseases, which may be explained by the reduced lipoprotein free radical scavenging activity that may give rise to neuronal damage, through distinct mechanism.
Conflicting findings that fail to support this postulate may represent the human population ethnic heterogeneity, different sample size and environmental parameters affecting PON1 status.
We conclude that further epidemiological studies are required in order to address the exact contribution of PON1 genome in combination with organophosphate exposure in populations with neurodegenerative diseases.
PMID: 21864527
Circadian dysfunction in a mouse model of Parkinson's disease.
Many Parkinson's disease (PD) patients exhibit sleep disorders as part of their symptoms with evidence suggesting that REM sleep disorders may be intimately associated with this disease.
Possible dysfunction in the circadian system in PD has received less attention, yet problems in circadian timing are common in neurodegenerative diseases.
In the present study, we examined the expression of daily and circadian rhythms in the alpha-synuclein overexpressing (ASO) transgenic line.
We found selective deficits in the expression of circadian rhythms of locomotor activity, including lower night-time activity and greater fragmentation in the wheel-running activity in this PD model.
These alterations were prominent in young adult (3-4 mo) ASO mice and worsened progressively with age, consistent with prior reports of age-related loss of motor skills.
The temporal distribution of sleep was also altered in the ASO mice compared to littermate controls.
In the ASO mice, the peak/trough expression of the clock gene PERIOD2 was normal in the master pacemaker of the circadian system: the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN); however, the daytime firing rate of SCN neurons was reduced in the mutant mice.
Together, this data raises the possibility that a weakening of circadian output is a core feature of PD.
The reduction in magnitude of circadian output would be expected to have functional consequences throughout the body.
PMID: 21864078
Cell replacement therapy for Parkinson's disease: how close are we to the clinic?
Cell replacement therapy (CRT) offers great promise as the future of regenerative medicine in Parkinson´s disease (PD).
Three decades of experiments have accumulated a wealth of knowledge regarding the replacement of dying neurons by new and healthy dopaminergic neurons transplanted into the brains of animal models and affected patients.
The first clinical trials provided the proof of principle for CRT in PD.
In these experiments, intrastriatal transplantation of human embryonic mesencephalic tissue reinnervated the striatum, restored dopamine levels and showed motor improvements.
Sequential controlled studies highlighted several problems that should be addressed prior to the wide application of CRT for PD patients.
Moreover, owing to ethical and practical problems, embryonic stem cells require replacement by better-suited stem cells.
Several obstacles remain to be surpassed, including identifying the best source of stem cells for A9 dopaminergic neuron generation, eliminating the risk of tumor formation and the development of graft-induced dyskinesias, and standardizing dopaminergic cell production in order to enable clinical application.
In this article, we present an update on CRT for PD, reviewing the research milestones, various stem cells used and tailored differentiation methods, and analyze the information gained from the clinical trials.
PMID: 21864068
Movement disorders in focus: experts debate on pathophysiology and concomitant signs.
The Movement Disorders Society (MDS) organized its 15th International Annual Congress of Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders in Toronto (Canada), on 5-9 June 2011.
This year's theme was 'Behavioral and motor interfaces of movement disorders, from laboratory to patient care'.
The congress was organized following a routine that has been well established through years of experience: with the exception of the first day, each day of the congress consisted of 3-h plenary sessions followed by parallel sessions, teaching courses, video sessions and skills workshops, fulfilling the educational purpose of the congress.
PMID: 21864066
Pramipexole extended release in Parkinson's disease.
Pramipexole extended release (ER) is a new once-daily formulation of pramipexole, a nonergot dopamine agonist, which is available in five dosage strengths: 0.26 (0.375) mg, 0.52 (0.75) mg, 1.05 (1.5) mg, 2.1 (3) mg and 3.15 (4.5) mg (all doses are expressed in terms of pramipexole base and the corresponding dose strengths of pramipexole salt are given in brackets).
Pramipexole ER is currently approved as monotherapy in early Parkinson's disease (PD), as well as an adjunct therapy to levodopa in advanced PD.
Compared with the immediate release (IR) formulation, the ER formulation offers several advantages, including the potential for improved compliance owing to its simple once-daily dosing regimen and steadier plasma levels over 24 h.
Double-blind, randomized, placebo and active comparator controlled trials in early, as well as advanced PD, established the superiority of both pramipexole ER and IR over placebo.
The overnight switch from pramipexole IR three times a day to ER once-daily in early PD has been shown to be successful in more than 80% of patients.
Pramipexole ER is well tolerated, with a similar adverse event profile to pramipexole IR.
The aim of this article is to provide a short review of the most relevant pharmacological and clinical data on pramipexole ER.
PMID: 21863741
[Mitochondrial disfunction in Parkinson's disease].
Mitochondrial structural and functional abnormalities in Parkinson's disease and experimental animal models of this pathology are described.
Special attention is paid to the inactivation of mitochondrial enzymes, mutations in mitochondrial and nuclear DNA, and genomic and proteomic research of mitochondrial proteins in Parkinson's disease and experimental parkinsonism of animals.
PMID: 21863007
Parkinson's disease induced pluripotent stem cells with triplication of the α-synuclein locus.
A major barrier to research on Parkinson's disease is inaccessibility of diseased tissue for study.
One solution is to derive induced pluripotent stem cells from patients and differentiate them into neurons affected by disease.
Triplication of SNCA, encoding α-synuclein, causes a fully penetrant, aggressive form of Parkinson's disease with dementia.
α-Synuclein dysfunction is the critical pathogenic event in Parkinson's disease, multiple system atrophy and dementia with Lewy bodies.
Here we produce multiple induced pluripotent stem cell lines from an SNCA triplication patient and an unaffected first-degree relative.
When these cells are differentiated into midbrain dopaminergic neurons, those from the patient produce double the amount of α-synuclein protein as neurons from the unaffected relative, precisely recapitulating the cause of Parkinson's disease in these individuals.
This model represents a new experimental system to identify compounds that reduce levels of α-synuclein, and to investigate the mechanistic basis of neurodegeneration caused by α-synuclein dysfunction.
PMID: 21862738
Meth use linked to risk of Parkinson disease.
PMID: 21862438
Brain volume changes in Parkinson's disease and their relationship with cognitive and behavioural abnormalities.
Cognitive and behavioral abnormalities are frequent in Parkinson's disease (PD) but their anatomical correlates are still uncertain.
We assessed a cohort of 59 PD patients with and without impulse control disorders (PD-ICDs and PD-CNTR) with magnetic resonance imaging and a comprehensive neuropsychological battery.
Thirty-five PD patients presented ICDs according to DSM-IV criteria and Minnesota Impulsive Disorders Interview.
We found areas of significant brain atrophy in the middle and superior frontal gyrus in the whole cohort of 59 PD patients vs.
healthy controls but there were no morphometric changes in PD-ICDs vs.
PD-CNTR.
This was consistent with cognitive findings of relatively preserved function in PD-ICDs with the exception for slower performance in the Trail Making Test B-A suggesting difficulties to maintain goal-directed tasks and suppress irrelevant responses.
Voxel Based Morphometric regression analysis (VBM) carried out using TMTB-A as independent factor showed a negative gray matter correlation between high TMTB-A scores and left middle frontal cortex, right posterior cingulate area, anterior cingulate and supplementary motor area bilaterally.
Our results suggest that PD is characterized by an overall loss of gray matter in pre-frontal regions.
However, the contribution of these changes to the development of ICDs is marginal.
PMID: 21862038
Mesencephalic midline change on transcranial sonography in early Parkinson's disease patients with depression.
Recently, several studies using transcranial sonography (TCS) have resulted in the alteration of the mesencephalic midline in patients with depression.
We aimed to investigate and compare sonographic abnormalities in the brainstem raphe (BR) in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) and controls, according to presence of depression.
Study participants totaled 61 patients with PD (29 PD without depression, 32 PD with depression) and 41 controls.
Results indicated that decreased BR echogenicity was much higher in PD patients with depression (PD+D) than in those without depression (PD-D).
Of the 61 PD patients, 32 (52.4%) had depression as diagnosed by psychiatric assessment, and 13 (17.6%) were excluded, due to insufficient temporal windows.
Based on these results, the use of TCS with respect to the mesencephalic midline may be useful in detecting depression, a risk factor for the development of PD.
PMID: 21860778
Development of a non-motor fluctuation assessment instrument for Parkinson disease.
Patients with Parkinson disease are increasingly recognized to suffer from non-motor symptoms in addition to motor symptoms.
Many non-motor symptoms fluctuate in parallel with motor symptoms and in relationship to plasma levodopa levels.
Though these symptoms are troublesome and result in reduced quality of life to patients and their caregivers, there has not been an objective method of recognizing and quantifying non-motor fluctuations (NMFs).
This study sought to develop a patient-based instrument that would accurately capture the experience of patients with NMFs.
Patient-based nominal group technique sessions, focus groups, and expert opinion were utilized in developing this questionnaire.
PMID: 21858182
Soluble beta-amyloid precursor protein is related to disease progression in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Biomarkers of disease progression in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) could support the identification of beneficial drugs in clinical trials.
We aimed to test whether soluble fragments of beta-amyloid precursor protein (sAPPα and sAPPß) correlated with clinical subtypes of ALS and were of prognostic value.
In a cross-sectional study including patients with ALS (N = 68) with clinical follow-up data over 6 months, Parkinson's disease (PD, N = 20), and age-matched controls (N = 40), cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of sAPPα a, sAPPß and neurofilaments (NfH(SMI35)) were measured by multiplex assay, Progranulin by ELISA.
CSF sAPPα and sAPPß levels were lower in ALS with a rapidly-progressive disease course (p = 0.03, and p = 0.02) and with longer disease duration (p = 0.01 and p = 0.01, respectively).
CSF NfH(SMI35) was elevated in ALS compared to PD and controls, with highest concentrations found in patients with rapid disease progression (p<0.01).
High CSF NfH(SMI3) was linked to low CSF sAPPα and sAPPß (p = 0.001, and p = 0.007, respectively).
The ratios CSF NfH(SMI35)/CSF sAPPα,-ß were elevated in patients with fast progression of disease (p = 0.002 each).
CSF Progranulin decreased with ongoing disease (p = 0.04).
This study provides new CSF candidate markers associated with progression of disease in ALS.
The data suggest that a deficiency of cellular neuroprotective mechanisms (decrease of sAPP) is linked to progressive neuro-axonal damage (increase of NfH(SMI35)) and to progression of disease.
PMID: 21856692
An exercise intervention to prevent falls in people with Parkinson's disease: a pragmatic randomised controlled trial.
To compare the effectiveness of an exercise programme with usual care in people with Parkinson's disease (PD) who have a history of falls.
Pragmatic randomised controlled trial.
Recruitment was from three primary and four secondary care organisations, and PD support groups in South West England.
The intervention was delivered in community settings.
People with PD, with a history of two or more falls in the previous year, who were able to mobilise independently.
10 week, physiotherapy led, group delivered strength and balance training programme with supplementary home exercises (intervention) or usual care (control).
Number of falls during the (a) 10 week intervention period and (b) the 10 week follow-up period.
130 people were recruited and randomised (64 to the intervention; 66 to usual care).
Seven participants (5.4%) did not complete the study.
The incidence rate ratio for falls was 0.68 (95% CI 0.43 to 1.07, p=0.10) during the intervention period and 0.74 (95% CI 0.41 to 1.33, p=0.31) during the follow-up period.
Statistically significant between group differences were observed in Berg balance, Falls Efficacy Scale-International scores and recreational physical activity levels.
The study did not demonstrate a statistically significant between group difference in falls although the difference could be considered clinically significant.
However, a type 2 error cannot be ruled out.
The findings from this trial add to the evidence base for physiotherapy and exercise in the management of people with PD.
Trial registration ISRCTN50793425.
PMID: 21856586
Glucocerebrosidase mutations in a French-Canadian Parkinson's disease cohort.
PMID: 21856585
OFF-rebound dyskinesia in subthalamic nucleus stimulation in Parkinson disease.
PMID: 21856319
Understanding facial emotion perception in Parkinson's disease: the role of configural processing.
Parkinson's disease (PD) has been frequently associated with facial emotion recognition impairments, which could adversely affect the social functioning of those patients.
Facial emotion recognition requires processing of the spatial relations between facial features, known as the facial configuration.
Few studies, however, have investigated this ability in people with PD.
We hypothesized that facial emotion recognition impairments in patients with PD could be accounted for by a deficit in configural processing.
To assess this hypothesis, three tasks were proposed to 10 patients with PD and 10 healthy controls (HC): (i) a facial emotion recognition task with upright faces, (ii) a similar task with upside-down faces, to explore the face inversion effect, and (iii) a configural task to assess participants' abilities to detect configural modifications made on a horizontal or vertical axis.
The results showed that when compared with the HC group, the PD group had impaired facial emotion recognition, in particular for faces expressing anger and fear, and exhibited reduced face inversion effect for these emotions.
More importantly, the PD group's performance on the configural task to detect vertical modifications was lower than the HC group's.
Taken together, these results suggest the presence of a configural processing alteration in patients with PD, especially for vertical, second-order information.
Furthermore, configural performance was positively correlated with emotion recognition for anger, disgust, and fear, suggesting that facial emotion recognition could be related, at least partially, to configural processing.
PMID: 21856205
Unilateral deep brain stimulation surgery in Parkinson's disease improves ipsilateral symptoms regardless of laterality.
Researchers have consistently observed in right-handed individuals across normal and disease states that the 'dominant' left hemisphere has greater ipsilateral control of the left side than the right hemisphere has over the right.
We sought to determine whether this ipsilateral influence of the dominant hemisphere reported in Parkinson's disease extends to treatments such as deep brain stimulation (DBS) and whether it affects outcome.
We hypothesised that among Parkinson right-handers, unilateral left DBS would provide greater ipsilateral motor improvement compared with the ipsilateral motor improvement experienced on the right side.
A total of 73 Parkinson patients who underwent unilateral DBS of the subthalamic nucleus (STN) or globus palidus internus (GPi) participated.
Left and right 'composite scores', were computed by separately adding all items on the left and right side from the motor section of the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale.
The change in the pre- and 4-month post-implantation score was the primary outcome measure.
The mean motor scores improved by 4.96 ± 11.79 points (p < 0.001) post-surgery on the ipsilateral side of the DBS implantation.
Regression analyses revealed that the side (left vs.
right) and target (STN vs.
GPi) did not significantly contribute in the effect of ipsilateral motor improvement (p = 0.3557).
While DBS on the 'dominant' left side failed to exert a greater ipsilateral influence compared with DBS on the non-dominant right side, significant ipsilateral motor improvements were observed after unilateral stimulation regardless of site of implantation and laterality.
PMID: 21855895
Localization of the subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson disease using multiunit activity.
Refinement of the subthalamic nucleus (STN) coordinates using intraoperative microelectrode recordings (MER) is routinely performed during deep brain stimulation (DBS) surgeries in Parkinson disease (PD).
The commonly used criteria for electrophysiological localization of the STN are qualitative.
The goal of this study was to validate quantitative STN detection algorithm (QD) derived from the multi-unit activity in a prospective setting.
Ten PD patients underwent STN DBS surgery.
The MUA was obtained by removing large spikes close to microelectrode using wavelet method and integrating the 500-2000Hz band in the power spectral density.
The qualitative intraoperative mapping of the STN using MER (IOM) versus QD was compared using Bland-Altman and Pearson's correlation analysis.
The clinical efficacy was confirmed in all subjects.
The mean difference between IOM and QD of the dorsal/ventral border was 0.31±0.84/0.44±0.47mm.
Using Bland-Altman statistic, only 2/36 (5.6%) differences (one for the dorsal border and one for the ventral border) were out of ±2 sd line of measurement differences.
Correlation between dorsal border/ventral border positions obtained by IOM and QD was 0.79, p<0.0001/0.91, p<0.0001.
Both methods are in reasonable agreement and are strongly correlated.
The QD gives objective coordinates of the STN borders at high precision and may be more accurate than IOM.
Prospective blinded comparative studies where the DBS leads will be placed using either QD or IOM are warranted.
PMID: 21855627
c-Fos expression after deep brain stimulation of the pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus in the rat 6-hydroxydopamine Parkinson model.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is used to alleviate motor dysfunction in Parkinson's disease (PD).
The pedunculopontine nucleus (PPN) may be a potential target for severe freezing and postural instability with 25 Hz stimulation being considered more effective than 130 Hz stimulation.
Here we evaluated the expression of c-Fos after 25 Hz and 130 Hz DBS of the pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus (PPTg, i.e., the rodent equivalent to the human PPN) in the rat 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) PD model.
Anaesthetized male Sprague Dawley rats with unilateral 6-OHDA-induced nigrostriatal lesions were stimulated with 25 Hz, 130 Hz, or 0 Hz sham-stimulation for 4h by electrodes implanted into the ipsilateral PPTg.
Thereafter the distribution and number of neurons expressing the immediate early gene c-Fos, a marker for acute neuronal activity, was assessed.
DBS of the PPTg induced strong ipsilateral c-Fos expression at the stimulation site, with 25 Hz having a more marked impact than 130 Hz.
Additionally, c-Fos was strongly expressed in the central gray.
In the dorsal part expression was stronger after 25 Hz stimulation, while in the medial and ventral part there was no difference between 25 Hz and 130 Hz stimulation.
Expression in the basal ganglia was negligible.
In the rat 6-OHDA PD model stimulation of the PPTg did not affect c-Fos expression in the basal ganglia, but had a strong impact on other functional circuitries.
PPN stimulation in humans might therefore also have an impact on other systems than the motor system.
PMID: 21853051
Serum cholesterol and the progression of Parkinson's disease: results from DATATOP.
Recent studies have suggested that higher serum cholesterol may be associated with lower occurrence of Parkinson's disease (PD).
This study is to test the hypothesis that higher serum cholesterol correlates with slower PD progression.
Baseline non-fasting serum total cholesterol was measured in 774 of the 800 subjects with early PD enrolled between 1987 and 1988 in the Deprenyl and Tocopherol Antioxidative Therapy of Parkinsonism (DATATOP) trial.
Participants were followed for up to two years, with clinical disability requiring levodopa therapy as the primary endpoint.
Hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were determined for increasing serum cholesterol concentration (in quintiles) for clinical disability requiring levodopa therapy, after adjusting for confounders.
At baseline, only nine subjects reported use of cholesterol-lowering agents (two with statins).
The overall mean cholesterol level was 216 mg/dL (range 100-355).
The HR of progressing to the primary endpoint decreased with increasing serum cholesterol concentrations.
Compared to the lowest quintile, the HRs (95%CI), for each higher quintile (in ascending order) are 0.83 (0.59-1.16); 0.86 (0.61-1.20); 0.84 (0.60-1.18); and 0.75 (0.52-1.09).
The HR for one standard deviation (SD) increase = 0.90 [(0.80-1.01), p for trend = 0.09].
This trend was found in males (HR per SD = 0.88 [(0.77-1.00), p for trend = 0.05], but not in females [HR = 1.03 (0.81-1.32)].
This secondary analysis of the DATATOP trial provides preliminary evidence that higher total serum cholesterol concentrations may be associated with a modest slower clinical progression of PD, and this preliminary finding needs confirmation from larger prospective studies.
PMID: 21852951
Variance of gene expression identifies altered network constraints in neurological disease.
Gene expression analysis has become a ubiquitous tool for studying a wide range of human diseases.
In a typical analysis we compare distinct phenotypic groups and attempt to identify genes that are, on average, significantly different between them.
Here we describe an innovative approach to the analysis of gene expression data, one that identifies differences in expression variance between groups as an informative metric of the group phenotype.
We find that genes with different expression variance profiles are not randomly distributed across cell signaling networks.
Genes with low-expression variance, or higher constraint, are significantly more connected to other network members and tend to function as core members of signal transduction pathways.
Genes with higher expression variance have fewer network connections and also tend to sit on the periphery of the cell.
Using neural stem cells derived from patients suffering from Schizophrenia (SZ), Parkinson's disease (PD), and a healthy control group, we find marked differences in expression variance in cell signaling pathways that shed new light on potential mechanisms associated with these diverse neurological disorders.
In particular, we find that expression variance of core networks in the SZ patient group was considerably constrained, while in contrast the PD patient group demonstrated much greater variance than expected.
One hypothesis is that diminished variance in SZ patients corresponds to an increased degree of constraint in these pathways and a corresponding reduction in robustness of the stem cell networks.
These results underscore the role that variation plays in biological systems and suggest that analysis of expression variance is far more important in disease than previously recognized.
Furthermore, modeling patterns of variability in gene expression could fundamentally alter the way in which we think about how cellular networks are affected by disease processes.
PMID: 21852238
Oxidized DJ-1 interacts with the mitochondrial protein BCL-XL.
Parkinson disease (PD)- and cancer-associated protein, DJ-1, mediates cellular protection via many signaling pathways.
Deletions or mutations in the DJ-1 gene are directly linked to autosomal recessive early-onset PD.
DJ-1 has potential roles in mitochondria.
Here, we show that DJ-1 increases its mitochondrial distribution in response to ultraviolet B (UVB) irradiation and binds to Bcl-X(L).
The interactions between DJ-1 and Bcl-X(L) are oxidation-dependent.
DJ-1(C106A), a mutant form of DJ-1 that is unable to be oxidized, binds Bcl-X(L) much less than DJ-1 does.
Moreover, DJ-1 stabilizes Bcl-X(L) protein level by inhibiting its ubiquitination and degradation through ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS) in response to UVB irradiation.
Furthermore, under UVB irradiation, knockdown of DJ-1 leads to increases of Bcl-X(L) ubiquitination and degradation upon UVB irradiation, thereby increasing mitochondrial Bax, caspase-3 activation and PARP cleavage.
These data suggest that DJ-1 protects cells against UVB-induced cell death dependent on its oxidation and its association with mitochondrial Bcl-X(L).
PMID: 21851954
Instrumental activities of daily living in Parkinson's disease dementia as compared with Alzheimer's disease: relationship to motor disability and cognitive deficits: a pilot study.
Our objective was to assess which clinical factors contribute most to the impairment of instrumental activities of daily living (IADL) in patients with dementia in Parkinson's disease (PDD) as compared to age- and dementia duration-matched patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Eighteen consecutive subjects (16 men, 2 women) with PDD and 30 age- and dementia duration-matched subjects with AD (13 men, 17 women) were recruited.
The groups were not matched for their Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE) score.
Neuropsychiatric, cognitive and motor data were collected in a routine clinical setting using the MMSE, four brief tests of the seven minute screen (i.e.
the Benton Temporal Orientation, Grober and Buschke's enhanced cued recall, verbal fluency, and the clock drawing test), the Neuropsychiatric Inventory, a modified version of the Hoehn and Yahr scale and a Czech modified version of Lawton's IADL questionnaire.
The IADL scores were correlated with clinical variables in each group.
There were no differences in IADL abilities between both groups.
A significant association was found between IADL and cognitive impairment as measured by screening tests in the AD group.
In the PDD group, IADL scores were particularly correlated with PD duration (r=-0.73, p<0.01) and the Hoehn and Yahr score (r=-0.59, p<0.01).
Our pilot study results show that motor deficits remain the major contributor to IADL impairment in PDD.
PMID: 21851616
Psychometric validation of the revised SCOPA-Diary Card: expanding the measurement of non-motor symptoms in Parkinson's disease.
To identify key non-motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease (PD) to include in a daily diary assessment for off-time, revise the Scales for Outcomes of Parkinson's disease Diary Card (SCOPA-DC) to include these non-motor symptoms, and investigate the validity, reliability and predictive utility of the Revised SCOPA-DC in a U.S.
population.
A convenience sample was used to recruit four focus groups of PD patients.
Based on findings from focus groups, the SCOPA-DC was revised and administered to a sample of 101 PD patients.
Confirmatory factor analysis was conducted to test the domain structure of the Revised SCOPA-DC.
The reliability, convergent and discriminant validity, and ability to predict off-time of the Revised SCOPA-DC were then assessed.
Based on input from PD patients, the Revised SCOPA-DC included several format changes and the addition of non-motor symptoms.
The Revised SCOPA-DC was best represented by a three-factor structure: Mobility, Physical Functioning and Psychological Functioning.
Correlations between the Revised SCOPA-DC and other Health-Related Quality of Life scores were supportive of convergent validity.
Known-groups validity analyses indicated that scores on the Revised SCOPA-DC were lower among patients who reported experiencing off-time when compared to those without off-time.
The three subscales had satisfactory predictive utility, correctly predicting off-time slightly over two-thirds of the time.
These findings provide evidence of content validity of the Revised SCOPA-DC and suggest that a three-factor structure is an appropriate model that provides reliable and valid scores to assess symptom severity among PD patients with symptom fluctuations in the U.S.
PMID: 21850687
Mutations in LRRK2 increase phosphorylation of peroxiredoxin 3 exacerbating oxidative stress-induced neuronal death.
Mutations in the leucine rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are responsible for autosomal dominant and sporadic Parkinson disease (PD), possibly exerting their effects via a toxic gain of function.
A common p.G2019S mutation (rs34637584:A>G) is responsible for up to 30-40% of PD cases in some ethnic populations.
Here, we show that LRRK2 interacts with human peroxiredoxin 3 (PRDX3), a mitochondrial member of the antioxidant family of thioredoxin (Trx) peroxidases.
Importantly, mutations in the LRRK2 kinase domain significantly increased phosphorylation of PRDX3 compared to wild-type.
The increase in PRDX3 phosphorylation was associated with decreased peroxidase activity and increased death in LRRK2-expressing but not in LRRK2-depleted or vector-transfected neuronal cells.
LRRK2 mutants stimulated mitochondrial factors involved in apoptosis and induced production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and oxidative modification of macromolecules.
Furthermore, immunoblot and immunohistochemical analysis of postmortem human PD patients carrying the p.G2019S mutation showed a marked increase in phosphorylated PRDX3 (p-PRDX3) relative to normal brain.
We showed that LRRK2 mutations increase the inhibition of an endogenous peroxidase by phosphorylation promoting dysregulation of mitochondrial function and oxidative damage.
Our findings provide a mechanistic link between the enhanced kinase activity of PD-linked LRRK2 and neuronal cell death.
PMID: 21850279
Identification of dopamine D2 receptors in gill of Crassostrea virginica.
The lateral epithelial cells of gill of Crassostrea virginica are innervated by dopamine and serotonin nerves that regulate the beating rate of their lateral cilia.
Terminal release of dopamine slows down the beating rate of the cilia, while serotonin release increases the beating rate.
Previously, we showed that the dopaminergic, but not the serotonergic, mechanism regulating the beating rate of the lateral cilia was disrupted by manganese treatments and that this disruption was occurring postsynaptically, at the level of the dopamine receptor or further downstream in the signal transduction pathway.
In humans manganese toxicity causes Manganism, a neurological disorder with clinical symptoms similar to Parkinson s disease.
In this study we utilized pharmacological agents and an immunohistofluorescence technique to characterize the dopamine receptor type present on the lateral ciliated cells of C.
virginica gill.
Agonists and antagonists to dopamine D1 or dopamine D2 receptors were applied to gill sections and beating rates of the lateral cilia were measured by stroboscopic microscopy.
The D2 agonists and D2 antagonists were effective in mimicking or blocking, respectively, the inhibitory actions of dopamine on lateral cilia beating, while application of either D1 agonists or D1 antagonists had no significant effect.
In other experiments we used an epilume fluorescence microscopic fitted with FITC filters to view gill sections treated with a primary antibody against D2 receptors and a FITC-linked secondary antibody.
Control gill sections without primary antibody exposure were similarly treated and viewed.
The D2 antibody treated sections showed bright fluorescent receptor-antibody complexes present at the lateral ciliated cells and other areas of gill, when compared to controls.
The results of our immunofluorescence study identify the presence of D2-like receptors on the lateral ciliated cells of C.
virginica gill and our pharmacological results indicate that D2-like receptors are the postsynaptic dopamine receptors involved in the cilio-inhibitory response of the lateral cilia.
The results of this study, when combined with our previous work, further suggest that the mechanism of action that underlies the dopaminergic neurotoxicity of manganese in gill of C.
virginica involves disruption of D2-like receptors.
C.
virginica continues to provide a simple yet good model with which to study the physiology of dopaminergic systems as well as the pharmacology of drugs affecting biogenic amines.
PMID: 21849941
Cognitive dysfunction in idiopathic and vascular parkinsonism.
To evaluate the characteristics of cognitive disturbances in patients with parkinsonism and to point out the need of following up those changes by highly specific tests.
The first group consisted of patients with Parkinson's disease, and the second group of patients with vascular parkinsonism.
The neuropsychological assessments were performed with mini mental state examination (MMSE) and the Raven progressive matrices.
The MMSE has shown a higher percentage of patients with vascular parkinsonism who had dementia.
For evaluating the nonverbal possibilities, the aim of understanding the complex situation and the visual perception, the Raven's progressive matrices were used showing that in both groups of the patients those specific changes were highly present.
It was concluded that MMSE and Raven's progressive matrices have to be obtained in early phases of the disease, and have to be repeated to follow up the therapy effect.
PMID: 21849641
Network correlates of the cognitive response to levodopa in Parkinson disease.
Cognitive dysfunction is common in Parkinson disease (PD), even early in its clinical course.
This disease manifestation has been associated with impaired verbal learning performance as well as abnormal expression of a specific PD-related cognitive spatial covariance pattern (PDCP).
It is not known, however, how this metabolic network relates to the cognitive response to dopaminergic therapy on the individual patient level.
We assessed treatment-mediated changes in verbal learning and PDCP expression in 17 patients with PD without dementia who underwent cognitive testing and metabolic imaging in the unmedicated and levodopa-treated conditions.
We also determined whether analogous changes were present in 12 other patients with PD without dementia who were evaluated before and during the treatment of cognitive symptoms with placebo.
Levodopa-mediated changes in verbal learning correlated with concurrent changes in PDCP expression (r = -0.60, p < 0.01).
The subset of patients with meaningful cognitive improvement on levodopa (n = 8) exhibited concurrent reductions in PDCP expression (p < 0.01) with treatment; network modulation was not evident in the remaining subjects.
Notably, the levodopa cognitive response correlated with baseline PDCP levels (r = 0.70, p = 0.002).
By contrast, placebo did not affect PDCP expression, even in the subjects (n = 7) with improved verbal learning during treatment.
These findings suggest that cognitive dysfunction in PD may respond to treatment depending upon the degree of baseline PDCP expression.
Quantification of treatment-mediated network changes can provide objective information concerning the efficacy of new agents directed at the cognitive manifestations of this disease.
PMID: 21849493
Effect of Ser-129 phosphorylation on interaction of α-synuclein with synaptic and cellular membranes.
In the healthy brain, less than 5% of α-synuclein (α-syn) is phosphorylated at serine 129 (Ser(P)-129).
However, within Parkinson disease (PD) Lewy bodies, 89% of α-syn is Ser(P)-129.
The effects of Ser(P)-129 modification on α-syn distribution and solubility are poorly understood.
As α-syn normally exists in both membrane-bound and cytosolic compartments, we examined the binding and dissociation of Ser(P)-129 α-syn and analyzed the effects of manipulating Ser(P)-129 levels on α-syn membrane interactions using synaptosomal membranes and neural precursor cells from α-syn-deficient mice or transgenic mice expressing human α-syn.
We first evaluated the recovery of the Ser(P)-129 epitope following either α-syn membrane binding or dissociation.
We demonstrate a rapid turnover of Ser(P)-129 during both binding to and dissociation from synaptic membranes.
Although the membrane binding of WT α-syn was insensitive to modulation of Ser(P)-129 levels by multiple strategies (the use of phosphomimic S129D and nonphosphorylated S129A α-syn mutants; by enzymatic dephosphorylation of Ser(P)-129 or proteasome inhibitor-induced elevation in Ser(P)-129; or by inhibition or stable overexpression of PLK2), PD mutant Ser(P)-129 α-syn showed a preferential membrane association compared with WT Ser(P)-129 α-syn.
Collectively, these data suggest that phosphorylation at Ser-129 is dynamic and that the subcellular distribution of α-syn bearing PD-linked mutations, A30P or A53T, is influenced by the phosphorylation state of Ser-129.
PMID: 21849176
Is there a need to redefine Parkinson's disease?
Parkinson's disease (PD) has initially been described as a clinical syndrome, although the exact definition has changed over the past centuries.
The inclusion of the pathological changes added another level of complexity, with Lewy bodies, synuclein deposits and neuronal loss in the substantia nigra being used alternatively.
A third level of complexity was added with the recognition of genetic mutations resulting in parkinsonism, sometimes with and sometimes without Lewy body deposition, and the identification of frequent additional important pre-motor manifestations.
These different points of view on the definition of PD have important implications on the study of the etiology and even the therapy of PD.
PMID: 21849175
Cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction in MSA and Parkinson's disease: similarities and differences.
In Parkinsons disease and multiple system atrophy (MSA), cardiovascular dysfunction may occur for a variety of reasons and may manifest itself through inappropriate changes and/or levels in blood pressure, heart rate and/or regional vascular perfusion in a range of situations.
The early occurrence of orthostatic hypotension often leads to consideration of MSA, especially in the presence of other features of autonomic failure.
Orthostatic hypotension, however, is increasingly recognised in PD, and especially with increasing age, severity of disease and as a result of drug therapy, sometimes for associated disorders.
Investigation of cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction in Parkinsonism is therefore important for a variety of reasons, that include determining the precise diagnosis and in predicting prognosis.
In Parkinsonian disorders, understanding the pathophysiological basis of the cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction aids targeting of therapy, improves management strategies and provides benefit for such patients.
PMID: 21849174
Aspects of speech rate and regularity in Parkinson's disease.
The hypokinetic dysarthria of Parkinson's disease (PD) has been defined as a multidimensional impairment leading to abnormalities in speech breathing, phonation, articulation and prosody.
The aspect of prosody can be subdivided into further dimensions, as for example stress and accentuation, intonation variability and speech rate and regularity.
According to available data from literature and findings of our own published studies, the present review illuminates the concept that inconstancies of speech fluency in PD are characterized by modifications of the arrangement of speech pauses and by a tendency of pace acceleration in the course of the performance.
Furthermore, on the level of single utterances, Parkinsonian speakers feature significant difficulties to steadily repeat single syllables without accelerating or slowing down the pace as we were able to show in a series of published investigations.
Evidence from literature and our own work justifies the hypothesis that the characteristic abnormalities in speech articulatory rate and regularity might serve as a marker of disease progression in PD.
PMID: 21849167
A training program to improve gait while dual tasking in patients with Parkinson's disease: a pilot study.
Impairments in the ability to perform another task while walking (ie, dual tasking [DT]) are associated with an increased risk of falling.
Here we describe a program we developed specifically to improve DT performance while walking based on motor learning principles and task-specific training.
We examined feasibility, potential efficacy, retention, and transfer to the performance of untrained tasks in a pilot study among 7 patients with Parkinson's disease (PD).
Seven patients (Hoehn and Yahr stage, 2.1±0.2) were evaluated before, after, and 1 month after 4 weeks of DT training.
Gait speed and gait variability were measured during usual walking and during 4 DT conditions.
The 4-week program of one-on-one training included walking while performing several distinct cognitive tasks.
Gait speed and gait variability during DT significantly improved.
Improvements were also seen in the DT conditions that were not specifically trained and were retained 1 month after training.
These initial findings support the feasibility of applying a task-specific DT gait training program for patients with PD and suggest that it positively affects DT gait, even in untrained tasks.
The present results are also consistent with the possibility that DT gait training enhances divided attention abilities during walking.
PMID: 21847085
Targeted training of ultrasonic vocalizations in aged and Parkinsonian rats.
Voice deficits are a common complication of both Parkinson disease (PD) and aging; they can significantly diminish quality of life by impacting communication abilities.
(1, 2) Targeted training (speech/voice therapy) can improve specific voice deficits,(3, 4) although the underlying mechanisms of behavioral interventions are not well understood.
Systematic investigation of voice deficits and therapy should consider many factors that are difficult to control in humans, such as age, home environment, age post-onset of disease, severity of disease, and medications.
The method presented here uses an animal model of vocalization that allows for systematic study of how underlying sensorimotor mechanisms change with targeted voice training.
The ultrasonic recording and analysis procedures outlined in this protocol are applicable to any investigation of rodent ultrasonic vocalizations.
The ultrasonic vocalizations of rodents are emerging as a valuable model to investigate the neural substrates of behavior.(5-8) Both rodent and human vocalizations carry semiotic value and are produced by modifying an egressive airflow with a laryngeal constriction.(9, 10) Thus, rodent vocalizations may be a useful model to study voice deficits in a sensorimotor context.
Further, rat models allow us to study the neurobiological underpinnings of recovery from deficits with targeted training.
To model PD we use Long-Evans rats (Charles River Laboratories International, Inc.) and induce parkinsonism by a unilateral infusion of 7 μg of 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) into the medial forebrain bundle which causes moderate to severe degeneration of presynaptic striatal neurons (for details see Ciucci, 2010).(11, 12) For our aging model we use the Fischer 344/Brown Norway F1 (National Institute on Aging).
Our primary method for eliciting vocalizations is to expose sexually-experienced male rats to sexually receptive female rats.
When the male becomes interested in the female, the female is removed and the male continues to vocalize.
By rewarding complex vocalizations with food or water, both the number of complex vocalizations and the rate of vocalizations can be increased (Figure 1).
An ultrasonic microphone mounted above the male's home cage records the vocalizations.
Recording begins after the female rat is removed to isolate the male calls.
Vocalizations can be viewed in real time for training or recorded and analyzed offline.
By recording and acoustically analyzing vocalizations before and after vocal training, the effects of disease and restoration of normal function with training can be assessed.
This model also allows us to relate the observed behavioral (vocal) improvements to changes in the brain and neuromuscular system.
PMID: 21846993
Sleep-related eating disorder in two patients with early-onset Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21846992
Correlation between progressive changes in piriform cortex and olfactory performance in early Parkinson's disease.
The mechanism underlying olfactory dysfunction in Parkinson's disease (PD) remains unknown.
The current study aims to investigate the relationship between sequential changes of volume change of cortex associated with olfactory function and degree of deficiency of olfactory performance in PD.
Based on the arbitrary cut-off score of olfactory performance measured by 'five odors olfactory detection arrays', subjects were classified into three groups: PD patients with olfactory impairment (OPD, n = 12), PD without olfactory impairment (NPD, n = 14), and healthy controls without olfactory impairment (NC, n = 26).
A morphometric analysis of magnetic resonance images (voxel-based morphometry; VBM) was used to investigate cortical volume change.
The scores of olfactory performance were higher in both NPD and OPD groups than in the NC group independent of age and disease duration, indicating that NPD subjects did have board line deficiency of olfaction though not meet the cut-off score for abnormal olfactory function.
Both NPD and OPD had cortical atrophy in the parahippocampal gyrus (PCG), but only OPD also had change in orbitofrontal cortex (OFC).
Correlation analysis revealed that decrement of volumes of PCG and right OFC was associated with decreased olfactory detection sensitivity, and the right OFC was also correlated to olfactory identification.
However, no correlation was found between structural changes and the severity of the disease measured by UPDRS score.
The results confirmed that atrophy in piriform cortex and orbitofrontal cortex is associated with olfactory dysfunction in early PD.
Atrophy of the orbitofrontal cortex becomes significant as olfactory damage progresses.
Volume measurement of olfaction-associated areas together with the assessment of olfactory function may be a sensitive indicator for the early diagnosis of PD.
PMID: 21846727
E46K human alpha-synuclein transgenic mice develop Lewy-like and tau pathology associated with age-dependent, detrimental motor impairment.
Synucleinopathies are a group of neurodegenerative disorders associated with the formation of aberrant amyloid inclusions composed of the normally soluble presynaptic protein α-synuclein (α-syn).
Parkinson disease is the most well known of these disorders because it bears α-syn pathological inclusions known as Lewy bodies (LBs).
Mutations in the gene for α-syn, including the E46K missense mutation, are sufficient to cause Parkinson disease as well as other synucleinopathies like dementia with LBs.
Herein, we describe transgenic mice expressing E46K human α-syn in CNS neurons that develop detrimental age-dependent motor impairments.
These animals accumulate age-dependent intracytoplasmic neuronal α-syn inclusions that parallel disease and recapitulate the biochemical, histological, and morphological properties of LBs.
Surprisingly, the morphology of α-syn inclusions in E46K human α-syn transgenic mice more closely resemble LBs than the previously described transgenic mice (line M83) that express neuronal A53T human α-syn.
E46K human α-syn mice also develop abundant neuronal tau inclusions that resemble neurofibrillary tangles.
Subsequent studies on the ability of E46K α-syn to induce tau inclusions in cellular models suggest that both direct and indirect mechanisms of protein aggregation are probably involved in the formation of the tau inclusions observed here in vivo.
Re-evaluation of presymptomatic transgenic mice expressing A53T human α-syn reveals that the formation of α-syn inclusions in mice must be synchronized; however, inclusion formation is diffuse within affected areas of the neuroaxis such that there was no clustering of inclusions.
Collectively, these findings provide insights in the mechanisms of formation of these aberrant proteinaceous inclusions and support the notion that α-syn aggregates are involved in the pathogenesis of human diseases.
PMID: 21846476
Dopaminergic neurotoxicant 6-OHDA induces oxidative damage through proteolytic activation of PKCδ in cell culture and animal models of Parkinson's disease.
The neurotoxicant 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) is used to investigate the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying selective degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in Parkinson's disease (PD).
Oxidative stress and caspase activation contribute to the 6-OHDA-induced apoptotic cell death of dopaminergic neurons.
In the present study, we sought to systematically characterize the key downstream signaling molecule involved in 6-OHDA-induced dopaminergic degeneration in cell culture and animal models of PD.
Treatment of mesencephalic dopaminergic neuronal N27 cells with 6-OHDA (100 μM) for 24h significantly reduced mitochondrial activity and increased cytosolic cytochrome c, followed by sequential activation of caspase-9 and caspase-3.
Co-treatment with the free radical scavenger MnTBAP (10 μM) significantly attenuated 6-OHDA-induced caspase activities.
Interestingly, 6-OHDA induced proteolytic cleavage and activation of protein kinase C delta (PKCδ) was completely suppressed by treatment with a caspase-3-specific inhibitor, Z-DEVD-FMK (50 μM).
Furthermore, expression of caspase-3 cleavage site-resistant mutant PKCδ(D327A) and kinase dead PKCδ(K376R) or siRNA-mediated knockdown of PKCδ protected against 6-OHDA-induced neuronal cell death, suggesting that caspase-3-dependent PKCδ promotes oxidative stress-induced dopaminergic degeneration.
Suppression of PKCδ expression by siRNA also effectively protected N27 cells from 6-OHDA-induced apoptotic cell death.
PKCδ cleavage was also observed in the substantia nigra of 6-OHDA-injected C57 black mice but not in control animals.
Viral-mediated delivery of PKCδ(D327A) protein protected against 6-OHDA-induced PKCδ activation in mouse substantia nigra.
Collectively, these results strongly suggest that proteolytic activation of PKCδ is a key downstream event in dopaminergic degeneration, and these results may have important translational value for development of novel treatment strategies for PD.
PMID: 21846220
Predictors of HVOT performance in Parkinson's disease.
Evidence suggests that the Hooper Visual Organization Test (HVOT) has naming and executive components that vary in size depending on neurological diagnosis.
The current study used a sample of individuals with Parkinson's disease (PD) to demonstrate for the first time that an executive measure can be the best predictor of HVOT performance.
Forty-eight nondemented and nondepressed individuals with idiopathic PD completed the HVOT and other measures of visuoperception, executive function, and visual confrontation naming.
Despite average performance on all neuropsychological measures, an executive measure, time to complete Trail-Making Test Part B minus time to complete Part A, was clearly the best predictor of HVOT performance in a standard regression.
The pattern of neurocognitive predictors is unlike that reported in healthy individuals and other patient samples.
This finding suggests that the presence of a neuropathological process can alter neurocognitive correlates even when performance is intact, and supports the contention that executive function is paramount in the cognitive profile associated with PD.
PMID: 21845593
Religious and spiritual beliefs in outpatients suffering from Parkinson Disease.
Personality changes are known to occur in idiopathic Parkinson's Disease (PD).
The aim of the study was to evaluate whether religious and spiritual beliefs in PD patients are different from age-matched controls.
Eighty-three PD participants, 79 hypertensive individuals not affected by PD and 88 healthy subjects participated to a cross-sectional study.
The Royal Free Interview (RFI) was used to evaluate participants' beliefs.
The Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) was applied to monitor emotional distress.
There was no statistical evidence of a difference between PD participants and the two control groups, the only exception being observed between the left PD onset group and the controls, where the total RFI score was about 5 points higher (t-test: p = 0.0273).
RFI total score was uncorrelated with age, severity of illness and depression, but was strongly dependent on the type of beliefs.
The percentage of PD participants suffering from anxiety and depression was high (right onset: 54.8%; left onset: 68.6%), while only 15.2% of the hypertensive participants, and none of the healthy controls, had a HADS score above 10 points.
Total RFI score was higher in women.
PD participants maintain their Faith in spite of the disease severity.
Differences are found between right and left onset of PD.
The possible beneficial effect of religious coping is discussed.
PMID: 21844102
A patient with tremor, part 2: from diagnosis to treatment.
PMID: 21843964
Oscillatory activity in the globus pallidus internus: comparison between Parkinson's disease and dystonia.
Deep brain stimulation in the globus pallidus internus (GPi) is used to alleviate the motor symptoms of both Parkinson's disease (PD) and dystonia.
We tested the hypothesis that PD and dystonia are characterized by different temporal patterns of synchronized oscillations in the GPi, and that the dopaminergic loss in PD makes the basal ganglia more susceptible to oscillatory activity.
Neuronal firing and local field potentials (LFPs) were simultaneously recorded from the GPi in four PD patients and seven dystonia patients using two independently driven microelectrodes.
In the PD patients, beta (11-30 Hz) oscillations were observed in the LFPs and the firing activity of ∼30% of the neurons was significantly coherent with the LFP.
However, in the dystonia group, the peak frequency of LFP oscillations was lower (8-20 Hz) and there was a significantly smaller proportion of neurons (∼10%) firing in coherence with the LFP (P<0.001).
These findings suggest that synchronization of neuronal firing with LFP oscillations is a more prominent feature in PD than in dystonia.
This study adds to the growing evidence that dopaminergic loss in PD may increase the sensitivity of the basal ganglia network to rhythmic oscillatory inputs.
PMID: 21842440
Screening LRRK2 gene mutations in patients with Parkinson's disease in Ghana.
PMID: 21841671
Parkinson's: treating the symptoms.
Parkinson's disease is frequently encountered in general nursing environments and particularly those dealing with older adults.
There are a range of drug treatments and other therapies available that can be used to enhance the quality of life and social engagement of people who have the condition.
The drugs need careful administration and attention to detail in terms of dose and timing.
This is where nurses, especially Parkinson's disease nurse specialists, have an important role to play.
PMID: 21840789
Congenital erythropoietic porphyria and Parkinson's disease: clinical association in a patient with a long-term follow-up.
PMID: 21840542
Monitoring therapeutic effects in Parkinson's disease by serial imaging of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic pathway.
PET and SPECT are very sensitive techniques to detect in-vivo nigrostriatal degeneration in Parkinson's disease, even in the pre-motor phase of the disease.
Furthermore, these techniques are able to measure disease progression.
However, caution must be used in the interpretation of studies in which therapeutic effects in Parkinson's disease were also monitored by serial imaging of nigrostriatal neurons, as disparity between imaging and clinical outcomes has been reported in several clinical studies.
PMID: 21840242
Differentiating Parkinson's disease from multiple system atrophy by [123I] meta-iodobenzylguanidine myocardial scintigraphy and olfactory test.
We aimed to study whether either [(123)l] myocardial meta-iodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) myocardial scintigraphy or the odor stick identification test for Japanese (OSIT-J) is effective in differentiating Parkinson's disease (PD) from multiple system atrophy (MSA).
We compared the MIBG accumulation and olfactory score between 42 PD and 42 MSA (19 MSA-P and 23 MSA-C) patients in the early stages.
[(123)l] MIBG myocardial scintigraphy showed higher sensitivity and the olfactory test higher specificity in differentiating PD from MSA.
There were significant differences between PD and MSA-C (p = 0.0019) instead of MSA-P (p > 0.05) in the MIBG accumulation, while there were significant differences between PD and MSA-P (p = 0.0003) or MSA-C (p = 0.0003) in the OSIT-J score.
Our data suggest that the olfactory test can be useful as a clinical tool with its higher specificity in differentiating PD from MSA in the early stages and, moreover, support the discrimination of PD from MSA-P.
PMID: 21839756
Emotion and ocular responses in Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disease that affects motor, cognitive, and emotional functioning.
Previous studies reported reduced skin conductance responses in PD patients, compared to healthy older adults when viewing emotionally arousing pictures.
Attenuated skin conductance changes in PD may reflect peripheral autonomic dysfunction (e.g., reduced nerve endings at the sweat gland) or, alternatively, a more central emotional deficit.
The aim of the current study was to investigate a second measure of sympathetic arousal-change in pupil dilation.
Eye movements, a motor-based correlate of emotional processing, were also assessed.
Results indicated that pupil dilation was significantly greater when viewing emotional, compared to neutral pictures for both PD patients and controls.
On the other hand, PD patients made fewer fixations with shorter scan paths, particularly when viewing pleasant pictures.
These results suggest that PD patients show normal sympathetic arousal to affective stimuli (indexed by pupil diameter), but differences in motor correlates of emotion (eye movements).
PMID: 21839480
The mirror system, theory of mind and Parkinson's disease.
The mirror system includes a group of neurons in the monkey cortex that discharge both when a movement is executed and when that same movement is observed.
An equivalent system in humans has been proposed to mediate action and emotion understanding, being therefore related to theory of mind.
Theory of mind (TOM) is the ability to infer our own or, more frequently, other person's mental states.
It is severely impaired in disorders of the autistic spectrum, but it is also affected in other neurological diseases including Parkinson's disease (PD).
Two recent studies have shown that the basal ganglia may be involved in action observation, as the subthalamic nucleus shows changes in activity during movement observation similar to those observed during movement execution.
These findings suggest that the basal ganglia may be involved in mirror circuit activity, which might be affected in PD in a similar way to normal movement execution.
Given the relationship between the mirror system and theory of mind, we hypothesize that TOM deficits in PD might be at least partially mediated by mirror system dysfunction.
PMID: 21839478
Clinical aspects of impulsive compulsive behaviours in Parkinson's disease.
Impulsive-compulsive behaviours (ICBs) are an increasingly well-recognised adverse-effect of dopaminergic medications used to treat Parkinson's disease.
ICBs include pathological gambling, compulsive sexual behaviour, compulsive buying, and binge eating, together with punding and the addiction-like compulsive use of dopamine replacement therapy, or dopamine dysregulation syndrome.
The prevalence of ICBs was approximately 14% in a large study undertaken in specialist movement disorder clinics.
Dopamine dysregulation syndrome is more associated with compulsive l-dopa use, whereas other ICBs are more linked with oral dopamine agonist use.
Other mechanisms implicated in the development and perpetuation of ICBs in PD include aberrant learning from reward-related situations, including decreased learning from negative feedback, increased measures of impulsivity or sensation seeking, and strong preference for immediate over future rewards.
Treatment options for impulsive-compulsive behaviours include pharmacological, surgical and psychological interventions.
The early recognition and prevention of ICBs, coupled with awareness of clinical risk factors for the development of these behaviours is of paramount importance, given the lack of specific treatments for these sometimes debilitating behaviours.
PMID: 21838671
Drug targets from genetics: alpha-synuclein.
One of the critical issues in Parkinson disease (PD) research is the identity of the specific toxic, pathogenic moiety.
In PD, mutations in alpha-synuclein (αsyn) or multiplication of the SNCA gene encoding αsyn, result in a phenotype of cellular inclusions, cell death, and brain dysfunction.
While the historical point of view has been that the macroscopic aggregates containing αsyn are the toxic species, in the last several years evidence has emerged that suggests instead that smaller soluble species - likely oligomers containing misfolded αsyn - are actually the toxic moiety and that the fibrillar inclusions may even be a cellular detoxification pathway and less harmful.
If soluble misfolded species of αsyn are the toxic moieties, then cellular mechanisms that degrade misfolded αsyn would be neuroprotective and a rational target for drug development.
In this review we will discuss the fundamental mechanisms underlying αsyn toxicity including oligomer formation, oxidative stress, and degradation pathways and consider rational therapeutic strategies that may have the potential to prevent or halt αsyn induced pathogenesis in PD.
PMID: 21838506
Site of deep brain stimulation and jaw velocity in Parkinson disease.
While deep brain stimulation (DBS) has proven to be an effective treatment for many symptoms of Parkinson disease (PD), a deterioration of axial symptoms frequently occurs, particularly for speech and swallowing.
These unfavorable effects of DBS may depend on the site of stimulation.
The authors made quantitative measures of jaw velocity to compare the relative effectiveness of DBS in the globus pallidus internus (GPi) or the subthalamic nucleus (STN).
This was a randomized, double-blind, and longitudinal study, with matched healthy controls.
The peak velocities of self-scaled and externally scaled jaw movements were studied in 27 patients with PD before and after 6 months of bilateral DBS in the GPi or the STN.
A mixed-effects model was used to identify differences in jaw velocity before DBS surgery (baseline) while off and on levodopa therapy, and after 6 months of DBS (postoperative) during 4 treatment conditions (off- and on-levodopa states with and without DBS).
Self-scaled jaw velocity was impaired by the DBS procedure in the STN; velocity was significantly decreased across all postoperative conditions compared with either the off- or on-levodopa baseline conditions.
In contrast, the postoperative velocity in the GPi group was generally faster than the baseline off-levodopa state.
Turning the DBS off and on had no effect on jaw velocity in either group.
Unlike baseline, levodopa therapy postoperatively no longer increased jaw velocity in either group, and this lack of effect was not related to postoperative changes in dose.
The externally scaled jaw velocity was little affected by PD, but DBS still slightly affected performance, with the STN group significantly slower than the GPi group for most conditions.
The authors' results suggest that either the electrode implant in STN or the subsequent period of continuous STN stimulation negatively affected voluntary jaw velocity, including the loss of the preoperative levodopa-induced improvement.
While the GPi group showed some improvement in voluntary jaw velocity postoperatively, their performance during the combination of DBS and levodopa was not different from their best medical management presurgery.
The results have implications for DBS target selection, particularly for those patients with oromotor dysfunctions.
PMID: 21836035
Psychosis associated to Parkinson's disease in the early stages: relevance of cognitive decline and depression.
To evaluate the prevalence of psychosis associated with Parkinson's disease (PSY-PD) in its early stages, its incidence over a 24 month follow-up period and the association with motor and non-motor clinical features.
PRIAMO is a 2 year longitudinal observational study that has enrolled patients with parkinsonism in 55 Italian centres.
A cohort of 495 patients with early disease stage PD (baseline Hoehn and Yahr score ≤ 2, disease's duration (median) 3.4 years) were followed for 2 years.
PSY-PD was evaluated by means of a clinician rated questionnaire and defined as the presence of at least one of the following symptoms occurring for at least 1 month: illusions, hallucinations, jealousy ideas and persecutory ideas.
Patients with and without PSY-PD were compared on several clinical variables, encompassing motor and non-motor features.
The prevalence of PSY-PD at baseline was 3%; the incidences at 12 and 24 months were 5.2% and 7.7%, respectively.
Longer disease duration and prescription of dopamine agonists at baseline were associated with the development of PSY-PD over the 24 month period.
At this follow-up time, worse disease severity, decline in cognitive performances, presence of depressive symptoms and anxiety were more frequently observed in PSY-PD.
Psychotic type symptoms may occur in the early stages of PD although less frequently than in later stages.
Beyond dopaminergic treatment, there are disease related factors, such as disease severity and the occurrence of cognitive and depressive symptoms, which may underlie the onset of psychotic type symptoms from the earliest stages.
PMID: 21836031
The relationship between motor planning and freezing of gait in Parkinson's disease.
To examine how a cued change in motor plan influences Parkinson's disease (PD) patients with freezing of gait (FOG) (PD FOG; n=10), compared with those without FOG (PD non-FOG; n=10) and healthy controls (n=10).
Participants walked through a doorway in three experimental conditions: no cue; cue before gait initiation; and cue after gait initiation.
The light cue was presented at the end of the pathway and signified that individuals must walk to the cue, turn around and return to starting position.
Step-to-step variability (a known precursor to FOG) revealed a significant main effect of group (F2,27=32.83, p<0.001), where PD FOG walked with greater step length variability than PD non-FOG and the control group.
A significant interaction (F4,54=3.035, p=0.025) demonstrated that only the PD FOG group was most variable when the cue was present before gait initiation.
This study concludes that motor planning deficits affect gait, specifically in individuals who experience FOG.
This may have important implications for the design of therapeutic interventions in PD FOG.
PMID: 21834788
Mini-Mental Parkinson (MMP) as a Dementia Screening Test: Comparison with the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE).
Background: As populations age, screening instruments for cognitive impairment and dementia will become of increasing importance in clinical practice.
Mini-Mental Parkinson (MMP), a derivative of the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), was originally described as a cognitive screening instrument for use in Parkinson's disease.
Its item content addresses some of the acknowledged shortcomings of the MMSE.
Pragmatic use of MMP in general cognitive clinics has not previously been examined.
Aim: To compare the performance of two scales, Mini-Mental Parkinson (MMP) and the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), as cognitive screening instruments for dementia in a memory clinic population.
Methods: MMP was administered prospectively to 201 consecutive new patient referrals independent of other tests used to establish dementia diagnosis according to standard diagnostic criteria (DSM-IV).
Diagnostic utility of MMP for dementia was measured and compared with MMSE.
Results: MMP proved easy to use and acceptable to patients.
Optimal test accuracy (0.86) was at MMP cutoff of ≤ 17/32, with sensitivity 0.51, specificity 0.97, positive predictive value 0.83, negative predictive value 0.87, and area under Receiver Operating Characteristic curve 0.89.
Using a higher cutoff (≤ 29/32), MMP sensitivity was 1.00 with specificity 0.70.
MMP scores correlated with MMSE (r = 0.93) and diagnostic agreement was high (k = 0.85).
Conclusions: MMP is a useful screening instrument in the memory clinic setting, with patients who fall below the designated cutoff requiring further investigation to ascertain a cause for their cognitive impairment.
PMID: 21833079
Regenerative medicine: Bespoke cells for the human brain.
PMID: 21833065
Experimental therapies for Parkinson's disease: Why fake it?
PMID: 21832232
The strong presence of REM sleep behavior disorder in PD: clinical and research implications.
PMID: 21832222
MRI measurements predict PSP in unclassifiable parkinsonisms: a cohort study.
Magnetic resonance parkinsonism index (MRPI) has been proposed as a powerful tool to discriminate patients with progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) from those with Parkinson disease (PD) or other parkinsonisms, on an individual basis.
We investigated the usefulness of MRPI in predicting the clinical evolution in PSP of patients with clinically unclassifiable parkinsonism (CUP), i.e., parkinsonism not fulfilling the established clinical diagnostic criteria for any parkinsonian disorders, using a cohort study.
Forty-five patients with CUP underwent baseline clinical evaluation and MRI with calculation of MRPI.
All patients were divided in 2 groups according to MRPI values.
A group included 30 patients with CUP with normal MRPI values while the other group included 15 patients with CUP with MRPI values suggestive of PSP (higher than 13.55).
A clinical follow-up was performed in all patients.
Duration of clinical follow-up in these 2 groups was 28.4 ± 11.7 months (mean ± SD).
None of the patients with CUP with normal MRPI values fulfilled established clinical criteria for PSP (follow-up ranging from 24 to 60 months).
By contrast, 11 of 15 patients with CUP with abnormal MRPI values (higher than 13.55) developed during the follow-up (range from 6 to 48 months) additional clinical features characteristic of probable (1 patient) or possible (10 patients) PSP.
MRPI showed a higher accuracy in predicting PSP (92.9%) than clinical features, such as vertical ocular slowness or first-year falls (61.9% and 73.8%, respectively).
Our findings suggest that MRPI is more powerful than clinical features in predicting the evolution of CUP toward PSP phenotypes.
PMID: 21832218
Extended-release pramipexole in early Parkinson disease: a 33-week randomized controlled trial.
To assess the clinical efficacy of a novel once-daily extended-release (ER) formulation of the dopamine agonist pramipexole as monotherapy in patients with early Parkinson disease (PD) and establish its noninferiority vs standard immediate-release (IR) pramipexole.
This was a multicenter, double-blind, parallel study of patients with early PD not receiving levodopa or dopamine agonists, randomly assigned to pramipexole IR, pramipexole ER, or placebo.
Seven-week flexible titration was followed by 26-week maintenance, with levodopa permitted as rescue medication.
The primary analysis was to test pramipexole ER noninferiority to pramipexole IR based on a change in the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) part II+III score at 33 weeks, with noninferiority predefined as a treatment group difference for which the lower bound of the 95% confidence interval (CI) did not exceed -3 points.
Among 213 ER and 207 IR recipients, the adjusted mean 33-week UPDRS II+III change (excluding levodopa rescue effects) was -8.2 for ER and -8.7 for IR, a difference of -0.5 with a 95% CI of -2.3 to 1.3.
Compared with placebo (n = 103), pramipexole ER and pramipexole IR were significantly superior on UPDRS II+III score, all key secondary outcomes, and almost all other endpoints.
On the 39-item Parkinson Disease Questionnaire, superiority of pramipexole ER failed to reach statistical significance.
Both formulations were equally safe and well-tolerated.
As monotherapy for early PD, pramipexole ER was noninferior to pramipexole IR and significantly more effective than placebo.
Tolerability and safety did not differ between the formulations.
This study provides Class I evidence that pramipexole ER is not inferior to pramipexole IR in patients with early PD.
PMID: 21832216
Extended-release pramipexole in advanced Parkinson disease: a randomized controlled trial.
In advanced Parkinson disease (PD), immediate-release pramipexole, taken 3 times daily, improves symptoms and quality of life.
A once-daily extended-release formulation may be an effective and simple alternative therapy.
For a multicenter randomized, double-blind, parallel trial of extended- and immediate-release pramipexole vs placebo, patients experiencing motor fluctuations while taking levodopa underwent flexible study drug titration and then maintenance at optimized dosage (0.375-4.5 mg/day).
The primary endpoint was a change in the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) part II+III score at 18 weeks, with further assessments at 33 weeks in a subset of patients.
Adverse events were recorded throughout.
Among 507 patients in the 18-week analyses, UPDRS II+III scores decreased (from baseline means of 40.0-41.7) by an adjusted mean of -11.0 for extended-release pramipexole and -12.8 for immediate-release pramipexole vs -6.1 for placebo (p = 0.0001 and p < 0.0001) and off-time decreased (from baseline means of 5.8-6.0 hours/day) by an adjusted mean of -2.1 and -2.5 vs -1.4 hours/day (p = 0.0199 and p < 0.0001).
Other outcomes were largely corroborative, including a significant improvement in early morning off symptoms.
Among 249 pramipexole patients completing 33 weeks, UPDRS II+III and off-time findings showed ≤10.1% change from 18-week values.
Both formulations were well-tolerated.
Extended-release pramipexole significantly improved UPDRS score and off-time compared with placebo, with similar efficacy, tolerability, and safety of immediate-release pramipexole compared with placebo.
This study provides Class I evidence that the extended-release form of pramipexole, taken once daily, is efficacious as an adjunct to levodopa in advanced PD.
PMID: 21832215
Associated factors for REM sleep behavior disorder in Parkinson disease.
To investigate the frequency, phenomenology, and associated risk factors of REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) in Parkinson disease (PD).
An unselected cohort of sleep-disturbed patients with PD (n=457) was investigated with video-supported polysomnography.
We determined the frequency of RBD and analyzed the influence of age, clinical disease features, disease duration, cognitive and physical impairment, medication, comorbidity, and sleep architecture.
The overall frequency of RBD was 46%.
According to our cohort and modified definition, there was no preferred PD subtype for RBD (p=0.142).
There was no gender preference (p=0.770).
RBD was associated with older age (p=0.000).
Adjusted for age and gender, patients with PD and RBD had longer disease duration (p=0.024), higher Hoehn & Yahr stages (p=0.002), more falls (p=0.018), more fluctuations (p=0.005), more psychiatric comorbidity (p=0.026), and a higher dose of levodopa (p=0.002).
The presence of RBD was related to slightly increased sleep efficiency (p=0.007), a higher amount of REM sleep (p=0.000), and more periodic leg movements during sleep (p=0.019).
RBD is a frequent and clinically relevant nocturnal disturbance for all stages of PD.
It increases with age and disease duration and may contribute to the nocturnal problems of patients with PD and their bed partners.
PMID: 21832214
Neurologist care in Parkinson disease: a utilization, outcomes, and survival study.
To investigate the utilization of neurologist providers in the treatment of patients with Parkinson disease (PD) in the United States and determine whether neurologist treatment is associated with improved clinical outcomes.
This was a retrospective observational cohort study of Medicare beneficiaries with PD in the year 2002.
Multilevel logistic regression was used to determine which patient characteristics predicted neurologist care between 2002 and 2005 and compare the age, race, sex, and comorbidity-adjusted annual risk of skilled nursing facility placement and hip fracture between neurologist- and primary care physician-treated patients with PD.
Cox proportional hazards models were used to determine the adjusted 6-year risk of death using incident PD cases, stratified by physician specialty.
More than 138,000 incident PD cases were identified.
Only 58% of patients with PD received neurologist care between 2002 and 2005.
Race and sex were significant demographic predictors of neurologist treatment: women (odds ratio [OR] 0.78, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.76-0.80) and nonwhites (OR 0.83, 95% CI 0.79-0.87) were less likely to be treated by a neurologist.
Neurologist-treated patients were less likely to be placed in a skilled nursing facility (OR 0.79, 95% CI 0.77-0.82) and had a lower risk of hip fracture (OR 0.86, 95% CI 0.80-0.92) in logistic regression models that included demographic, clinical, and socioeconomic covariates.
Neurologist-treated patients also had a lower adjusted likelihood of death (hazard ratio 0.78, 95% CI 0.77-0.79).
Women and minorities with PD obtain specialist care less often than white men.
Neurologist care of patients with PD may be associated with improved selected clinical outcomes and greater survival.
PMID: 21832212
Do neurologists make a difference in Parkinson disease care?
PMID: 21832061
Hsc70 protein interaction with soluble and fibrillar alpha-synuclein.
The aggregation of α-synuclein (α-Syn), the primary component of Lewy bodies, into high molecular weight assemblies is strongly associated with Parkinson disease.
This event is believed to result from a conformational change within native α-Syn.
Molecular chaperones exert critical housekeeping functions in vivo including refolding, maintaining in a soluble state, and/or pacifying protein aggregates.
The influence of the stress-induced heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) on α-Syn aggregation has been notably investigated.
The constitutively expressed chaperone Hsc70 acts as an antiaggregation barrier before cells are overwhelmed with α-Syn aggregates and Hsp70 expression induced.
Here, we investigate the interaction between Hsc70 and α-Syn, the consequences of this interaction, and the role of nucleotides and co-chaperones Hdj1 and Hdj2 as modulators.
We show that Hsc70 sequesters soluble α-Syn in an assembly incompetent complex in the absence of ATP.
The affinity of Hsc70 for soluble α-Syn diminishes upon addition of ATP alone or together with its co-chaperones Hdj1 or Hdj2 allowing faster binding and release of client proteins thus abolishing α-Syn assembly inhibition by Hsc70.
We show that Hsc70 binds α-Syn fibrils with a 5-fold tighter affinity compared with soluble α-Syn.
This suggests that Hsc70 preferentially interacts with high molecular weight α-Syn assemblies in vivo.
Hsc70 binding certainly has an impact on the physicochemical properties of α-Syn assemblies.
We show a reduced cellular toxicity of α-Syn fibrils coated with Hsc70 compared with "naked" fibrils.
Hsc70 may therefore significantly affect the cellular propagation of α-Syn aggregates and their spread throughout the central nervous system in Parkinson disease.
PMID: 21832049
Interactions of pathological hallmark proteins: tubulin polymerization promoting protein/p25, beta-amyloid, and alpha-synuclein.
The disordered tubulin polymerization promoting protein (TPPP/p25) was found to be co-enriched in neuronal and glial inclusions with α-synuclein in Parkinson disease and multiple system atrophy, respectively; however, co-occurrence of α-synuclein with β-amyloid (Aβ) in human brain inclusions has been recently reported, suggesting the existence of mixed type pathologies that could result in obstacles in the correct diagnosis and treatment.
Here we identified TPPP/p25 as an interacting partner of the soluble Aβ oligomers as major risk factors for Alzheimer disease using ProtoArray human protein microarray.
The interactions of oligomeric Aβ with proteins involved in the etiology of neurological disorders were characterized by ELISA, surface plasmon resonance, pelleting experiments, and tubulin polymerization assay.
We showed that the Aβ(42) tightly bound to TPPP/p25 (K(d) = 85 nm) and caused aberrant protein aggregation by inhibiting the physiologically relevant TPPP/p25-derived microtubule assembly.
The pair-wise interactions of Aβ(42), α-synuclein, and tubulin were found to be relatively weak; however, these three components formed soluble ternary complex exclusively in the absence of TPPP/p25.
The aggregation-facilitating activity of TPPP/p25 and its interaction with Aβ was monitored by electron microscopy with purified proteins by pelleting experiments with cell-free extracts as well as by confocal microscopy with CHO cells expressing TPPP/p25 or amyloid.
The finding that the interaction of TPPP/p25 with Aβ can produce pathological-like aggregates is tightly coupled with unusual pathology of the Alzheimer disease revealed previously; that is, partial co-localization of Aβ and TPPP/p25 in the case of diffuse Lewy body disease with Alzheimer disease.
PMID: 21831682
The enigma of the E326K mutation in acid β-glucocerebrosidase.
A large number of mutations, and several polymorphisms, have been characterized in the GBA gene, encoding the lysosomal enzyme glucocerebrosidase, the activity of which is impaired in Gaucher disease.
In this communication we summarize published and new data concerning biochemical characterization of the E326K amino acid change (1093G>A in the GBA1 cDNA) in tissue culture and its association with Parkinson disease, suggesting it is a disease causing mutation and not merely a polymorphism in the GBA gene.
PMID: 21831400
Imaging correlates of apathy and depression in Parkinson's disease.
Though the core symptoms of Parkinson's disease (PD) are motor-related, a majority of patients also have neuropsychiatric symptoms concerning mood, behavior and cognition.
Apathy and depression are considered among the most frequent ones, and have a negative impact on global functioning and quality of life.
Recent neuroimaging studies have provided specific findings related with these symptoms.
Depression in PD has been specifically associated with morphological and functional changes in prefrontal cortex, cingulate and thalamus, as with 5-HT transmission reduction in posterior cingulated and amygdala-hippocampus complex.
Apathy has received less attention, but has been related with gray matter volume reductions or functional deficits in many regions, as anterior and posterior cingulate and dorsolateral or inferior frontal gyrus.
Some of these deficits may be also related with a more pronounced reduction in striatal dopamine transmission.
As neuroimaging studies give more arguments to the mechanisms of these symptoms, they also stimulate research for a better individualization of specific affective dimensions in Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21831297
Overnight switch from ropinirole to transdermal rotigotine patch in patients with Parkinson disease.
A recent trial involving predominantly Caucasian subjects with Parkinson Disease (PD) showed switching overnight from an oral dopaminergic agonist to the rotigotine patch was well tolerated without loss of efficacy.
However, no such data have been generated for Korean patients.
This open-label multicenter trial investigated PD patients whose symptoms were not satisfactorily controlled by ropinirole, at a total daily dose of 3 mg to 12 mg, taken as monotherapy or as an adjunct to levodopa.
Switching treatment from oral ropinirole to transdermal rotigotine was carried out overnight, with a dosage ratio of 1.5:1.
After a 28-day treatment period, the safety and tolerability of switching was evaluated.
Due to the exploratory nature of this trial, the effects of rotigotine on motor and nonmotor symptoms of PD were analyzed in a descriptive manner.
Of the 116 subjects who received at least one treatment, 99 (85%) completed the 28-day trial period.
Dose adjustments were required for 11 subjects who completed the treatment period.
A total of 76 treatment-emergent adverse events (AEs) occurred in 45 subjects.
No subject experienced a serious AE.
Thirteen subjects discontinued rotigotine prematurely due to AEs.
Efficacy results suggested improvements in both motor and nonmotor symptoms and quality of life after switching.
Fifty-two subjects (46%) agreed that they preferred using the patch over oral medications, while 31 (28%) disagreed.
Switching treatment overnight from oral ropinirole to transdermal rotigotine patch, using a dosage ratio of 1.5:1, was well tolerated in Korean patients with no loss of efficacy.
This trial is registered with the ClincalTrails.gov Registry (NCT00593606).
PMID: 21829882
[Violence in the caregiver-patient dyad in Parkinson disease: 3 measurement methods].
PMID: 21829612
Disease severity and progression in progressive supranuclear palsy and multiple system atrophy: validation of the NNIPPS--Parkinson Plus Scale.
The Natural History and Neuroprotection in Parkinson Plus Syndromes (NNIPPS) study was a large phase III randomized placebo-controlled trial of riluzole in Progressive Supranuclear Palsy (PSP, n = 362) and Multiple System Atrophy (MSA, n = 398).
To assess disease severity and progression, we constructed and validated a new clinical rating scale as an ancillary study.
Patients were assessed at entry and 6-montly for up to 3 years.
Evaluation of the scale's psychometric properties included reliability (n = 116), validity (n = 760), and responsiveness (n = 642).
Among the 85 items of the initial scale, factor analysis revealed 83 items contributing to 15 clinically relevant dimensions, including Activity of daily Living/Mobility, Axial bradykinesia, Limb bradykinesia, Rigidity, Oculomotor, Cerebellar, Bulbar/Pseudo-bulbar, Mental, Orthostatic, Urinary, Limb dystonia, Axial dystonia, Pyramidal, Myoclonus and Tremor.
All but the Pyramidal dimension demonstrated good internal consistency (Cronbach α ≥ 0.70).
Inter-rater reliability was high for the total score (Intra-class coefficient = 0.94) and 9 dimensions (Intra-class coefficient = 0.80-0.93), and moderate (Intra-class coefficient = 0.54-0.77) for 6.
Correlations of the total score with other clinical measures of severity were good (rho ≥ 0.70).
The total score was significantly and linearly related to survival (p<0.0001).
Responsiveness expressed as the Standardized Response Mean was high for the total score slope of change (SRM = 1.10), though higher in PSP (SRM = 1.25) than in MSA (SRM = 1.0), indicating a more rapid progression of PSP.
The slope of change was constant with increasing disease severity demonstrating good linearity of the scale throughout disease stages.
Although MSA and PSP differed quantitatively on the total score at entry and on rate of progression, the relative contribution of clinical dimensions to overall severity and progression was similar.
The NNIPPS-PPS has suitable validity, is reliable and sensitive, and therefore is appropriate for use in clinical studies with PSP or MSA.
ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00211224.
PMID: 21829596
Copy number variation in familial Parkinson disease.
Copy number variants (CNVs) are known to cause Mendelian forms of Parkinson disease (PD), most notably in SNCA and PARK2.
PARK2 has a recessive mode of inheritance; however, recent evidence demonstrates that a single CNV in PARK2 (but not a single missense mutation) may increase risk for PD.
We recently performed a genome-wide association study for PD that excluded individuals known to have either a LRRK2 mutation or two PARK2 mutations.
Data from the Illumina370Duo arrays were re-clustered using only white individuals with high quality intensity data, and CNV calls were made using two algorithms, PennCNV and QuantiSNP.
After quality assessment, the final sample included 816 cases and 856 controls.
Results varied between the two CNV calling algorithms for many regions, including the PARK2 locus (genome-wide p = 0.04 for PennCNV and p = 0.13 for QuantiSNP).
However, there was consistent evidence with both algorithms for two novel genes, USP32 and DOCK5 (empirical, genome-wide p-values<0.001).
PARK2 CNVs tended to be larger, and all instances that were molecularly tested were validated.
In contrast, the CNVs in both novel loci were smaller and failed to replicate using real-time PCR, MLPA, and gel electrophoresis.
The DOCK5 variation is more akin to a VNTR than a typical CNV and the association is likely caused by artifact due to DNA source.
DNA for all the cases was derived from whole blood, while the DNA for all controls was derived from lymphoblast cell lines.
The USP32 locus contains many SNPs with low minor allele frequency leading to a loss of heterozygosity that may have been spuriously interpreted by the CNV calling algorithms as support for a deletion.
Thus, only the CNVs within the PARK2 locus could be molecularly validated and associated with PD susceptibility.
PMID: 21829225
People of the British Isles: preliminary analysis of genotypes and surnames in a UK-control population.
There is a great deal of interest in a fine-scale population structure in the UK, both as a signature of historical immigration events and because of the effect population structure may have on disease association studies.
Although population structure appears to have a minor impact on the current generation of genome-wide association studies, it is likely to have a significant part in the next generation of studies designed to search for rare variants.
A powerful way of detecting such structure is to control and document carefully the provenance of the samples involved.
In this study, we describe the collection of a cohort of rural UK samples (The People of the British Isles), aimed at providing a well-characterised UK-control population that can be used as a resource by the research community, as well as providing a fine-scale genetic information on the British population.
So far, some 4000 samples have been collected, the majority of which fit the criteria of coming from a rural area and having all four grandparents from approximately the same area.
Analysis of the first 3865 samples that have been geocoded indicates that 75% have a mean distance between grandparental places of birth of 37.3 km, and that about 70% of grandparental places of birth can be classed as rural.
Preliminary genotyping of 1057 samples demonstrates the value of these samples for investigating a fine-scale population structure within the UK, and shows how this can be enhanced by the use of surnames.
PMID: 21827877
Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21827489
Similar potency of catechin and its enantiomers in alleviating 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium ion cytotoxicity in SH-SY5Y cells.
Previously, the flavonoid (±)-catechin was shown to exert potent neuroprotective action in the mouse 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine-induced Parkinson's disease model.
The purpose of this study was to investigate whether the different enantiomers of catechin ((+)-catechin, (-)-catechin and (±)-catechin, a 50:50 mixture of (+)-catechin and (-)-catechin) could protect SH-SY5Y cells against 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium ion (MPP(+) ) toxicity by decreasing the generation of oxygen free radicals.
The inhibitive effect of (±)-catechin on JNK/c-Jun activation was investigated.
The effects of (+)-catechin, (-)-catechin or (±)-catechin in protecting against MPP(+) toxicity were evaluated and compared in SH-SY5Y cells by testing the release of lactate dehydrogenase.
The generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) was measured by immunochemistry and the phosphorylation level of JNK/c-Jun was determined by Western blotting.
In SH-SY5Y cells, (+)-catechin, (-)-catechin or (±)-catechin reduced apoptosis induced by MPP(+) and decreased ROS generation caused by MPP(+) .
Different enantiomers of catechin showed protective effects at similar potency.
Moreover (±)-catechin decreased JNK/c-Jun phosphorylation which was increased by MPP(+).
  Catechin and its two enantiomers could protect SH-SY5Y cells against MPP(+) cytotoxicity at a similar potency.
Antioxidative stress and inhibition of the JNK/c-Jun signalling pathway might have been involved in the neuroprotective mechanisms of catechin against MPP(+) cytotoxicity in SH-SY5Y cells.
PMID: 21826887
Caring for bladder dysfunctions in patients with Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease and parkinson-like syndromes are frequently associated with disautonomic disorders, particularly urinary symptoms, with various degrees of severity.
Urinary symptoms can represent the debut of an extrapiramidal syndrome and in most cases are urgency and incontinence due to detrusor hyperreflexia.
Urodynamic studies allow to understand the causes of urinary symptoms, and thus makes possible a rational nursing and therapeutic approach.
PMID: 21825240
Resting tremor in Parkinson disease: a negative predictor of levodopa-induced dyskinesia.
It is unclear whether patients with different clinical subtypes of Parkinson disease (PD) differ in their risk of developing levodopa-induced dyskinesia (LID) and whether resting tremor is negatively correlated with this risk.
To determine whether resting tremor as an initial manifestation of PD negatively correlated with subsequent occurrence and severity of LID and to study the correlations between LID and other epidemiological factors (eg, age at onset of PD and duration of PD).
Logistic regression analysis was used to determine predictive factors of LID.
Spearman rank correlations between LID and epidemiological factors and motor signs (including tremor) were calculated.
Institutional tertiary referral center for movement disorders.
Cohort of 85 patients with PD.
Occurrence of LID according to the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale part IV.
Resting tremor as an initial manifestation of PD was associated with reduced risk of developing LID independent of other predictors of LID (duration of PD, axial signs, and levodopa dose).
Resting tremor as an initial manifestation of PD predicts lower probability of developing LID under levodopa treatment.
PMID: 21825239
Deep brain stimulation in benign tremulous parkinsonism.
Benign tremulous parkinsonism (BTP) is characterized by prominent resting plus action tremor, mild parkinsonism with limited disability or progression apart from tremor, and a less-robust response to levodopa therapy.
This disorder has an uncertain pathophysiologic relationship to idiopathic Parkinson disease.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) should be efficacious for this condition, but there is no previously published experience.
To assess the clinical outcomes and surgical complications of patients with BTP who underwent DBS.
Retrospective case series.
Tertiary care medical center.
Twelve men and 3 women with BTP who underwent DBS for levodopa-refractory tremor.
Tremor status after DBS, preoperative vs postoperative scores on the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin tremor scale, and the presence of adverse events.
Of the 15 patients, 8 underwent unilateral thalamic nucleus ventralis intermedius (VIM), 4 bilateral VIM, and 3 bilateral subthalamic nucleus DBS.
At last follow-up at a median of 4 years post-DBS, 7 patients were tremor free, 6 had only trace tremor, and 2 were definitely improved but with residual tremor.
The median preoperative Fahn-Tolosa-Marin tremor scale score was 17 (range, 11-21); the tremor scale score at the last videotaped follow-up was 1 (range, 0-6).
Median time between the 2 videotapes was 11.5 months (range, 3-14 months).
No patients experienced adverse events after the surgical procedure.
These findings support the efficacy of DBS, with VIM and STN targets, in medically refractory BTP-related tremor.
Further studies are needed to explore the long-term durability of response and to better compare the surgical targets.
PMID: 21825238
Referring patients for deep brain stimulation: an improving practice.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is a recent treatment modality.
Few studies have examined referral practices for DBS.
To review referral patterns to a large movement disorders center to investigate the current level of knowledge surrounding DBS candidacy.
Retrospective analysis.
Tertiary care medical center.
Reviewed were 197 medical records of patients referred for DBS between December 1, 2005, and November 30, 2009.
Standardized criteria for DBS patient selection were used to categorize referred DBS candidates as the following: good candidates, possible future candidates, poor candidates because of neurological contraindications, or poor candidates because of medical contraindications.
Yearly percentages were computed.
Referral sources were categorized as movement disorder specialists vs non-movement disorder physicians and self-referred.
In total, 165 referrals (83.8%) had ailments for which DBS was indicated, and 100 referrals (50.8%) were good candidates (62 with idiopathic Parkinson disease, 35 with dystonia, and 3 with essential tremor).
Referrals by movement disorder specialists vs other sources differed significantly in their percentages of good candidates (66.7% vs 40.4%, P = .002) and possible future candidates (14.7% vs 32.7%, P = .02) but not poor candidates (18.7% vs 25.0%, P = .60).
Over the observed period of referrals, the yearly percentages significantly decreased for good candidates and increased for possible future candidates and poor candidates.
Compared with findings in prior studies, the quality of DBS referrals has improved.
The increase in referral of possible future candidates and poor candidates may reflect greater confidence in the procedure.
PMID: 21825213
Ten-year outcome of subthalamic stimulation in Parkinson disease: a blinded evaluation.
To assess the 10-year motor outcome of deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus (STN-DBS) in patients with Parkinson disease (PD).
Patients with PD with bilateral STN-DBS were assessed according to the Core Assessment Program for Surgical Interventional Therapies in Parkinson's Disease protocol and videotaped at baseline and 1, 5, and 10 years after surgery.
An independent rater blinded to stimulation and medication condition scored the 10-year video assessments.
Movement Disorders Centre, Toronto Western Hospital, University Health Network, University of Toronto.
Eighteen patients with advanced PD and 10-year follow-up of STN-DBS.
Bilateral STN-DBS surgery.
The primary outcome was the change in blinded Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) motor scores/subscores between the no medication/stimulation condition vs the no medication/no stimulation condition at 10 years.
Secondary outcomes were the changes in blinded UPDRS motor scores between the medication/no stimulation and medication/stimulation conditions, UPDRS II scores, UPDRS IV dyskinesia and motor fluctuations scores, and anti-PD medication dose (levodopa equivalent daily dose) at different points.
In the 18 patients available for follow-up at 10 years, STN-DBS still significantly improved the UPDRS total motor score (P = .007) and resting and action tremor (P < .01 and P = .02, respectively) and bradykinesia (P = .01) subscores.
The UPDRS II scores in the medication and no medication conditions, UPDRS IV dyskinesia and motor fluctuations scores, and the levodopa equivalent daily dose were also significantly reduced compared with baseline.
Axial signs showed the most progressive decline in stimulation and levodopa response over the years.
This class III study provides evidence that stimulation-induced motor improvement was sustained overall at 10 years, although part of the initial benefit wore off mainly because of progressive loss of benefit on axial signs over time.
PMID: 21825080
Once-weekly risedronate for prevention of hip fracture in women with Parkinson's disease: a randomised controlled trial.
Incidence of a fracture, particularly in the hip joint, is high in Parkinson's disease (PD), owing to the immobilisation-induced bone resorption and vitamin D deficiency with reduced bone mineral density (BMD).
The authors previously demonstrated the lowered incidence of hip fractures in PD by daily administration of risedronate and vitamin D.
This randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study was conducted to determine the efficacy of 17.5 mg once-weekly risedronate in the prevention of hip fracture in women with PD.
Patients were randomly assigned to 17.5 mg risedronate once a week (n=136) or a placebo (n=136) combined with daily 1000 IU of ergocalciferol.
Incidence of hip fractures was compared between the two groups during the 2-year follow-up.
Hip fractures occurred in 15 patients in the placebo group and 3 patients in the risedronate group.
The RR for hip fractures in the risedronate group as compared with the placebo group was 0.20 (95% CI 0.06 to 0.66).
In the risedronate group, serum calcium levels decreased during the follow-up, while the levels in the placebo group increased.
BMD increased by 3.4% in the risedronate group and decreased by 3.2% in the placebo group (p<0.01).
Treatment with once-weekly risedronate and ergocalciferol prevents hip fractures in older women with PD.
PMID: 21824799
A randomized pilot trial of estrogen replacement therapy in post-menopausal women with Parkinson's disease.
To assess short-term safety and tolerability of estrogen replacement therapy in post-menopausal women with Parkinson's disease (PD).
In a multi-center randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot trial, post-menopausal women with PD and motor fluctuations received either 0.625 mg/day of conjugated equine estrogens or matching placebo for 8 weeks.
The primary outcome was the ability of participants to complete the trial.
Other outcome measures included adverse events and changes from baseline to Week 8 in Unified PD Rating Scale scores, "on" time, dyskinesia ratings, and neuropsychological test results.
Twenty-three women (age 62.9(6.3) years, total Unified PD Rating 25.0(13.4), 8.8(6.0) years since symptom onset) were enrolled.
There were no serious adverse events.
One subject withdrew due to worsening of tremor and dystonia.
The most commonly reported adverse events were vaginal spotting, breast enlargement and breast tenderness.
The estrogen group showed improved total and motor Unified PD Rating scores although these did not reach statistical significance (mean changes from baseline, estrogen vs.
placebo: Total -5.0 vs.
2.8, treatment effect = -7.8, p = 0.10; Motor -3.0 vs.
2.4, treatment effect = -5.4, p = 0.16).
Estrogen replacement therapy was safe and well-tolerated over 8 weeks in post-menopausal women with advanced PD.
This pilot data suggests that estrogen replacement may be associated with improvement in motor symptoms.
While larger studies of longer duration are necessary to determine the effects of estrogen in PD, the complex risk/benefit profile and continued controversy surrounding estrogen are obstacles to clinical trials.
PMID: 21824629
Altered tryptophan metabolism in Parkinson's disease: a possible novel therapeutic approach.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is one of the most common disabling neurodegenerative diseases.
Although several therapeutic approaches are available, there are two major unresolved issues: the lack of proved neuroprotective therapy and the treatment of L-dopa-induced motor complications.
In the brain, 90% of the tryptophan is metabolized in the kynurenine pathway.
Some of the intermediates, such as quinolinic acid and 3-hydroxy kynurenine, are neurotoxic, while others, such as kynurenic acid, are putative intrinsic neuroprotective compounds, mainly by acting as endogenous antagonists of ionotropic excitatory amino acid receptors.
Alterations in the kynurenine pathway have been demonstrated in PD.
Preclinical data suggest that intervention in the kynurenine pathway may result in neuroprotection and may alleviate L-dopa-induced dyskinesia.
There are two alternative approaches for such intervention: the use of kynurenic acid analogues or pro-drugs, or modulation of the activities of the intrinsic enzymes of the pathway.
PMID: 21822547
Orthostatic Hypotension Is Differentially Associated with the Cerebellar Versus the Parkinsonian Variant of Multiple System Atrophy: a Comparative Study.
Orthostatic hypotension (OH) is a cardinal feature of autonomic failure in multiple system atrophy (MSA); however, there are few comparative data on OH in the motor subtypes of MSA.
In the present retrospective study, postural blood pressure drop after 3 min of standing was determined in 16 patients with the cerebellar variant of MSA (MSA-C) and in 17 patients with the Parkinson variant (MSA-P).
Twenty idiopathic Parkinson's disease (IPD) patients matched for age, sex, disease duration and dopaminergic therapy served as control group.
OH frequency and severity were more pronounced in MSA-C followed by MSA-P and IPD.
Differences in brainstem pathology are likely to account for the tight association of MSA-C and OH.
A simple standing test should be obligatory in the work-up of patients with sporadic late-onset ataxias.
PMID: 21821107
Characterization and evaluation of chitosan nanoparticles for dopamine brain delivery.
The aim of this study was to characterize nanoparticles (NPs) composed of chitosan (CS) and evaluate their potential for brain delivery of the neurotransmitter Dopamine (DA).
For this purpose, CS based NPs were incubated with DA at two different concentrations giving rise to nanocarriers denoted as DA/CSNPs (1) and DA/CSNPs (5), respectively.
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) analysis confirmed that DA was adsorbed onto the external surface of such NPs.
The cytotoxic effect of the CSNPs and DA/CSNPs was assessed using the MTT test and it was found that the nanovectors are less cytotoxic than the neurotransmitter DA after 3 h of incubation time.
Transport studies across MDCKII-MDR1 cell line showed that DA/CSNPs (5) give rise to a significant transport enhancing effect compared with the control and greater than the corresponding DA/CSNPs (1).
Measurement of reactive oxygen species (ROS) suggested a low DA/CSNPs neurotoxicity after 3 h.
In vivo brain microdialysis experiments in rat showed that intraperitoneal acute administration of DA/CSNPs (5) (6-12 mg/kg) induced a dose-dependent increase in striatal DA output.
Thus, these CS nanoparticles represent an interesting technological platform for DA brain delivery and, hence, may be useful for Parkinson's disease treatment.
PMID: 21820940
Which measures of physical function and motor impairment best predict quality of life in Parkinson's disease?
Our objective was to compare the relative value of elements of the motor system in predicting the physical mobility domain of health related quality of life in patients with Parkinson's disease in order to specify targets for intervention.
In this cross-sectional study, the Parkinson's disease questionnaire-39 was administered to 263 subjects with Parkinson's disease to assess health related quality of life.
Demographics, motor impairments and physical function were assessed using the Unified Parkinson disease rating scale, 10-m walk test, 6-min walk test, Freezing of gait questionnaire, Timed up & go, functional gait assessment, Berg balance test, functional reach and 9-hole peg test.
The results revealed that demographic factors accounted for 19.7% of the variance in Parkinson disease questionnaire-39 mobility score.
When motor impairments were added to the model, the bradykinesia composite score contributed a significant portion of the variance (R(2) change = 0.12, p < 0.001).
The tremor and rigidity composite scores did not contribute significantly.
The Freezing of gait questionnaire was the strongest predictor (R(2) change = 0.23, p < 0.001) of the physical function tests followed by Functional gait assessment (R(2) change = 0.06, p < 0.001) and 6-min walk test (R(2) change = 0.01, p = 0.01).
Collectively, 61% of the variance in Parkinson disease questionnaire-39 mobility score and 41.5% of the Parkinson disease questionnaire-39(total) score was accounted for.
These results suggest greater value of physical function tests, and not tests of motor impairments, in predicting health related quality of life.
PMID: 21820129
Assessing the role of dopamine in limb and cranial-oromotor control in a rat model of Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder primarily characterized by sensorimotor dysfunction.
The neuropathology of PD includes a loss of dopamine (DA) neurons of the nigrostriatal pathway.
Classic signs of the disease include rigidity, bradykinesia, and postural instability.
However, as many as 90% of patients also experience significant deficits in speech, swallowing (including mastication), and respiratory control.
Oromotor deficits such as these are underappreciated, frequently emerging during the early, often hemi-Parkinson, stage of the disease.
In this paper, we review tests commonly used in our labs to model early and hemi-Parkinson deficits in rodents.
We have recently expanded our tests to include sensitive models of oromotor deficits.
This paper discusses the most commonly used tests in our lab to model both limb and oromotor deficits, including tests of forelimb-use asymmetry, postural instability, vibrissae-evoked forelimb placing, single limb akinesia, dry pasta handling, sunflower seed shelling, and acoustic analyses of ultrasonic vocalizations and pasta biting strength.
In particular, we lay new groundwork for developing methods for measuring abnormalities in the acoustic patterns during eating that indicate decreased biting strength and irregular intervals between bites in the hemi-Parkinson rat.
Similar to limb motor deficits, oromotor deficits, at least to some degree, appear to be modulated by nigrostriatal DA.
Finally, we briefly review the literature on targeted motor rehabilitation effects in PD models.
LEARNING OUTCOMES: Readers will: (a) understand how a unilateral lesion to the nigrostriatal pathway affects limb use, (b) understand how a unilateral lesion to the nigrostriatal pathway affects oromotor function, and (c) gain an understanding of how limb motor deficits and oromotor deficits appear to involve dopamine and are modulated by training.
PMID: 21819982
5-HT(1A) receptor stimulation and L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia in Parkinson's disease: bridging the gap between serotonergic and glutamatergic mechanisms.
PMID: 21819188
Stridor and dysphagia associated with subthalamic nucleus stimulation in Parkinson disease.
Refractory symptoms in Parkinson disease show good response to deep brain stimulation (DBS).
This procedure improves United Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale scores and reduces dyskinesias, whereas speech and swallowing dysfunction typically do not improve and may even worsen.
Rarely, DBS can cause idiosyncratic dystonias of muscle groups, including those of the neck and throat.
The authors describe a patient experiencing stridor and dysphagia with confirmed pulmonary restriction and aspiration following subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulator adjustment, with a resolution of symptoms and signs when the stimulator was switched off.
PMID: 21817179
[A new rehabilitation strategy for patients with Parkinson disease: a proposal of mentality-orientated rehabilitation].
Rehabilitation, a treatment strategy that involves group effort with multiple specialists, roles, and facilities, is widely offered to patients in need.
The current rehabilitation strategy is mainly disability oriented, and, in principle, starts from the evaluation of motor function and aims to strengthen the deteriorated function/s.
Therefore, this method is very effective for patients with acute diseases.
However, the effect of such a rehabilitation strategy on gradually progressive neurodegenerative diseases is not well clarified.
In particular, Disability-oriented Rehabilitation has not shown an adequate effect in Parkinson disease, which is associated with psychological stress.
In this report, we provide an outline of a new rehabilitation strategy and introduce Mentality-oriented Rehabilitation for patients with Parkinson disease.
PMID: 21816921
Altered microstructure in corticospinal tract in idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus: comparison with Alzheimer disease and Parkinson disease with dementia.
Previous neuropathologic studies in chronic hydrocephalus have suggested the presence of white matter damage, presumably from mechanical pressure due to ventricular enlargement and metabolic derangement.
This study aimed to investigate the diffusional properties of the CST in patients with iNPH by using DTI and to determine whether this method could be used as a new diagnostic tool to differentiate patients with iNPH from those with AD and PDD and control subjects.
We enrolled 18 patients with iNPH, 11 patients with AD, 11 patients with PDD, and 19 healthy control subjects.
Diffusion tensor metrics of the segmented CST, including FA values, axial eigenvalues, and radial eigenvalues, were evaluated by using tract-specific analysis.
The anisotropy color-coding tractography of the CST was visually evaluated.
The DTI findings were compared among groups.
Tract-specific analysis of the CST showed that FA values and axial eigenvalues were significantly increased (P < .001), whereas radial eigenvalues were not significantly altered, in patients with iNPH compared with other subjects.
The CST tractographic images in patients with iNPH was visually different from those in other subjects (P < .001).
In discriminating patients with iNPH from other subjects, the CST FA values had a sensitivity of 94% and specificity of 80% at a cutoff value of 0.59.
Our results suggest that patients with iNPH have altered microstructures in the CST.
Quantitative and visual CST evaluation by using DTI may be useful for differentiating patients with iNPH from patients with AD or PDD or healthy subjects.
PMID: 21816674
AMP kinase: the missing link between type 2 diabetes and neurodegenerative diseases?
PMID: 21815648
Levodopa activates apoptosis signaling kinase 1 (ASK1) and promotes apoptosis in a neuronal model: implications for the treatment of Parkinson's disease.
Oxidative stress is implicated in the etiology of Parkinson's disease (PD), the second most common neurodegenerative disease.
PD is treated with chronic administration of l-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (levodopa, L-DOPA), and typically, increasing doses are used during progression of the disease.
Paradoxically, L-DOPA is a pro-oxidant and induces cell death in cellular models of PD through disruption of sulfhydryl homeostasis involving loss of the thiol-disulfide oxidoreductase functions of the glutaredoxin (Grx1) and thioredoxin (Trx1) enzyme systems [Sabens, E.
A., Distler, A.
M., and Mieyal, J.
J.
(2010) Biochemistry 49 (12), 2715-2724].
Considering this loss of both Grx1 and Trx1 activities upon L-DOPA treatment, we sought to elucidate the mechanism(s) of L-DOPA-induced apoptosis.
In other contexts, both the NFκB (nuclear factor κB) pathway and the ASK1 (apoptosis signaling kinase 1) pathway have been shown to be regulated by both Grx1 and Trx1, and both pathways have been implicated in cell death signaling in model systems of PD.
Moreover, mixed lineage kinase (MLK) has been considered as a potential therapeutic target for PD.
Using SHSY5Y cells as model dopaminergic neurons, we found that NFκB activity was not altered by L-DOPA treatment, and the selective MLK inhibitor (CEP-1347) did not protect the cells from L-DOPA.
In contrast, ASK1 was activated with L-DOPA treatment as indicated by phosphorylation of its downstream mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK), p38 and JNK.
Chemical inhibition of either p38 or JNK provided protection from L-DOPA-induced apoptosis.
Moreover, direct knockdown of ASK1 protected from L-DOPA-induced neuronal cell death.
These results identify ASK1 as the main pro-apoptotic pathway activated in response to L-DOPA treatment, implicating it as a potential target for adjunct therapy in PD.
PMID: 21813820
A qualitative study of interference with communicative participation across communication disorders in adults.
To explore the similarities and differences in self-reported restrictions in communicative participation across different communication disorders in community-dwelling adults.
Interviews were conducted with 44 adults representing 7 different medical conditions: spasmodic dysphonia, multiple sclerosis, stroke, stuttering, Parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and laryngectomy.
This article represents a secondary analysis of qualitative data collected in cognitive interviews during development of the Communicative Participation Item Bank.
The data were analyzed to identify themes in participants' experiences related to communicative participation.
Participants described many situations in which they experienced interference in communicative participation.
Two themes emerged from the data.
The first theme was Interference is both "functional" and "emotional," in which participants defined interference as limitations in accomplishing tasks and emotional consequences.
The second theme was "It depends"-sources of interference, in which participants described many variables that contribute to interference in participation.
Participants had limited control of some variables such as symptoms and environmental contexts, but personal decisions and priorities also influenced participation.
Despite different impairments and activity limitations, participants described similar communicative participation restrictions.
These similarities may have theoretical and clinical implications in terms of how we assess, treat, and study the participation restrictions associated with communication disorders.
PMID: 21813326
NeurimmiRs: microRNAs in the neuroimmune interface.
Recent reports of microRNA (miR) modulators of both neuronal and immune processes (here termed NeurimmiRs) predict therapeutic potential for manipulating NeurimmiR levels in diseases affecting both the immune system and higher brain functions, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), multiple sclerosis (MS) and anxiety-related disorders.
In our opinion, NeurimmiRs that function within both the nervous and the immune systems, such as miR-132 and miR-124, may act as 'negotiators' between these two interacting compartments.
We suggest that NeurimmiRs primarily target transcriptional or other regulatory genes, which enables modulation of both immune and cognitive processes through direct or indirect alterations of neuron-glia and/or brain-to-body signaling.
Thus, manipulating NeurimmiR control over the immune contributions to cognitive pathways may offer new therapeutic targets.
PMID: 21813140
Updates on Somatoform Disorders (SFMD) in Parkinson's Disease and Dementia with Lewy Bodies and discussion of phenomenology.
Somatoform Disorders (SFMD) were recently described in Parkinson Disease (PD) and Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB).
The present paper updates the observations in our cohort of patients and further details clinical phenomenology.
Of 3178 patients consecutively referred to our Institutions from 1999, 1572 subjects had neurodegenerative diseases and 1718 psychiatric disorders.
After 2-9 years of follow up, 488 patients were labelled as PD, 415 as Alzheimer Disease, 162 as DLB, 48 as Progressive Supranuclear Palsy, 48 as Multiple System Atrophy and 49 as Fronto-Temporal Dementia.
The frequency of SFMD (DSM-IV-TR criteria) was determined in each diagnostic category by direct observation of SFMD symptoms, psychiatric interviews, SCL 90Rss, collection of previous general practitioners and hospital charts.
The frequency of SFMD was considerably higher in DLB (29 patients, 18%) and PD (37 patients, 7.5%) than in any other group (0-2%).
The frequency of SFMD in psychiatric patients was 2%.
SFMD in PD and DLB were characterised by motor and non-motor patterns and were often accompanied by catatonic signs consisting of posturing stereotypies and negativism (55%).
SFMD symptoms preceded PD motor signs by 6 months-5 years in 92% of the 29 DLB and 37 PD patients and in 70% SFMD were recurrent at follow-up.
In 93% of these patients, hypochondria was a preceding or concomitant background.
PMID: 21813030
Relation of Parkinson's disease subtypes to visual activities of daily living.
Visual perceptual problems are common in Parkinson's disease (PD) and often affect activities of daily living (ADLs).
PD patients with non-tremor symptoms at disease onset (i.e., rigidity, bradykinesia, gait disturbance or postural instability) have more diffuse neurobiological abnormalities and report worse non-motor symptoms and functional changes than patients whose initial symptom is tremor, but the relation of motor symptom subtype to perceptual deficits remains unstudied.
We assessed visual ADLs with the Visual Activities Questionnaire in 25 non-demented patients with PD, 13 with tremor as the initial symptom and 12 with an initial symptom other than tremor, as well as in 23 healthy control participants (NC).
As expected, the non-tremor patients, but not the tremor patients, reported more impairment in visual ADLs than the NC group, including in light/dark adaptation, acuity/spatial vision, depth perception, peripheral vision and visual processing speed.
Non-tremor patients were significantly worse than tremor patients overall and on light/dark adaptation and depth perception.
Environmental enhancements especially targeted to patients with the non-tremor PD subtype may help to ameliorate their functional disability.
PMID: 21812969
Genome-wide association study identifies candidate genes for Parkinson's disease in an Ashkenazi Jewish population.
To date, nine Parkinson disease (PD) genome-wide association studies in North American, European and Asian populations have been published.
The majority of studies have confirmed the association of the previously identified genetic risk factors, SNCA and MAPT, and two studies have identified three new PD susceptibility loci/genes (PARK16, BST1 and HLA-DRB5).
In a recent meta-analysis of datasets from five of the published PD GWAS an additional 6 novel candidate genes (SYT11, ACMSD, STK39, MCCC1/LAMP3, GAK and CCDC62/HIP1R) were identified.
Collectively the associations identified in these GWAS account for only a small proportion of the estimated total heritability of PD suggesting that an 'unknown' component of the genetic architecture of PD remains to be identified.
We applied a GWAS approach to a relatively homogeneous Ashkenazi Jewish (AJ) population from New York to search for both 'rare' and 'common' genetic variants that confer risk of PD by examining any SNPs with allele frequencies exceeding 2%.
We have focused on a genetic isolate, the AJ population, as a discovery dataset since this cohort has a higher sharing of genetic background and historically experienced a significant bottleneck.
We also conducted a replication study using two publicly available datasets from dbGaP.
The joint analysis dataset had a combined sample size of 2,050 cases and 1,836 controls.
We identified the top 57 SNPs showing the strongest evidence of association in the AJ dataset (p < 9.9 × 10(-5)).
Six SNPs located within gene regions had positive signals in at least one other independent dbGaP dataset: LOC100505836 (Chr3p24), LOC153328/SLC25A48 (Chr5q31.1), UNC13B (9p13.3), SLCO3A1(15q26.1), WNT3(17q21.3) and NSF (17q21.3).
We also replicated published associations for the gene regions SNCA (Chr4q21; rs3775442, p = 0.037), PARK16 (Chr1q32.1; rs823114 (NUCKS1), p = 6.12 × 10(-4)), BST1 (Chr4p15; rs12502586, p = 0.027), STK39 (Chr2q24.3; rs3754775, p = 0.005), and LAMP3 (Chr3; rs12493050, p = 0.005) in addition to the two most common PD susceptibility genes in the AJ population LRRK2 (Chr12q12; rs34637584, p = 1.56 × 10(-4)) and GBA (Chr1q21; rs2990245, p = 0.015).
We have demonstrated the utility of the AJ dataset in PD candidate gene and SNP discovery both by replication in dbGaP datasets with a larger sample size and by replicating association of previously identified PD susceptibility genes.
Our GWAS study has identified candidate gene regions for PD that are implicated in neuronal signalling and the dopamine pathway.
PMID: 21812497
Disease modification in Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is an age-related, progressive, multisystem neurodegenerative disorder resulting in significant morbidity and mortality, as well as a growing social and financial burden in an aging population.
The hallmark of PD is loss of dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta, leading to bradykinesia, rigidity and tremor.
Current pharmacological treatment is therefore centred upon dopamine replacement to alleviate symptoms.
However, two major problems complicate this approach: (i) motor symptoms continue to progress, requiring increasing doses of medication, which result in both short-term adverse effects and intermediate- to long-term motor complications; (ii) dopamine replacement does little to treat non-dopaminergic motor and non-motor symptoms, which are an important source of morbidity, including dementia, sleep disturbances, depression, orthostatic hypotension, and postural instability leading to falls.
It is critical, therefore, to develop a broader and more fundamental therapeutic approach to PD, and major research efforts have focused upon developing neuroprotective interventions.
Despite many encouraging preclinical data suggesting the possibility of addressing the underlying pathophysiology by slowing cell loss, efforts to translate this into the clinical realm have largely proved disappointing in the past.
Barriers to finding neuroprotective or disease-modifying drugs in PD include a lack of validated biomarkers of progression, which hampers clinical trial design and interpretation; difficulties separating symptomatic and neuroprotective effects of candidate neuroprotective therapies; and possibly fundamental flaws in some of the basic preclinical models and testing.
However, three recent clinical trials have used a novel delayed-start design in an attempt to overcome some of these roadblocks.
While not examining markers of cell loss and function, which would determine neuroprotective effects, this trial design pragmatically tests whether earlier versus later intervention is beneficial.
If positive (i.e.
if an earlier intervention proves more effective), this demonstrates disease modification, which could result from neuroprotection or from other mechanisms.
This strategy therefore provides a first step towards supporting neuroprotection in PD.
Of the three delayed-start design clinical trials, two have investigated early versus later start of rasagiline, a specific irreversible monoamine oxidase B inhibitor.
Each trial has supported, although not proven, disease-modifying effects.
A third delayed-start-design clinical trial examining potential disease-modifying effects of pramipexole has unfortunately reportedly been negative according to preliminary presentations.
The suggestion that rasagiline is disease modifying is made all the more compelling by in vitro and PD animal-model studies in which rasagiline was shown to have neuroprotective effects.
In this review, we examine efforts to demonstrate neuroprotection in PD to date, describe ongoing neuroprotection trials, and critically discuss the results of the most recent delayed-start clinical trials that test possible disease-modifying activities of rasagiline and pramipexole in PD.
PMID: 21812418
Chemoproteomics-based design of potent LRRK2-selective lead compounds that attenuate Parkinson's disease-related toxicity in human neurons.
Leucine-rich repeat kinase-2 (LRRK2) mutations are the most important cause of familial Parkinson's disease, and non-selective inhibitors are protective in rodent disease models.
Because of their poor potency and selectivity, the neuroprotective mechanism of these tool compounds has remained elusive so far, and it is still unknown whether selective LRRK2 inhibition can attenuate mutant LRRK2-dependent toxicity in human neurons.
Here, we employ a chemoproteomics strategy to identify potent, selective, and metabolically stable LRRK2 inhibitors.
We demonstrate that CZC-25146 prevents mutant LRRK2-induced injury of cultured rodent and human neurons with mid-nanomolar potency.
These precise chemical probes further validate this emerging therapeutic strategy.
They will enable more detailed studies of LRRK2-dependent signaling and pathogenesis and accelerate drug discovery.
PMID: 21812035
Parkinson's disease: What remains of the "missing heritability"?
PMID: 21811303
Discrepancies in reporting the CAG repeat lengths for Huntington's disease.
Huntington's disease results from a CAG repeat expansion within the Huntingtin gene; this is measured routinely in diagnostic laboratories.
The European Huntington's Disease Network REGISTRY project centrally measures CAG repeat lengths on fresh samples; these were compared with the original results from 121 laboratories across 15 countries.
We report on 1326 duplicate results; a discrepancy in reporting the upper allele occurred in 51% of cases, this reduced to 13.3% and 9.7% when we applied acceptable measurement errors proposed by the American College of Medical Genetics and the Draft European Best Practice Guidelines, respectively.
Duplicate results were available for 1250 lower alleles; discrepancies occurred in 40% of cases.
Clinically significant discrepancies occurred in 4.0% of cases with a potential unexplained misdiagnosis rate of 0.3%.
There was considerable variation in the discrepancy rate among 10 of the countries participating in this study.
Out of 1326 samples, 348 were re-analysed by an accredited diagnostic laboratory, based in Germany, with concordance rates of 93% and 94% for the upper and lower alleles, respectively.
This became 100% if the acceptable measurement errors were applied.
The central laboratory correctly reported allele sizes for six standard reference samples, blind to the known result.
Our study differs from external quality assessment (EQA) schemes in that these are duplicate results obtained from a large sample of patients across the whole diagnostic range.
We strongly recommend that laboratories state an error rate for their measurement on the report, participate in EQA schemes and use reference materials regularly to adjust their own internal standards.
PMID: 21811128
Relationship between slowing of the EEG and cognitive impairment in Parkinson disease.
A previous study using the quantitative EEG technique confirmed that diffuse slowing of the EEG is present in Parkinson disease.
The present study was the first to assess the relationship between cognitive impairment and quantitative EEG in Parkinson disease.
A total of 100 patients with Parkinson disease with a mean Hoehn-Yahr stage of 2.68 were serially enrolled.
Cognitive impairment was assessed using the Mini-Mental State Examination.
Lack of ischemic lesions was confirmed in all the patients by MRI.
Absolute power values were measured for four frequency bands from δ to β.
The electrodes were divided among six locations as follows: frontal pole and frontal, central, parietal, temporal, and occipital locations.
Spectral ratio was calculated as the sum of power values for the α- and β-waves divided by the sum of values for slow waves.
The relationship between Mini-Mental State Examination score and spectral ratio was assessed by the Jonckheere-Terpstra trend test.
At all electrode locations, spectral ratio significantly decreased with a decline in Mini-Mental State Examination score (frontal pole, P = 0.017; frontal, P = 0.028; central, P = 0.019; parietal, P = 0.004; temporal, P = 0.002; occipital, P = 0.006).
The rate of patients with Parkinson disease with slowing of the EEG was more frequent with serious cognitive impairment.
PMID: 21810701
Detection of elevated levels of α-synuclein oligomers in CSF from patients with Parkinson disease.
PMID: 21810464
Parkinson disease: insights in clinical, genetic and pathological features of monogenic disease subtypes.
In the past 15 years, insights in clinical and genetic characteristics of Parkinson disease (PD) have increased substantially.
Sequence or copy number variants in at least six genes (SNCA, LRRK2, PARK2, PINK1, DJ-1 and ATP13A2) have been identified to cause monogenic forms of PD.
Routine clinical testing for mutations in these genes is feasible and available, but overlapping phenotypes in monogenic and sporadic PD complicate straightforward diagnostic screening.
Primarily, a positive familial history and an early onset age should prompt clinicians to consider genetic testing.
Based on a literature review on clinical and neuropathological features of PD patients carrying a pathogenic mutation we propose guidelines for genetic diagnostic testing in clinical practice.
However, the absence of disease-modifying therapies and the variable penetrance of most known mutations currently limit the usefulness of genetic diagnostic testing for PD in clinical practice.
PMID: 21810444
Past, present and future of A(2A) adenosine receptor antagonists in the therapy of Parkinson's disease.
Several selective antagonists for adenosine A(2A) receptors (A(2A)R) are currently under evaluation in clinical trials (phases I to III) to treat Parkinson's disease, and they will probably soon reach the market.
The usefulness of these antagonists has been deduced from studies demonstrating functional interactions between dopamine D₂ and adenosine A(2A) receptors in the basal ganglia.
At present it is believed that A(2A)R antagonists can be used in combination with the dopamine precursor L-DOPA to minimize the motor symptoms of Parkinson's patients.
However, a considerable body of data indicates that in addition to ameliorating motor symptoms, adenosine A(2A)R antagonists may also prevent neurodegeneration.
Despite these promising indications, one further issue must be considered in order to develop fully optimized antiparkinsonian drug therapy, namely the existence of (hetero)dimers/oligomers of G protein-coupled receptors, a topic that is currently the focus of intense debate within the scientific community.
Dopamine D₂ receptors (D₂Rs) expressed in the striatum are known to form heteromers with A(2A) adenosine receptors.
Thus, the development of heteromer-specific A(2A) receptor antagonists represents a promising strategy for the identification of more selective and safer drugs.
PMID: 21810386
Dowling-Degos disease involving the vulva and back: case report and review of the literature.
Dowling-Degos disease is a rarely encountered pigmentary disorder in which small brown-to-black macules appear in a clustered or reticulated pattern primarily at flexural sites.
It usually occurs as an autosomal dominant trait but sporadic cases have also been reported.
Dowling-Degos disease is sometimes associated with other cutaneous abnormalities, many of which appear to occur as a result of abnormal follicular development.
The histology is distinctive with marked, heavily pigmented, slender, and often branched, elongation of the rete ridges.
Dowling-Degos disease is caused by one of several loss-of-function mutations in the keratin 5 gene.
Similar mutations are found in patients with Galli-Galli disease and that disorder is now considered to be a subset of Dowling-Degos disease.
Medical therapy is ineffective but two patients have responded well to ablative laser therapy.
We report a patient with the sporadic form of the disease who developed pigmented macules in the rarely involved sites of the lower back and vulva.
Her vulvar lesions were treated with Er:YAG laser ablation.
PMID: 21809600
[Pharmaceutical care for Parkinson's patients with orthostatic dysregulation].
PMID: 21809586
[Resveratrol derived from rhizoma et radix polygoni cuspidati and its liposomal form protect nigral cells of Parkinsonian rats].
Objective: Oxidative stress is a hallmark in the pathogenesis of Parkinson disease (PD), which involves the selective loss of nigral dopaminergic neurons in PD.
Resveratrol (3,5,4'-trihydroxy-trans-stilbene) is well known for its powerful antioxidant property and a wide range of other biological effects.
In this study, we investigated the protective effect of resveratrol derived from Rhizoma Et Radix Polygoni Cuspidati and its liposomal form on the nigral cells of PD rats induced by unilateral microinjection of 6-hydroxy dopamine in the striatum.
The results showed that after 14 days gavage of resveratrol and resveratrol liposome respectively (20 mg x kg(-1) WB per day), the abnormal rotational behavior of PD rats were deceased evidently, the numbers of total nigral cells, total nigral neurons and TH immuno-positive neurons were more than that of PD rats without given resveratrol or resveratrol liposome, simultaneously, the number of apoptotic nigral cells were decreased obviously.
The results also showed that resveratrol and resveratrol liposome could decrease the total ROS activity, increase the total antioxidant capability of the nigral tissues.
All the data indicated that resveratrol liposome performed stronger effects than resveratrol except for behavioral improvement.
Our study confirmed that resveratrol derived from Rhizoma Et Radix Polygoni Cuspidati and its liposomal form could inhibit the loss of dopaminergic neurons of PD rats, the underlying mechanism may be attributed to their radical scavenging effect and antioxidant property.
Due to presumably increased bioavailability, resveratrol liposome possesses the stronger therapeutic effect and may become a better clinical agent for the treatment of PD than free resveratrol.
PMID: 21809259
[Does multiple sclerosis facilitate migraine].
Known comorbidities for migraine are affective disorders.
Only few studies exist which explore migraine as comorbidity in a given diagnosis.
The aim of our study is to determine the frequency of the comorbidity "migraine" subject to a given diagnosis.
Out of 2562 observations comorbidity "migraine" was diagnosed with a frequency of 16.2 % when an affective disorder was diagnosed.
In multiple sclerosis and epilepsy, migraine as comorbidity was diagnosed in 15 % and 9.6 %, respectively.
Migraine in patients with Parkinson's disease is rare.
The correlation between affective disorders and epilepsies is known, but the high frequency of migraine in multiple sclerosis should be taken into account when diagnosing central demyelinating disorders.
PMID: 21809256
[Treatment of parkinsonism and legal capacity].
PMID: 21808748
Assessing depression and factors possibly associated with depression during the course of Parkinson's disease.
Although research suggests depression is common among individuals with Parkinson's disease (PD), it is unclear how to best assess depression in PD (dPD).
We wanted to examine the prevalence of dPD using different definitions of depression, as well as examine factors associated with dPD.
One hundred fifty-eight individuals (68% male; age 66.8 ± 9.6 SD) with a primary diagnosis of PD were assessed for depression using the Harvard Department of Psychiatry/National Depression Screening Day Scale (HANDS) in an outpatient setting at the Movement Disorders Clinic at Massachusetts General Hospital.
We defined depression using 4 thresholds based on the HANDS and whether or not an individual was ever on an antidepressant regimen.
We also examined potential predictors of the presence of dPD.
The prevalence of depression among study participants ranged from 11% to 57%, depending on which of the 4 definitions of depression was applied.
Younger age and longer duration of PD predicted a relatively higher prevalence of depression.
Having a history of depression prior to onset of PD also was predictive of dPD.
Depression appears to be relatively common among individuals with PD, and history of depression, younger age, and longer PD duration may be factors associated with dPD.
PMID: 21808735
MRI findings in neuroferritinopathy.
Neuroferritinopathy is a neurodegenerative disease which demonstrates brain iron accumulation caused by the mutations in the ferritin light chain gene.
On brain MRI in neuroferritinopathy, iron deposits are observed as low-intensity areas on T2WI and as signal loss on T2(∗)WI.
On T2WI, hyperintense abnormalities reflecting tissue edema and gliosis are also seen.
Another characteristic finding is the presence of symmetrical cystic changes in the basal ganglia, which are seen in the advanced stages of this disorder.
Atrophy is sometimes noted in the cerebellar and cerebral cortices.
The variety in the MRI findings is specific to neuroferritinopathy.
Based on observations of an excessive iron content in patients with chronic neurologic disorders, such as Parkinson disease and Alzheimer disease, the presence of excess iron is therefore recognized as a major risk factor for neurodegenerative diseases.
The future development of multimodal and advanced MRI techniques is thus expected to play an important role in accurately measuring the brain iron content and thereby further elucidating the neurodegenerative process.
PMID: 21808724
The Frequency of Nonmotor Symptoms among Advanced Parkinson Patients May Depend on Instrument Used for Assessment.
Background.
Nonmotor symptoms (NMS) of Parkinson's disease (PD) may be more debilitating than motor symptoms.
The purpose of this study was to determine the frequency and corecognition of NMS among our advanced PD cohort (patients considered for deep brain stimulation (DBS)) and caregivers.
Methods.
NMS-Questionnaire (NMS-Q), a self-administered screening questionnaire, and NMS Assessment-Scale (NMS-S), a clinician-administered scale, were administered to PD patients and caregivers.
Results.
We enrolled 33 PD patients (23 males, 10 females) and caregivers.
The most frequent NMS among patients using NMS-Q were gastrointestinal (87.9%), sleep (84.9%), and urinary (72.7%), while the most frequent symptoms using NMS-S were sleep (90.9%), gastrointestinal (75.8%), and mood (75.8%).
Patient/caregiver scoring correlations for NMS-Q and NMS-S were 0.670 (P < 0.0001) and 0.527 (P = 0.0016), respectively.
Conclusion The frequency of NMS among advanced PD patients and correlation between patients and caregivers varied with the instrument used.
The overall correlation between patient and caregiver was greater with NMS-Q than NMS-S.
PMID: 21808232
The Parkinson's disease market.
PMID: 21808027
QnAs with Robert C. Malenka.
PMID: 21807381
Subjective and objective assessment of executive functions in Parkinson's disease.
Impairments in executive functions (EF) in Parkinson's disease (PD) will have a negative influence on daily life.
For the assessment objective and subjective measurement approaches are used.
It is however unknown whether these approaches contribute in a different way to the assessment of EF in PD.
Thirty-nine PD patients and 24 healthy participants completed the Dysexecutive questionnaire (DEX; subjective measure) and the Frontal Assessment Battery (FAB; objective measure).
PD patients showed impaired EF (FAB) and reported more problems with EF in daily life (DEX) than healthy participants.
The performance on the FAB could however not be explained by the problems with EF that were reported by PD patients (DEX) and vice versa.
In conclusion, not all PD patients who show impairments in EF report them and not all PD patients who report problems with EF in daily life show impairments according to objective measurement.
Both measures thus contribute in a different way to the assessment of EF in PD patients.
However, it has to be considered that the FAB is not a critical test to assess cognition in PD, since these patients also suffer from posterior abnormalities including memory and visuo-spatial deficits which are strong predictors for PD dementia.
PMID: 21807139
Aquatic therapy versus conventional land-based therapy for Parkinson's disease: an open-label pilot study.
To assess and compare 2 different protocols of physiotherapy (land or water therapy) for people with Parkinson's disease (PD) focused on postural stability and self-movement, and to provide methodological information regarding progression within the program for a future larger trial.
Randomized, controlled, open-label pilot trial.
Outpatients, Parkinson's disease Center of Ferrol-Galicia (Spain).
Individuals (N=11) with idiopathic PD in stages 2 or 3 according to the Hoehn and Yahr Scale completed the investigation (intervention period plus follow-up).
After baseline evaluations, participants were randomly assigned to a land-based therapy (active control group) or a water-based therapy (experimental group).
Participants underwent individual sessions for 4 weeks, twice a week, for 45 minutes per session.
Both interventions were matched in terms of exercise features, which were structured in stages with clear objectives and progression criteria to pass to the next phase.
Participants underwent a first baseline assessment, a posttest immediately after 4 weeks of intervention, and a follow-up assessment after 17 days.
Evaluations were performed OFF-dose after withholding medication for 12 hours.
Functional assessments included the Functional Reach Test (FRT), the Berg Balance Scale (BBS), the UPDRS, the 5-m walk test, and the Timed Up and Go test.
A main effect of both therapies was seen for the FRT.
Only the aquatic therapy group improved in the BBS and the UPDRS.
In this pilot study, physiotherapy protocols produced improvement in postural stability in PD that was significantly larger after aquatic therapy.
The intervention protocols are shown to be feasible and seem to be of value in amelioration of postural stability-related impairments in PD.
Some of the methodological aspects detailed here can be used to design larger controlled trials.
PMID: 21806997
Autophosphorylation in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) GTPase domain modifies kinase and GTP-binding activities.
The leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) protein has both guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) and kinase activities, and mutation in either enzymatic domain can cause late-onset Parkinson disease.
Nucleotide binding in the GTPase domain may be required for kinase activity, and residues in the GTPase domain are potential sites for autophosphorylation, suggesting a complex mechanism of intrinsic regulation.
To further define the effects of LRRK2 autophosphorylation, we applied a technique optimal for detection of protein phosphorylation, electron transfer dissociation, and identified autophosphorylation events exclusively nearby the nucleotide binding pocket in the GTPase domain.
Parkinson-disease-linked mutations alter kinase activity but did not alter autophosphorylation site specificity or sites of phosphorylation in a robust in vitro substrate myelin basic protein.
Amino acid substitutions in the GTPase domain have large effects on kinase activity, as insertion of the GTPase-associated R1441C pathogenic mutation together with the G2019S kinase domain mutation resulted in a multiplicative increase (∼7-fold) in activity.
Removal of a conserved autophosphorylation site (T1503) by mutation to an alanine residue resulted in greatly decreased GTP-binding and kinase activities.
While autophosphorylation likely serves to potentiate kinase activity, we find that oligomerization and loss of the active dimer species occur in an ATP- and autophosphorylation-independent manner.
LRRK2 autophosphorylation sites are overall robustly protected from dephosphorylation in vitro, suggesting tight control over activity in vivo.
We developed highly specific antibodies targeting pT1503 but failed to detect endogenous autophosphorylation in protein derived from transgenic mice and cell lines.
LRRK2 activity in vivo is unlikely to be constitutive but rather refined to specific responses.
PMID: 21805772
Sudden cardiac deaths in young British Army personnel.
Much attention has been paid to sudden cardiac death in young athletes which has led to the implementation of tighter screening controls in many sports at various levels.
Less attention has been paid to this subject in young army recruits.
We describe three cases of sudden cardiac death in young UK soldiers.
The scale of the problem in the UK is unknown.
We highlight issues regarding diagnostic testing to identify risk factors for sudden cardiac death and suggest potential additions to the current screening programme for new recruits to help increase the sensitivity of detecting cardiac pathology and reducing the rates of sudden cardiac death in this group.
PMID: 21804674
REM sleep behavior disorder in the marmoset MPTP model of early Parkinson disease.
Sleep problems are a common phenomenon in most neurological and psychiatric diseases.
In Parkinson disease (PD), for instance, sleep problems may be the most common and burdensome non-motor symptoms in addition to the well-described classical motor symptoms.
Since sleep disturbances generally become apparent in the disease before motor symptoms emerge, they may represent early diagnostic tools and a means to investigate early mechanisms in PD onset.
The sleep disturbance, REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD), precedes PD in one-third of patients.
We therefore investigated sleep changes in marmoset monkeys treated with 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine hydrochloride (MPTP), the non-human primate model for idiopathic PD.
Mild parkinsonism was induced in 5 marmoset monkeys (3M/2F) over a 2-week period of subchronic MPTP treatment.
Electroencephalograms (EEGs) and electromyograms (EMGs) were recorded weekly.
Motor activity and hand-eye coordination were also measured weekly, and any signs of parkinsonism were noted each day.
Sleep parameters, motor activity, and performance data before and after MPTP treatment were compared between MPTP-treated marmosets and 4 control marmosets (1M/3F).
MPTP increased the number of sleep epochs with high-amplitude EMG bouts during REM sleep relative to control animals (mean ± SEM percentage of REM 58.2 ± 9.3 vs.
29.6 ± 7.7; P < 0.05).
Of all sleep parameters measured, RBD-like measures discriminated best between MPTP-treated and control animals.
On the other hand, functional motor behavior, as measured by hand-eye coordination, was not affected by MPTP treatment (correct trials MPTP: 23.40 ± 3.56 vs.
control: 36.13 ± 5.88 correct trials; P = 0.32).
This REM sleep-specific change, in the absence of profound changes in wake motor behaviors, suggests that the MPTP marmoset model of PD could be used for further studies into the mechanisms and treatment of RBD and other sleep disorders in premotor symptom PD.
PMID: 21804282
Delays in neurological drug development in Japan.
The lag in the approval and development of neurological drugs between Japan and other countries has been a major issue for patients with neurological diseases.
The objective of this study was to analyze the factors contributing to the delay in the launching of neurological drugs in Japan.
We analyzed data from Japan and the US for the approval of 36 standard neurological drugs and examined the potential factors that may cause the delay of their launch.
Of the 36 standard neurological drugs, all of which were approved in the US, only 21 were introduced in Japan from June 1999 to April 2010, whereas the other 15, whose indications were Alzheimer disease, epilepsy, migraine, multiple sclerosis, and Parkinson disease, remained unapproved.
The US led Japan in the number of introductions (20 versus 1), with introductions in Japan occurring at a median of 87 months after introductions in the US.
Japan's review time of new drug applications (23 months) could not explain this lag.
In 15 of the 21 approved drugs, the application data package included overseas data.
The mean review time of these 15 drugs was significantly shorter than that of the other 6 drugs without overseas data.
The maximum daily doses of 7 of the drugs were higher in the US than in Japan.
These results show that there is still a large gap between Japan and the US with regard to access to standard neurological drugs, despite several important reforms in the Japanese drug approval system.
PMID: 21804280
Fatigue in patients with Parkinson's disease: impact on quality of life.
To determine the prevalence of fatigue and factors associated with fatigue in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD).
Fatigue was evaluated using the PD Fatigue Scale, a self-report questionnaire consisting of 16 statements describing the severity of fatigue symptoms.
Patients were also evaluated using the Unified PD Rating Scale, Zung Depression Scale, the Epworth Sleepiness Scale, the PD Questionnaire-39 (PDQ-39) for assessing quality of life (QOL), and the Apathy Scale.
We examined 46 consecutive outpatients clinically diagnosed with PD, excluding patients with cognitive impairment.
Fatigue was present in 22 (48%) patients.
Multiple logistic regression analysis indicated that only QOL-scores and Apathy Scale scores were significant independent variables related to the presence of fatigue.
Fatigue is a common symptom in patients with PD, and it is a symptom closely related to impaired QOL.
PMID: 21804006
Genomes and characterization of phages Bcep22 and BcepIL02, founders of a novel phage type in Burkholderia cenocepacia.
Within the Burkholderia cepacia complex, B.
cenocepacia is the most common species associated with aggressive infections in the lungs of cystic fibrosis patients, causing disease that is often refractive to treatment by antibiotics.
Phage therapy may be a potential alternative form of treatment for these infections.
Here we describe the genome of the previously described therapeutic B.
cenocepacia podophage BcepIL02 and its close relative, Bcep22.
Phage Bcep22 was found to contain a circularly permuted genome of 63,882 bp containing 77 genes; BcepIL02 was found to be 62,714 bp and contains 76 predicted genes.
Major virion-associated proteins were identified by proteomic analysis.
We propose that these phages comprise the founding members of a novel podophage lineage, the Bcep22-like phages.
Among the interesting features of these phages are a series of tandemly repeated putative tail fiber genes that are similar to each other and also to one or more such genes in the other phages.
Both phages also contain an extremely large (ca.
4,600-amino-acid), virion-associated, multidomain protein that accounts for over 20% of the phages' coding capacity, is widely distributed among other bacterial and phage genomes, and may be involved in facilitating DNA entry in both phage and other mobile DNA elements.
The phages, which were previously presumed to be virulent, show evidence of a temperate lifestyle but are apparently unable to form stable lysogens in their hosts.
This ambiguity complicates determination of a phage lifestyle, a key consideration in the selection of therapeutic phages.
PMID: 21803679
EMG-based characterization of pathological tremor using the iterated Hilbert transform.
The identification and characterization of pathological tremor are necessary for the development of techniques for tremor suppression, for example, based on functional electrical stimulation.
For this purpose, the amplitude and phase characteristics of the tremor signal should be estimated by effective detection techniques, either from the kinematics or from muscle recordings.
This paper presents an approach for the estimation of the characteristics of pathological tremor from the surface electromyogram (EMG) signal based on the iterated Hilbert transform (IHT).
It is shown that the IHT allows an asymptotically exact modeling of the tremor and the voluntary activity components in the surface EMG, and an effective demodulation of the pathological tremor parameters.
The method was tested on signals generated by a recent model for tremor generation as well as experimentally recorded from patients affected by pathological tremor.
The results showed the ability of the proposed approach to demodulate effectively the tremor amplitude (average correlation with imposed amplitude: R(2)=0.52), the frequency (root mean square error in frequency estimation: 2.6 Hz), and phase, as well as the degree of voluntary activity (correlation with simulated inertial load: R(2)=0.62).
The application of the method to the experimental data indicated that the estimated tremor component closely resembles inertial measurements of limb movement (peak cross correlation across four patients: 0.62±0.15).
Compared to the performance of empirical mode decomposition, the proposed method proved to be more accurate for tremor characterization without a priori knowledge of the tremor characteristics.
This method can be used as a part of a control system in strategies for suppression of tremor.
PMID: 21803216
Trichloroethylene and Parkinson disease.
Multiple genetic and environmental etiologies have been implicated in the pathogenesis of idiopathic Parkinson disease.
Recent observations have suggested an association between chronic exposure to trichloroethylene (TCE) and development of clinical parkinsonism.
Animal models of TCE exposure have shown nigrostriatal degeneration and the development of parkinsonian features.
Animal and cell culture models indicate mitochondrial dysfunction as the probable mechanism, most likely mediated by TaClo, a potential TCE metabolite.
These observations endorse the hypothesis that a variety of environmental risk factors may cause nigrostriatal degeneration and clinical parkinsonism in genetically predisposed individuals.
PMID: 21803214
Welding and parkinsonism.
Manganese-induced parkinsonism has been recognized since 1837.
It has been reported primarily in miners, grinders, and smelters since that time.
More recently, isolated case reports involving welders have appeared in the medical literature.
Manganism can be distinguished from other forms of parkinsonism by clinical presentation with support from laboratory and radiologic findings.
The controversy regarding the risk of parkinsonism in welders is reviewed.
PMID: 21802694
Prevalence of depression in Parkinson's disease: effects of disease stage, motor subtype and gender.
Depression is one of the most common non-motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease (PD) with a large negative impact on the quality of life.
Factors such as disease stage, subtype of PD and gender might play an important role in the prevalence of depression, but a large study investigating all these factors in a within-subject design is lacking.
Therefore we studied a homogeneous group of 256 Dutch PD patients (60% men, mean age=65.12 (±9.6) years).
In total, 36.3% of the subjects had a BDI-score indicative for a minor depression, while 12.9% had a major depression.
Notably, only 8.6% of the minor depressed patients and 30.3% of the major depressed patients were taking antidepressants.
A higher prevalence of depression was observed in the later stages of the disease.
However, this finding was absent in a smaller subsample after correction for cognitive impairment.
Our data did not show a difference in the prevalence of depression between the motor subtypes and showed a trend towards higher prevalence of depression in the tremor dominant group.
There was no significant difference in the prevalence of depression between men and women.
We will discuss the relevance of these results in relation to the findings of other studies.
PMID: 21802341
cGMP level in idiopathic Parkinson's disease patients with and without cardiovascular disease - A pilot study.
We have previously found that average serum cGMP level in unselected patients with Parkinson's disease (PD), particularly in patients treated with a combination of l-DOPA and the dopamine agonist pergolide mesylate, is markedly higher than that in healthy controls.
Here we compared serum cGMP and total testosterone levels between l-DOPA/pergolide mesylate-treated male idiopathic PD patients without and with cardiovascular disease (iPD, n = 10, and iPD-CVD, n = 10, respectively) and age-matched healthy volunteers (n = 10).
There was no difference in PD-related disability between the two patient groups as assessed by UPDRS motor score and Hoehn-Yahr staging.
Whereas none of the patients showed hypoandrogenemia, PD patients compared to controls revealed significantly lower serum testosterone levels, and iPD-CVD patients showed significantly lower levels than iPD patients.
Serum cGMP levels were but moderately while significantly higher in the two groups of PD patients than in the controls, and were the highest in the iPD-CVD group.
For all study groups combined, there was a high negative correlation between total testosterone level and cGMP level.
Our data indicate that blood total testosterone level is negatively correlated with general health status in PD patients, whereas the reverse is true for blood cGMP level.
PMID: 21801451
Falls and mobility in Parkinson's disease: protocol for a randomised controlled clinical trial.
Although physical therapy and falls prevention education are argued to reduce falls and disability in people with idiopathic Parkinson's disease, this has not yet been confirmed with a large scale randomised controlled clinical trial.
The study will investigate the effects on falls, mobility and quality of life of (i) movement strategy training combined with falls prevention education, (ii) progressive resistance strength training combined with falls prevention education, (iii) a generic life-skills social program (control group).
People with idiopathic Parkinson's disease who live at home will be recruited and randomly allocated to one of three groups.
Each person shall receive therapy in an out-patient setting in groups of 3-4.
Each group shall be scheduled to meet once per week for 2 hours for 8 consecutive weeks.
All participants will also have a structured 2 hour home practice program for each week during the 8 week intervention phase.
Assessments will occur before therapy, after the 8 week therapy program, and at 3 and 12 months after the intervention.
A falls calendar will be kept by each participant for 12 months after outpatient therapy.Consistent with the recommendations of the Prevention of Falls Network Europe group, three falls variables will be used as the primary outcome measures: the number of fallers, the number of multiple fallers and the falls rate.
In addition to quantifying falls, we shall measure mobility, activity limitations and quality of life as secondary outcomes.
This study has the potential to determine whether outpatient movement strategy training combined with falls prevention education or progressive resistance strength training combined with falls prevention education are effective for reducing falls and improving mobility and life quality in people with Parkinson's disease who live at home.
Australia and New Zealand Clinical Trials Register (ANZCTR): ACTRN12606000344594.
PMID: 21800960
Magnetic resonance imaging techniques for visualization of the subthalamic nucleus.
The authors reviewed 70 publications on MR imaging-based targeting techniques for identifying the subthalamic nucleus (STN) for deep brain stimulation in patients with Parkinson disease.
Of these 70 publications, 33 presented quantitatively validated results.
There is still no consensus on which targeting technique to use for surgery planning; methods vary greatly between centers.
Some groups apply indirect methods involving anatomical landmarks, or atlases incorporating anatomical or functional data.
Others perform direct visualization on MR imaging, using T2-weighted spin echo or inversion recovery protocols.
The combined studies do not offer a straightforward conclusion on the best targeting protocol.
Indirect methods are not patient specific, leading to varying results between cases.
On the other hand, direct targeting on MR imaging suffers from lack of contrast within the subthalamic region, resulting in a poor delineation of the STN.
These deficiencies result in a need for intraoperative adaptation of the original target based on test stimulation with or without microelectrode recording.
It is expected that future advances in MR imaging technology will lead to improvements in direct targeting.
The use of new MR imaging modalities such as diffusion MR imaging might even lead to the specific identification of the different functional parts of the STN, such as the dorsolateral sensorimotor part, the target for deep brain stimulation.
PMID: 21799880
Case control polysomnographic studies of sleep disorders in Parkinson's disease.
The relationship between a number of primary sleep disorders and Parkinson's disease (PD) is still debated.
There are limited case control polysomnographic studies in PD and most of these study sample sizes are small.
We conducted one of the largest case-control studies involving overnight polysomnographic evaluation, with prospective recruitment of unselected Parkinson's disease patients and healthy controls from an Asian population.
The cases were recruited from the specialized movement disorder outpatient clinics in a tertiary referral center, and controls from the same geographical locations.
All subjects underwent an overnight polysomnographic study and a multiple sleep latency test.
A total of 124 subjects including 56 patients and 68 controls frequency-matched for age and sex were included.
Multivariate analysis revealed that patients had significantly shorter total sleep time than controls (p = 0.01), lower sleep efficiency (p = 0.001) and increased REM latency (p = 0.007).
In patients, multivariate analysis showed that reduced total sleep time was significantly associated with increased age (p = 0.001) and increased levodopa dose (p = 0.032).
The mean Insomnia Severity Index was higher in PD patients (9.0±7.1) compared to controls (3.3±3.9, p<0.001).
The mean Epworth Sleepiness Scale score was higher in PD patients (9.3±5.9 vs.
5.7±4.8, p<0.001).
Nocturnal arousals, obstructive sleep apnea, periodic leg movements and objective abnormal sleepiness were not increased in our patients.
Our case-control polysomnographic study, the first-ever performed in an Asian population, revealed altered sleep architecture and reduced sleep in PD patients compared to controls.
Reduced total sleep time was associated with increased age and levodopa dose.
However, nocturnal arousals, primary sleep disorders and abnormal sleepiness were not increased in our PD patients suggesting that ethnic/genetic differences may be a factor in the pathophysiology of these conditions.
PMID: 21799870
Pathogenic LRRK2 mutations do not alter gene expression in cell model systems or human brain tissue.
Point mutations in LRRK2 cause autosomal dominant Parkinson's disease.
Despite extensive efforts to determine the mechanism of cell death in patients with LRRK2 mutations, the aetiology of LRRK2 PD is not well understood.
To examine possible alterations in gene expression linked to the presence of LRRK2 mutations, we carried out a case versus control analysis of global gene expression in three systems: fibroblasts isolated from LRRK2 mutation carriers and healthy, non-mutation carrying controls; brain tissue from G2019S mutation carriers and controls; and HEK293 inducible LRRK2 wild type and mutant cell lines.
No significant alteration in gene expression was found in these systems following correction for multiple testing.
These data suggest that any alterations in basal gene expression in fibroblasts or cell lines containing mutations in LRRK2 are likely to be quantitatively small.
This work suggests that LRRK2 is unlikely to play a direct role in modulation of gene expression, although it remains possible that this protein can influence mRNA expression under pathogenic cicumstances.
PMID: 21799745
14-3-3theta protects against neurotoxicity in a cellular Parkinson's disease model through inhibition of the apoptotic factor Bax.
Disruption of 14-3-3 function by alpha-synuclein has been implicated in Parkinson's disease.
As 14-3-3s are important regulators of cell death pathways, disruption of 14-3-3s could result in the release of pro-apoptotic factors, such as Bax.
We have previously shown that overexpression of 14-3-3θ reduces cell loss in response to rotenone and MPP(+) in dopaminergic cell culture and reduces cell loss in transgenic C.
elegans that overexpress alpha-synuclein.
In this study, we investigate the mechanism for 14-3-3θ's neuroprotection against rotenone toxicity.
While 14-3-3s can inhibit many pro-apoptotic factors, we demonstrate that inhibition of one factor in particular, Bax, is important to 14-3-3s' protection against rotenone toxicity in dopaminergic cells.
We found that 14-3-3θ overexpression reduced Bax activation and downstream signaling events, including cytochrome C release and caspase 3 activation.
Pharmacological inhibition or shRNA knockdown of Bax provided protection against rotenone, comparable to 14-3-3θ's neuroprotective effects.
A 14-3-3θ mutant incapable of binding Bax failed to protect against rotenone.
These data suggest that 14-3-3θ's neuroprotective effects against rotenone are at least partially mediated by Bax inhibition and point to a potential therapeutic role of 14-3-3s in Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21799425
It is not about the bike, it is about the pedaling: forced exercise and Parkinson's disease.
Forced exercise has resulted in neuroprotective effects and improved motor function in animal studies.
These promising results have not yet been translated fully to humans with Parkinson's disease (PD), as traditional exercise interventions have not yielded global improvements in function.
A novel forced exercise intervention is described that has resulted in improved motor function and central nervous system function in PD patients.
PMID: 21799414
Recent advances in pharmacological treatment of psychosis in late life.
Psychosis is among the most frequent psychiatric symptoms in late life.
Treatment of late life psychosis is often challenging because of age-related changes, physical comorbidities and frailty of older adults.
The present study aims at reviewing recent literature on pharmacological treatment of psychosis in the older population.
Recent studies show that antipsychotics remain the mainstay of treatment for older adults with psychosis.
Although the efficacies of both typical and atypical antipsychotics have been demonstrated in older adults with schizophrenia, delirium and Parkinson's disease psychosis, there is a growing body of data favoring atypical antipsychotics.
However, most of the evidence is not based on rigorously conducted trials.
In addition, the use of antipsychotic medication in managing psychosis associated with dementia has declined significantly with the recognition of its serious adverse effects in this vulnerable population.
A recent study suggests that effective alternative treatments are yet to be developed.
Studies have demonstrated the clinical benefits of antipsychotics in older people with psychosis.
The potential benefits from the use of antipsychotics must be weighed against their adverse effects.
PMID: 21798732
Acute toxicity of MPTP and MPP(+) in the brain of embryo and newborn mice.
1-Methyl-4-phenyl-1, 2, 3, 6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) causes damage to dopaminergic neurons in the nigrostriatal system, similar to that seen in Parkinson disease (PD).
Recently, a few reports have confirmed neuroblastic apoptosis in the subventricular zone (SVZ) of adult C57BL/6J mice by i.p.
injection of MPTP, and concluded that MPTP is also toxic to neuroblasts in the SVZ.
While there have been many researches on the neurotoxicity of MPTP in adult mice, there have been only a few in fetal mice.
In the present study, we assessed the toxicity of MPTP to embryonic and newborn mice after a single injection into pregnant or newborn mice.
MPTP and 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP(+)), a metabolite of MPTP, caused loss of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)-positive cells or fibers and increased apoptotic cells in embryonic and newborn mice.
In addition, MPTP and MPP(+) induced a marked increase of apoptotic cells in the SVZ compared to the nigrostriatal system.
The present results may indicate that MPTP and MPP(+) pass through the placenta and blood-brain barrier (BBB) and that a different mechanism may be involved in MPTP- or MPP(+)-induced toxicity in the SVZ and in the nigrostriatal system of embryonic and newborn mice.
PMID: 21798561
Treatment approaches of gastrointestinal dysfunction in Parkinson's disease, therapeutical options and future perspectives.
Gastrointestinal (GI) dysfunction is a common but underestimated feature in Parkinson's disease (PD).
Out of the multimodal spectrum of treatment options, there currently are only a few pharmacological treatments available to improve gastrointestinal motility and symptoms.
Because enteric nervous function is mainly regulated by transmitters different from those involved in the brain, dopamine replacement is not a treatment option in PD patients.
This article focuses on the known regulative mechanism of GI function and presents known and upcoming treatment options for GI dysfunction in PD.
PMID: 21798243
Gelsolin co-occurs with Lewy bodies in vivo and accelerates α-synuclein aggregation in vitro.
Deposition of fibrillar α-synuclein as Lewy bodies is the neuropathological hallmark of Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).
Apart from α-synuclein, these intraneuronal inclusions contain over 250 different proteins.
The actin binding protein gelsolin, has previously been suggested to be part of the Lewy body, but its potential role in α-synuclein aggregation remains unknown.
Here, we studied the association between gelsolin and α-synuclein in brain tissue from PD and DLB patients as well as in a cell model for α-synuclein aggregation.
Moreover, the potential effect of gelsolin on α-synuclein fibrillization was also investigated.
Our data demonstrate that gelsolin co-occured with α-synuclein in Lewy bodies from affected human brain as well as with Lewy body-like inclusions in α-synuclein over expressing cells.
Furthermore, in the presence of calcium chloride, gelsolin was found to enhance the aggregation rate of α-synuclein in vitro.
Moreover, no apparent structural differences could be observed between fibrils formed in the presence or absence of gelsolin.
Further studies on gelsolin and other Lewy body associated proteins are warranted to learn more about their potential role in the α-synuclein aggregation process.
PMID: 21797648
Diagnostic challenges in parkinsonism.
PMID: 21796667
DJ-1 modulates the expression of Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase-1 through the Erk1/2-Elk1 pathway in neuroprotection.
Loss of function mutations of Park7/DJ-1 gene increase the susceptibility of dopaminergic cells to reactive oxygen species and cause early onset familial Parkinson disease (PD).
However, the mechanisms underlying dopaminergic neuron loss related to DJ-1 mutation remain undefined.
Therefore, it is important to find the new mechanisms underlying the antioxidative functions of DJ-1.
DJ-1 knockdown cells and DJ-1 knockout mice were used to elucidate the mechanisms underlying the antioxidative stress of DJ-1.
Preliminary study of the saliva from PD patients and controls was used to confirm our findings obtained from the above studies.
Our experiments showed that DJ-1 interacted with Erk1/2 and was required for the nuclear translocation of Erk1/2 upon oxidative stimulation.
The translocation of Erk1/2 activated Elk1 and sequentially promoted superoxide dismutase1 (SOD1) expression.
The nuclear translocation of Erk1/2, the activation of Elk1, and the ensuing upregulation of SOD1 were all suppressed in DJ-1 knockdown cells and DJ-1 null mice treated with oxidative insult.
Furthermore, reintroduction of SOD1 into DJ-1 knockdown cells protected them against oxidative stress.
Finally, in the preliminary study, we found close correlation between the protein levels of DJ-1 and SOD1 in the saliva samples from different stages of PD patients.
Our studies suggest that DJ-1 regulates SOD1 expression through Erk1/2-Elk1 pathway in its protective response to oxidative insult.
PMID: 21796424
Effects of Obovatol on GSH Depleted Glia-Mediated Neurotoxicity and Oxidative Damage.
Earlier studies indicate that obovatol (OBO), isolated from a medicinal herb Magnolia obovata, has anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative properties.
Depletion of glutathione (GSH) in glial cells with the γ-glutamylcysteine synthase inhibitor D,L-buthionine-S,R-sulfoximine (BSO) is known to produce oxidative stress which, in turn, induces these cells to secrete inflammatory cytokines and other neurotoxic substances.
In the present study, we investigated the ability of OBO to protect SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells from this effect.
Human microglia, astrocytes and their surrogate THP-1 and U373 cell lines were activated by treatment with BSO.
Such treatment depleted their intracellular GSH and increased levels of damage to DNA, lipids and proteins (8-OHdG, lipid peroxide, protein carbonyls and 3-nitrotyrosine), and activated the inflammatory pathways P38 MAP kinase and NFκB.
These are accompanied by release of proinflammatory factors such as TNFα, IL-6 and nitric oxide.
Their conditioned media were toxic to SH-SY5Y cells.
All these effects were attenuated by pre-treatment with OBO.
Prior treatment of SH-SY5Y cells with OBO also attenuated THP-1 or U373 conditioned media neurotoxicity and also reduced oxidative damage produced by treatment with hydrogen peroxide or BSO.
Prior treatment with OBO potentiated survival of SH-SY5Y cells exposed to conditioned medium from BSO-treated THP-1, U373 cells, microglia and astrocytes.
The data indicate that OBO could be anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidative and neuroprotective, and be an effective agent for inhibiting pathogenesis in neurological diseases such as Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in which glial-mediated neuroinflammation and oxidative stress are thought to contribute to disease progression.
PMID: 21795961
Gaps in treatment for anxiety in Parkinson disease.
PMID: 21795716
Enhanced autophagy from chronic toxicity of iron and mutant A53T α-synuclein: implications for neuronal cell death in Parkinson disease.
Parkinson disease (PD), a prevalent neurodegenerative motor disorder, is characterized by the rather selective loss of dopaminergic neurons and the presence of α-synuclein-enriched Lewy body inclusions in the substantia nigra of the midbrain.
Although the etiology of PD remains incompletely understood, emerging evidence suggests that dysregulated iron homeostasis may be involved.
Notably, nigral dopaminergic neurons are enriched in iron, the uptake of which is facilitated by the divalent metal ion transporter DMT1.
To clarify the role of iron in PD, we generated SH-SY5Y cells stably expressing DMT1 either singly or in combination with wild type or mutant α-synuclein.
We found that DMT1 overexpression dramatically enhances Fe(2+) uptake, which concomitantly promotes cell death.
This Fe(2+)-mediated toxicity is aggravated by the presence of mutant α-synuclein expression, resulting in increased oxidative stress and DNA damage.
Curiously, Fe(2+)-mediated cell death does not appear to involve apoptosis.
Instead, the phenomenon seems to occur as a result of excessive autophagic activity.
Accordingly, pharmacological inhibition of autophagy reverses cell death mediated by Fe(2+) overloading.
Taken together, our results suggest a role for iron in PD pathogenesis and provide a mechanism underlying Fe(2+)-mediated cell death.
PMID: 21795682
Toward the discovery of effective polycyclic inhibitors of alpha-synuclein amyloid assembly.
The fibrillation of amyloidogenic proteins is a critical step in the etiology of neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases.
There is major interest in the therapeutic intervention on such aberrant aggregation phenomena, and the utilization of polyaromatic scaffolds has lately received considerable attention.
In this regard, the molecular and structural basis of the anti-amyloidogenicity of polyaromatic compounds, required to evolve this molecular scaffold toward therapeutic drugs, is not known in detail.
We present here biophysical and biochemical studies that have enabled us to characterize the interaction of metal-substituted, tetrasulfonated phthalocyanines (PcTS) with α-synuclein (AS), the major protein component of amyloid-like deposits in Parkinson disease.
The inhibitory activity of the assayed compounds on AS amyloid fibril formation decreases in the order PcTS[Ni(II)] ~ PcTS > PcTS[Zn(II)] > PcTS[Al(III)] ≈ 0.
Using NMR and electronic absorption spectroscopies we demonstrated conclusively that the differences in binding capacity and anti-amyloid activity of phthalocyanines on AS are attributed to their relative ability to self-stack through π-π interactions, modulated by the nature of the metal ion bound at the molecule.
Low order stacked aggregates of phthalocyanines were identified as the active amyloid inhibitory species, whose effects are mediated by residue specific interactions.
Such sequence-specific anti-amyloid behavior of self-stacked phthalocyanines contrasts strongly with promiscuous amyloid inhibitors with self-association capabilities that act via nonspecific sequestration of AS molecules.
The new findings reported here constitute an important contribution for future drug discovery efforts targeting amyloid formation.
PMID: 21795543
Dendritic sodium channels promote active decorrelation and reduce phase locking to parkinsonian input oscillations in model globus pallidus neurons.
Correlated firing among populations of neurons is present throughout the brain and is often rhythmic in nature, observable as an oscillatory fluctuation in the local field potential.
Although rhythmic population activity is believed to be critical for normal function in many brain areas, synchronized neural oscillations are associated with disease states in other cases.
In the globus pallidus (GP in rodents, homolog of the primate GPe), pairs of neurons generally have uncorrelated firing in normal animals despite an anatomical organization suggesting that they should receive substantial common input.
In contrast, correlated and rhythmic GP firing is observed in animal models of Parkinson's disease (PD).
Based in part on these findings, it has been proposed that an important part of basal ganglia function is active decorrelation, whereby redundant information is compressed.
Mechanisms that implement active decorrelation, and changes that cause it to fail in PD, are subjects of great interest.
Rat GP neurons express fast, transient voltage-dependent sodium channels (NaF channels) in their dendrites, with the expression level being highest near asymmetric synapses.
We recently showed that the dendritic NaF density strongly influences the responsiveness of model GP neurons to synchronous excitatory inputs.
In the present study, we use rat GP neuron models to show that dendritic NaF channel expression is a potential cellular mechanism of active decorrelation.
We further show that model neurons with lower dendritic NaF channel expression have a greater tendency to phase lock with oscillatory synaptic input patterns like those observed in PD.
PMID: 21794951
No evidence of substantia nigra telomere shortening in Parkinson's disease.
Telomeres are repetitive tracts of DNA which protect chromosomal integrity.
Increased oxidative stress leads to shorter telomeres, which have been associated with several late-onset human diseases.
Given independent evidence of oxidative stress and Parkinson's disease (PD), and conflicting reports of the role of telomere length in PD, we measured telomere length in both PD peripheral blood monocytes and in substantia nigra from affected individuals and controls.
We confirmed previous findings of a paradoxically longer telomere length in blood from PD patients, but found no difference in telomere length in substantia nigra.
Confounding factors provide a likely explanation for the findings in blood, and possibly the reduced frequency of cigarette smoking in PD patients.
We conclude that telomere shortening is unlikely to be involved in the pathogenesis of PD.
PMID: 21793734
Switching the microglial harmful phenotype promotes lifelong restoration of subtantia nigra dopaminergic neurons from inflammatory neurodegeneration in aged mice.
Aging represents a major risk factor for the development and progression of Parkinson disease (PD), a chronic degenerative disorder characterized by the selective loss of dopaminergic (DAergic) neurons in the subtantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc).
Emerging evidence highlights the glia as a pivotal factor in PD etiology, and epidemiological studies indicate that certain nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may prevent or delay the progression of PD.
Given that the exaggerated inflammatory response observed in old age may play a critical role in exacerbating DAergic vulnerability, we hypothesize here that switching the harmful glial response to inflammation and oxidative stress might increase the ability of the SN to resist inflammatory attacks.
To this end, we developed a treatment in which we combined the effects of nitric oxide (NO) with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory activity by using HCT1026, a NO-donating derivative of flurbiprofen that has a safe profile and additional immunomodulatory properties.
Young and aged mice fed with control or HCT1026 (30 mg kg(-1) day(-1)) diet were exposed to a single systemic injection of a subtoxic dose (0.2 mg kg(-1)) of lipopolysaccharide (LPS), one of the most extensively used glial activators.
HCT1026 efficiently reversed the age-dependent increase of microglial activation in response to LPS to levels measured in younger mice.
In aged mice, LPS induced a progressive loss of DAergic neurons with no recovery for their entire life span, whereas younger mice or aged mice fed with HCT1026 were resistant to systemic LPS-induced DAergic neurodegeneration, underscoring glia as a key pharmacological target for DAergic neuroprotection.
PMID: 21792127
A new mouse model of dystonia.
PMID: 21791948
Can the clinical outcome of deep brain stimulation be predicted?
PMID: 21791351
Botulinum toxin type A in patients with Parkinson's disease and refractory overactive bladder.
In this 6-month followup study we investigated the effect of intradetrusor injection of 100 U botulinum toxin type A in patients with Parkinson's disease and refractory detrusor overactivity.
Eight patients with Parkinson's disease and detrusor overactivity refractory to anticholinergics were injected with 100 U botulinum toxin type A.
Daytime and nighttime urinary frequency, and urinary incontinence episodes were recorded.
Patients also completed a standardized quality of life questionnaire on incontinence and a visual analog scale on the impact of bladder problems on daily life activities, and underwent urodynamic assessment, including pressure flow studies.
Clinical and urodynamic assessment was performed before, and 1, 3 and 6 months after injection.
In all patients 100 U botulinum toxin type A induced decreased daytime and nighttime urinary frequency, a decreased number of urinary incontinence episodes, increased quality of life scores and, as shown by increased maximum cystometric capacity, improved urodynamic findings.
In 2 patients with Parkinson's disease post-void residual urine volume developed.
Intradetrusor injection of 100 U botulinum toxin type A induced clinical and urodynamic improvement in overactive bladder symptoms that lasted at least 6 months in patients with Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21791235
HLA rs3129882 variant in Chinese Han patients with late-onset sporadic Parkinson disease.
Recently, the rs3129882 variant in intron 1 of HLA-DRA was found to be associated with late-onset sporadic Parkinson disease (PD) in Americans of European ancestry.
To evaluate whether the same variant is related to PD in Chinese population, we investigated late-onset sporadic PD patients of Chinese Han ethanicity in Mainland China.
We found significant difference in genotypic and allele distribution between patients and control subjects (χ²)=6.446, p=0.040 for genotypic distribution; χ²=5.762, p=0.016 for allele distribution), suggesting this variant is associated with late-onset sporadic PD in Chinese Han population.
PMID: 21791117
Single and dual task gait training in people with Parkinson's disease: a protocol for a randomised controlled trial.
Difficulty performing more than one task at a time (dual tasking) is a common and disabling problem experienced by people with Parkinson disease (PD).
If asked to perform another task when walking, people with PD often take shorter steps or walk more slowly.
Currently there is uncertainty about whether clinicians should teach people with PD to avoid dual tasking or whether they should encourage them to practice dual tasking with the hope that practice will lead to enhanced performance.
This study will address this issue by comparing single to dual task gait training.
A prospective randomised clinical trial is being conducted.
Sixty participants with idiopathic PD will be recruited, provided they score I-IV on the modified Hoehn and Yahr (1967) scale, and fulfil other inclusion criteria.
Participants will be randomly allocated to either a single or dual task gait training group.
Both groups will receive 12 hours of walking training over 4 weeks.
The single task group will undertake gait training with cueing strategies to increase step length.
The dual task group will train to improve step length when walking and performing a variety of added tasks.
Both groups will receive a tailored home program for 6 months.
Blinded assessors will conduct four assessments: two baseline assessments, one post intervention and one at 6 months follow-up.
The primary outcome measure will be step length when dual tasking over 8 m.
Secondary outcome measures include: spatiotemporal gait parameters when walking under single and dual task conditions, measures of executive function, the timed up and go test, measures of community mobility, and quality of life.
All analyses will be based on intention to treat principle.
This trial will examine the immediate and longer term effect of dual task walking training as compared to single task training in people with idiopathic PD, at the impairment, activity, and participation levels.
It has the potential to identify a new intervention that may improve and maintain walking beyond the laboratory.
The results of this trial will provide guidance for clinicians in the development of walking training programs for people with PD.
ACTRN12609000791235.
PMID: 21790503
Effect of rotigotine on sleep and quality of life in Parkinson's disease patients: post hoc analysis of RECOVER patients who were symptomatic at baseline.
The aim of this research is to characterize further the potential motor and non-motor benefits of rotigotine reported in the double-blind, placebo-controlled RECOVER trial primary publication, by performing a post hoc exploratory analysis of patient status (symptom improvement/worsening).
Full RECOVER trial methodological details have already been reported.
The post hoc analyses presented here are done on individual items of the PDSS-2 and PDQ-8 for all patients and two subgroups (baseline symptomatic and highly symptomatic patients).
Ten PDSS-2 and five PDQ-8 items show significant mean treatment difference versus placebo.
In the overall population, items that most favor rotigotine in percentage of patients with improvement are 'limb pain causes waking' and 'uncomfortable in bed due to immobility' for PDSS-2; for PDQ-8, rotigotine is most favored in 'difficulty dressing', 'felt depressed' and 'difficulty getting around in public'.
Among symptomatic and highly symptomatic patients, the PDSS-2 items that most favor rotigotine are both indicators of pain.
On the PDQ-8, the two items most favored in symptomatic patients are 'difficulty dressing' and 'embarrassed in public due to PD', and in the highly symptomatic subgroup 'difficulty dressing' and 'difficulty getting around in public'.
Though this trial was not powered for statistical subgroup analysis, these post hoc results indicate that treatment with rotigotine may benefit patients with sleep, pain, mood and quality-of-life issues.
PMID: 21790211
Rotigotine transdermal patch: a review of its use in the treatment of Parkinson's disease.
A transdermal patch formulation of the non-ergolinic dopamine agonist rotigotine (Neupro®) is indicated as monotherapy for the treatment of early Parkinson's disease and as combination therapy with levodopa throughout the course of the disease.
Daily application of the rotigotine transdermal patch (referred to here as rotigotine) provided predictable release and absorption of rotigotine, with steady-state rotigotine concentrations reached within 1-2 days.
In six large, well designed clinical trials, rotigotine was an efficacious treatment for Parkinson's disease.
In early Parkinson's disease, rotigotine initiated without levodopa produced significantly greater improvements than placebo in the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) summed motor and activities of daily living (ADL) scores, as well as significantly higher response rates.
In a comparison with oral ropinirole, rotigotine did not meet a prespecified response-rate noninferiority criterion, although this may reflect the dosages used, which may not have been directly comparable.
In advanced Parkinson's disease, rotigotine in combination with levodopa reduced 'off' time and improved motor functioning and ADL significantly more than levodopa plus placebo.
Rotigotine was noninferior to oral pramipexole in reducing 'off' time, although it did not meet a response-rate noninferiority criterion.
A recent trial focused on both motor and non-motor endpoints in patients with inadequate early morning motor control despite antiparkinsonian treatment (most received levodopa).
Rotigotine improved morning motor functioning and reduced sleep disturbances, night-time motor symptoms, depressive symptoms, pain and functioning, and quality of life to a significantly greater extent than placebo.
Rotigotine was generally well tolerated across the trials and in longer-term extension studies, with the most common treatment-emergent adverse events being application-site reactions, gastrointestinal disturbances, somnolence and headache.
Application-site reactions were generally mild to moderate in severity; where reported, up to 3% of patients had severe skin reactions.
Thus, rotigotine offers a novel approach to the treatment of Parkinson's disease and, given its ease of administration, efficacy in reducing disabling motor and non-motor symptoms, and acceptable tolerability profile, it has the potential to be an attractive treatment option for this highly debilitating disease.
PMID: 21790007
[Expression of GSK3B gene in peripheral blood in patient with Parkinson's disease].
Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons.
Detecting changes in gene expression in untreated de novo patients with PD is important for understanding disease pathogenesis and for identifying biomarkers for preclinical stage of PD.
In this study we investigate expression of gene of Glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta (GSK3B) in the peripheral blood of different groups of patients with neurological diseases using reverse transcription reaction and real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Our results suggest that the expression levels of GSK3B can't serve as a biomarker for early stages of PD.
PMID: 21789693
[The presymptomatic stage of neurodegenerative disorders].
Neurodegenerative disorders, such as Huntington's disease, spinocerebellar ataxias, Parkinson's disease or Alzheimer's disease, manifest in adult age with insidiously developing, slowly progressing symptoms.
At this stage, most patients consult a doctor, and a definite diagnosis can be made.
It is, however, well established that the manifest disease is preceded by a presymptomatic disease stage that may last for years.
A striking example is Parkinson's disease, in which more than half of the dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra are lost before motor symptoms appear.
Studies of the presymptomatic stage of neurodegenerative disorders are pivotal for an advanced understanding of these disorders and the development of preventive strategies aimed at postponing the clinical onset of these disorders.
It is therefore important to identify the earliest and most sensitive clinical signs and biological markers that herald the onset of the illness.
Furthermore, studies of presymptomatic disease stages are important because they may help to unravel compensatory mechanisms responsible for apparently normal brain function despite ongoing neurodegeneration.
PMID: 21788621
Quality improvement in neurology: AAN Parkinson disease quality measures.
PMID: 21788619
Slowly progressive Parkinson syndrome due to thalamic butterfly astrocytoma.
PMID: 21788252
Behavioural disorders, disability and quality of life in Parkinson's disease.
although non-motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease (PD) are known to adversely affect disability and health-related quality of life, the impact that specific disorders of reward and motivation have remains unclear.
Impulse control disorders are more likely in those with a younger disease onset although there is no strong evidence to date that apathy is related to age of onset or correlated with a longer duration of disease.
to examine the effects of apathy and impulse controls disorders on disability and health-related quality of life.
a total of 99 non-demented participants with PD (35 with impulse control disorders, 26 with apathy and 38 with neither behavioural complication) were assessed using the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (Activities of Daily Living component) and the Schwab-England scale to evaluate disability, and the PDQ (eight items) to assess quality of life.
quality of life was reduced in both behavioural groups compared with participants without either condition.
Disability was greater in the group with apathy.
Variation in disability score (56%, P < 0.001) was explained by greater levels of apathy, depression, motor impairment and longer disease duration.
Variation in quality of life score (54%, P < 0.001) was explained by higher levels of impulsivity, depression, dopaminergic load, motor complications, working memory problems and younger age at onset.
apathy and impulsivity negatively impact on disability and health-related quality of life, emphasising the importance of effective diagnosis and management of these PD-related behavioural disturbances.
PMID: 21787968
Nutritional support of surgical patients with inflammatory bowel disease.
Patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) in need of surgery are often malnourished, which in turn increases the risk for postoperative complications.
Malnutrition in IBD patients who must undergo surgery is due to the disordered activity of the diseased intestine, decreased dietary intake, and adverse effects of potent medications.
IBD operations predispose patients to both macronutrient and micronutrient deficiencies.
If the gut can be used safely it is the preferential route for feeding, though preoperative and postoperative parenteral nutrition remains a viable alternative for severely malnourished patients.
New nutrient therapies include immunonutrition, fish oils, and probiotics.
PMID: 21787806
The function of dopaminergic neural signal transmission in auditory pulse perception: evidence from dopaminergic treatment in Parkinson's patients.
Auditory pulse perception, which is the perception of relatively salient and regularly appearing events in an acoustic sequence, is a necessary function in humans and has been suggested to rely on basal ganglia function.
Our study investigated the effect dopamine depletion has on the auditory pulse perception in Parkinson's disease (PD).
We examined PD patients and healthy seniors in this study, and all participants performed a pulse perception task and a motor control task.
The pulse perception task consisted of a two alternative forced choice task in which subjects had to identify stimuli as metrical or non-metrical.
We tested PD patients before and after the administration of l-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanin (l-DOPA).
The healthy control group performed the same tasks twice.
PD patients that were dopamine depleted performed the pulse perception task equally well and as fast as did the healthy control group.
However, after the administration of l-DOPA, PD patients performed the pulse perception task significantly faster than they did before the pharmacological intervention, which showed that pulse perception can be modulated by dopaminergic stimulation.
These findings indicate that pulse perception relies on dopaminergic mechanisms but is not affected by dopamine depletion in the early stages of PD.
PMID: 21787314
A BACwards glance at neurodegeneration: molecular insights into disease from LRRK2, SNCA and MAPT BAC-transgenic mice.
BAC (bacterial artificial chromosome)-transgenic mice expressing a transgene from an entire genomic locus under the control of the native promoter offer the opportunity to generate more accurate genetic models of human disease.
The present review discusses results of recent studies investigating PD (Parkinson's disease) and tauopathies using BAC-transgenic mice carrying either the LRRK2 (leucine-rich repeat kinase 2), α-synuclein (SNCA) or MAPT (microtubule-associated protein tau) genes.
In all lines, expression of the WT (wild-type) gene resulted in physiologically relevant protein expression.
The effect of expressing the mutant form of a gene varied depending on the mouse strain or the particular disease mutation used, although it was common to see either neurochemical or behavioural differences in these animals.
Overall, BAC technology offers an exciting opportunity to generate a wide range of new animal models of human-disease states.
PMID: 21786295
Open-label surgical trials for Parkinson disease: time for reconsideration.
PMID: 21786135
Neuronal discharge patterns in the Globus Pallidus pars interna in a patient with Parkinson's disease and hemiballismus secondary to subthalamotomy.
Alterations in the basal ganglia-thalamocortical "motor" circuit activity, have been proposed to explain many features associated with hypokinetic and hyperkinetic movement disorders.
We describe the firing pattern of the globus pallidus pars interna in a Parkinson disease's patient who developed Hemichorea-Ballismus subsequent to ipsilateral subthalamotomy, and compare findings to those from PD patients submitted to pallidotomy while in the OFF-medication state.
Single units obtained from extracellular recordings were extracted and mean discharge frequency, interspike interval and coefficient of variation (defined as Tonicity Score) were computed.
Discharge density histograms, analysis of distribution and spectral analysis were also performed.
Mean firing frequency showed no significant difference between PD patients in the OFF state and the patient we report.
However, a significant difference in tonicity was found for this patient characterized by a regular, non-bursting firing pattern.
The findings indicate that in HB caused by lesions to STN in the parkinsonian state, GPi firing rates can be similar to and firing pattern more regular than those observed in GPi of PD patients OFF-medication with intact STN.
PMID: 21786116
Comment: should we diagnose MCI in Parkinson disease?
PMID: 21785221
Intra-neuronal vesicular uptake of catecholamines is decreased in patients with Lewy body diseases.
Several neurodegenerative disorders, including Parkinson disease (PD), are characterized by the presence of Lewy bodies - cytoplasmic inclusions containing α-synuclein protein aggregates - in the affected neurons.
A poorly understood feature of Lewy body diseases is loss of sympathetic nerves in the heart and other organs, manifesting as orthostatic hypotension (OH; also known as postural hypotension).
We asked whether sympathetic denervation is associated with decreased uptake of catecholamines, such as dopamine and norepinephrine, into storage vesicles within sympathetic neurons.
We used 6-[18F]-dopamine (18F-DA) to track myocardial uptake and retention of catecholamines.
Concurrently, the fate of intra-neuronal 18F-DA was followed by assessment of arterial plasma levels of the 18F-DA metabolite 18F-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (18F-DOPAC).
The ratio of myocardial 18F-DA to arterial 18F-DOPAC provided an index of vesicular uptake.
Tracer concentrations were measured in patients with PD with or without orthostatic hypotension (PD+OH, PD-No-OH); in patients with pure autonomic failure (PAF, a Lewy body disease without parkinsonism); in patients with multiple system atrophy (MSA, a non-Lewy body synucleinopathy); and in normal controls.
Patients with PD+OH or PAF had decreased vesicular 18F-DA uptake and accelerated 18F-DA loss, compared with MSA and control subjects.
PD-No-OH patients could be subtyped into one of these categories based on their initial 18F-DA uptake.
We conclude that sympathetic denervation in Lewy body diseases is associated with decreased vesicular uptake of neuronal catecholamines, suggesting that vesicular monoamine transport is impaired.
Vesicular uptake may constitute a novel target for diagnosis, treatment, and prevention.
PMID: 21784889
Anatomically selective serotonergic type 1A and serotonergic type 2A therapies for Parkinson's disease: an approach to reducing dyskinesia without exacerbating parkinsonism?
L-DOPA remains the most effective treatment for Parkinson's disease (PD).
However, long-term administration of L-DOPA is compromised by complications, particularly dyskinesia.
Serotonergic type 1A (5-HT(1A)) receptor agonists and serotonergic type 2A (5-HT(2A)) receptor antagonists were, until recently, considered to be promising therapies against dyskinesia.
However, there have been some recent high-profile failures in clinical trials, notably with sarizotan, and it seems that these classes of drugs may also impair l-DOPA antiparkinsonian efficacy.
A simple explanation for the loss of antiparkinsonian benefit might be lack of good selectivity of these compounds for their respective targets, particularly with respect to off-target actions on dopaminergic receptors or poor dose selection in clinical studies.
However, such explanations do not hold broadly when considering the actions of all compounds studied to date, whether in animal models or clinical trials.
Here, we review 5-HT(1A) and 5-HT(2A) receptor function in PD and provide an anatomically based rationale as to why in some instances 5-HT(1A)- and 5-HT(2A)-modulating drugs might worsen parkinsonism, in addition to reducing dyskinesia.
We propose that, in addition to selectivity for specific receptor subtypes, to target 5-HT(1A) and 5-HT(2A) receptors to alleviate dyskinesia, without worsening parkinsonism, it will be necessary to develop compounds that display anatomical selectivity, targeting corticostriatal transmission, while avoiding 5-HT receptors on ascending serotonergic and dopaminergic inputs from the raphe and substantia nigra, respectively.
PMID: 21784692
Correlation between the Movement Disorders Society Unified Parkinson's Disease rating scale (MDS-UPDRS) and the Unified Parkinson's Disease rating scale (UPDRS) during L-dopa acute challenge.
While Movement Disorders Society Unified Parkinson's Disease rating scale (MDS-UPDRS) validation has been exhaustive; performance evaluation to detect acute changes arising after administration of a single dose of L-dopa has yet to be explored.
To determine the correlation between UPDRS and MDS-UPDRS during the acute challenge with Ldopa and the MDS-UPDRS equivalent to 30% cutoff score of UPDRS for defining responsiveness, 64 patients were assessed.
Consecutive assessments were performed immediately before and after administration of a single dose of L-dopa/carbidopa 250/25 mg using the motor section of the UPDRS and the MDS-UPDRS.
Good diagnostic accuracy, consistent with published findings of high correlation between scales was observed.
Area under the curve (AUC) was 0.99 (CI = 0.97-1.00, P < 0.001) and maximum Youden index (Y = 0.905) corresponded to a cutoff of 24.5%.
In conclusion we have found an excellent correlation between UPDRS and MDS-UPDRS and that the 30% of variation in UPDRS score used for predicting sustained long term L-dopa response was equivalent to 24% in MDS-UPDRS.
PMID: 21784670
Parkinson's disease: interhemispheric textural differences in MR images.
Early-stage diagnosis of Parkinson's disease (PD) is essential in making decisions related to treatment and prognosis.
However, there is no specific diagnostic test for the diagnosis of PD.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the role of texture analysis (TA) of magnetic resonance images in detecting subtle changes between the hemispheres in various brain structures in patients with early symptoms of parkinsonism.
In addition, functional TA parameters for detecting textural changes are presented.
Fifty-one patients with symptoms of PD and 20 healthy controls were imaged using a 3-T magnetic resonance device.
Co-occurrence matrix-based TA was applied to detect changes in textures between the hemispheres in the following clinically interesting areas: dentate nucleus, basilar pons, substantia nigra, globus pallidus, thalamus, putamen, caudate nucleus, corona radiata, and centrum semiovale.
The TA results were statistically evaluated using the Mann-Whitney U test.
The results showed interhemispheric textural differences among the patients, especially in the area of basilar pons and midbrain.
Concentrating on this clinically interesting area, the four most discriminant parameters were defined: co-occurrence matrix correlation, contrast, difference variance, and sum variance.
With these parameters, differences were also detected in the dentate nucleus, globus pallidus, and corona radiata.
On the basis of this study, interhemispheric differences in the magnetic resonance images of patients with PD can be identified by the means of co-occurrence matrix-based TA.
The detected areas correlate with the current pathophysiologic and neuroanatomic knowledge of PD.
PMID: 21784538
Genetic mutations and functions of PINK1.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disease.
Mutations in PINK1 (PARK6) are the second most frequent cause of autosomal recessive, young-onset PD, after parkin (PARK2).
PINK1 (a kinase with an N-terminal mitochondrial targeting sequence) provides protection against mitochondrial dysfunction and regulates mitochondrial morphology via fission/fusion machinery.
PINK1 also acts upstream of parkin (a cytosolic E3 ubiquitin ligase) in a common pathway.
Recent studies have described PINK1/parkin function in the maintenance of mitochondrial quality via autophagy (mitophagy).
PINK1/parkin-mediated mitophagy provides new insights into the etiology of PD and could be a suitable target for new treatment of PD.
In this review, we discuss the molecular genetics and functions of PINK1, which could be key factors in novel rational therapy for sporadic PD as well as PINK1-linked PD.
PMID: 21784416
CSF xanthine, homovanillic acid, and their ratio as biomarkers of Parkinson's disease.
Diminished nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurotransmission is a biochemical hallmark of Parkinson's disease.
Despite this, a reliable trait biomarker of sporadic Parkinson's disease has not emerged from measurements of cerebrospinal fluid dopamine metabolites.
Previous studies have highlighted strong neurochemical relationships between dopamine and various purine compounds.
In this study, we analyzed cerebrospinal fluid concentrations of homovanillic acid (the major catabolite of dopamine) and the purine compound xanthine for a comparison of 217 unmedicated Parkinson's disease subjects and 26 healthy controls.
These compounds were highly correlated for both the Parkinson's disease subjects (r=0.68) and for controls (r=0.73; both groups, p<0.001).
While neither homovanillic acid nor xanthine concentrations differentiated Parkinson's disease from controls, their ratio did.
For controls, the mean [xanthine]/[homovanillic acid] quotient was 13.1±5.5 as compared to the Parkinson's disease value of 17.4±6.7 at an initial lumbar CSF collection (p=0.0017), and 19.7±8.7 (p<0.001) at a second CSF collection up to 24 months later.
The [xanthine]/[homovanillic acid] ratio in the Parkinson's disease subjects differed as a function of disease severity, as measured by the sum of Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale Activities of Daily Living and Motor Exam ratings.
The [xanthine]/[homovanillic acid] ratio also increased between the first and second CSF collections, suggesting that this quotient provides both a state and trait biomarker of Parkinson's disease.
These observations add to other neurochemical evidence that links purine metabolism to Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21783205
Increased dopamine transporter density in Parkinson's disease patients with Social Anxiety Disorder.
Social Anxiety Disorder (SAD) is more common among PD patients than in the general population.
This association may be explained by psychosocial mechanisms but it is also possible that neurobiological mechanism underlying PD can predispose to SAD.
The aim of this study was to investigate a possible dopaminergic mechanism involved in PD patients with SAD, by correlating striatal dopamine transporter binding potential (DAT-BP) with intensity of social anxiety symptoms in PD patients using SPECT with TRODAT-1 as the radiopharmaceutical.
Eleven PD patients with generalized SAD and 21 PD patients without SAD were included in this study; groups were matched for age, gender, disease duration and disease severity.
SAD diagnosis was determined according to DSM IV criteria assessed with SCID-I and social anxiety symptom severity with the Brief Social Phobia Scale (BSPS).
Demographic and clinical data were also collected.
DAT-BP was significantly correlated to scores on BSPS for right putamen (r=0.37, p=0.04), left putamen (r=0.43, p=0.02) and left caudate (r=0.39, p=0.03).
No significant correlation was found for the right caudate (r=0.23, p=0.21).
This finding may reinforce the hypothesis that dopaminergic dysfunction might be implicated in the pathogenesis of social anxiety in PD.
PMID: 21782285
Role of sepiapterin reductase gene at the PARK3 locus in Parkinson's disease.
Sepiapterin reductase (SPR) gene is an enzyme which catalyses the final step of tetrahydrobiopterin synthesis (BH4) and was implicated in Parkinson's disease (PD) pathogenesis as a candidate gene for PARK3 locus.
A number of studies yielded association of the PARK3 locus with PD, and SPR knockout mice were shown to display parkinsonian features.
To evaluate the role of SPR gene polymorphisms in diverse populations in PD, we performed collaborative analyses in the Genetic Epidemiology of Parkinson Disease (GEO-PD) Consortium.
A total of 5 single nucleotide polymorphisms (3 in the promoter region and 2 in the 3' untranslated region [UTR]) were genotyped.
Fixed as well as random effect models were used to provide summary risk estimates of SPR variants.
A total of 19 sites provided data for 6547 cases and 9321 controls.
Overall odds ratio estimates varied from 0.92 to 1.01.
No overall association with the SPR gene using either fixed effect or random effect model was observed in the studied population.
I(2) Metric varied from 0% to 36.2%.
There was some evidence for an association for participants of North European/Scandinavian descent with the strongest signal for rs1876487 (odds ratio = 0.82; p value = 0.003).
Interestingly, families which were used to map the PARK3 locus, have Scandinavian ancestry suggesting a founder effect.
In conclusion, this large association study for the SPR gene revealed no association for PD worldwide.
However, taking the initial mapping of the PARK3 into account, the role of a population-specific effect warrants consideration in future studies.
PMID: 21782030
Apathy, depression, and motor symptoms have distinct and separable resting activity patterns in idiopathic Parkinson disease.
Apathy and depression are heterogeneous syndromes with symptoms that overlap clinically.
This clinical overlap leads to problems with classification and diagnosis in clinical populations.
No functional imaging study has attempted to separate brain regions altered in apathy from those altered in depression in a clinical population.
Parkinson disease (PD) is a disorder in which apathy and depression co-exist in a single population.
We evaluate the relationship between apathy, depression, and motor severity of disease in PD, focusing on the relationship between these factors and the amplitude of the low frequency fluctuation (ALFF) in the resting state.
We first evaluated if the resting ALFF signal is a reliable measure for our clinical question.
For this, we develop and introduce a cross validation approach we term the "Regional Mapping of Reliable Differences" (RMRD) method to evaluate reliability of regions of interest deemed "significant" by standard voxel-wise techniques.
Using this approach, we show that the apathy score in this sample is best predicted by ALFF signal in the left supplementary motor cortex, the right orbitofrontal cortex, and the right middle frontal cortex, whereas depression score is best predicted by ALFF signal in the right subgenual cingulate.
Disease severity was best predicted by ALFF signal in the right putamen.
A number of additional regions are also statistically (but not reliably) correlated with our neuropsychological measures and disease severity.
Our results support the use of resting fMRI as a means to evaluate neuropsychiatric states and motor disease progression in Parkinson disease, and the clinical and epidemiologic observation that apathy and depression are distinct pathological entities.
Our finding that "significance" and "reliability" are dissociated properties of regions of interest identified as significant using standard voxel-wise techniques suggests that including reliability analyses may add useful scientific information in neurobehavioral research.
PMID: 21781348
Genetic polymorphisms involved in dopaminergic neurotransmission and risk for Parkinson's disease in a Japanese population.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by alterations in dopaminergic neurotransmission.
Genetic polymorphisms involved in dopaminergic neurotransmission may influence susceptibility to PD.
We investigated the relationship of catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), monoamine oxidase B (MAOB), dopamine receptor (DR) D2 and DRD4 polymorphisms and PD risk with special attention to the interaction with cigarette smoking among 238 patients with PD and 369 controls in a Japanese population.
Subjects with the AA genotype of MAOB rs1799836 showed a significantly increased risk of PD (odds ratio (OR) = 1.70, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.12 - 2.58) compared with the AG and GG genotypes combined.
The AA genotype of COMT rs4680 was marginally associated with an increased risk of PD (OR = 1.86, 95% CI = 0.98 - 3.50) compared with the GG genotype.
The DRD2 rs1800497 and DRD4 rs1800955 polymorphisms showed no association with PD.
A COMT -smoking interaction was suggested, with the combined GA and AA genotypes of rs4680 and non-smoking conferring significantly higher risk (OR = 3.97, 95% CI = 2.13 - 7.41) than the AA genotype and a history of smoking (P for interaction = 0.061).
No interactions of smoking with other polymorphisms were observed.
The COMT rs4680 and MAOB rs1799836 polymorphisms may increase susceptibility to PD risk among Japanese.
Future studies involving larger control and case populations and better pesticide exposure histories will undoubtedly lead to a more thorough understanding of the role of the polymorphisms involved in the dopamine pathway in PD.
PMID: 21781190
Evaluating dopaminergic system contributions to cued pattern switching during bimanual coordination.
Switching between different coordinated movements has been shown to be slow, with delayed responses and even freezing deficits in individuals with Parkinson's disease (PD).
While it is well accepted that the dopaminergic system responds to dopamine replacement to ameliorate overall slowness (bradykinesia) and other motor symptoms of PD, it is unknown whether the dopaminergic system can influence overall coordination between limbs and if this may be impacted by the availability of sensory feedback.
In the current study, PD and healthy age-matched control participants performed a rhythmic coordination task that required a cued voluntary switch between movement patterns (in-phase and anti-phase).
PD participants performed the task first after overnight withdrawal ('off'), and subsequently after administration ('on') of dopamine replacement.
Coordinated movements were performed while paced by an auditory metronome in two sensory conditions: 'no vision' or 'normal vision'.
Measures of voluntary switch time and delayed responses revealed that PD 'off' required significantly more time than healthy participants to switch between movement patterns.
Interestingly, PD 'off' demonstrated disrupted coordination, as revealed by mean (accuracy) and standard deviation (stability) of absolute error of relative phase.
Dopamine replacement improved the time needed to switch and amount of delayed responses in PD participants, but had no influence on coordination itself.
It is concluded that although modulation of the dopaminergic system improves the slowness during switching, coordination deficits may be the result of secondary impairments (possibly attention-related) that cannot be improved with dopamine replacement.
PMID: 21780724
Palliative care in Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease is a progressive, neurodegenerative condition with no known cure.
People with the condition can have complex palliative care needs similar to those of cancer patients.
This article describes the four stages of Parkinson's disease, and illustrates how nurses can apply the principles of palliative care to support and care at each stage.
PMID: 21780180
Wearing-off scales in Parkinson's disease: critique and recommendations.
Wearing-off occurs in the majority of patients with Parkinson's disease after a few years of dopaminergic therapy.
Because a variety of scales have been used to estimate wearing-off, the Movement Disorder Society commissioned a task force to assess their clinimetric properties.
A systematic review was conducted to identify wearing-off scales that have either been validated or used in Parkinson's patients.
A scale was designated "Recommended" if it had been used in clinical studies beyond the group that developed it, if it had been specifically used in Parkinson's disease reports, and if clinimetric studies had established that it is valid, reliable, and sensitive.
"Suggested" scales met 2 of the above criteria, and those meeting 1 were "Listed." We identified 3 diagnostic and 4 severity rating scales for wearing-off quantification.
Two questionnaires met the criteria to be Recommended for diagnostic screening (questionnaires for 19 and 9 items), and 1 was Suggested (questionnaire for 32 items).
Only the patient diaries were Recommended to assess wearing-off severity, with the caveat of relatively limited knowledge of validity.
Among the other severity assessment tools, the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale version 3 and the version revised from the Movement Disorders Society were classified as Suggested, whereas the Treatment Response Scale was Listed.
PMID: 21778795
Intracranial air correlates with preoperative cerebral atrophy and stereotactic error during bilateral STN DBS surgery for Parkinson's disease.
We examine the effect of intracranial air on stereotactic accuracy during bilateral deep brain stimulation (DBS) surgery for Parkinson's disease (PD).
We also assess factors that may predict an increased risk of intracranial air during these surgeries.
32 patients with PD underwent bilateral DBS surgery.
The technique used for implantation of the leads has been standardized in over 800 subthalamic nucleus (STN) implantations.
For lead implantation, the goal of the neurophysiological technique is identification of the STN and its borders with 3 microelectrode recording (MER) tracks.
We examined the number of tracks and the degree of deviation from the planned target on each side.
Total intracranial air (TIA) was then compared in these groups.
We also examined the relationship between the TIA and length of surgery, ventricular volume and the degree of atrophy.
Side 2 in this series required more MER tracks.
The TIA was larger in patients with more than 3 MER tracks on side 2 of surgery.
There was more deviation from the target on side 2.
In addition, the TIA in patients with >1 mm of vector deviation on side 2 was more than in those without.
The TIA correlated with the number of tracks on side 2 as well as with the degree of the second euclidean deviation on side 2.
There was a correlation of degree of atrophy with TIA.
In bilateral STN DBS for PD, intracranial air may contribute to error in stereotactic accuracy especially on the second side.
In addition, there is a correlation between the accumulated volume of intracranial air and the degree of cerebral atrophy.
PMID: 21778409
External cueing improves motor imagery quality in patients with Parkinson disease.
Patients with Parkinson disease (PD) are often profoundly slow in their performance of physical tasks, as well as in motor imagery (MI).
This may limit the implementation and potential benefits of MI practice during rehabilitation.
The authors investigated whether the quality of MI could be improved by external cueing.
Fourteen patients with PD and 14 healthy controls physically executed and visually imagined a goal-directed aiming task and a box-and-block task, both in the presence and absence of visual and auditory cues.
Mental chronometry and eye movement recording allowed objective evaluation of the temporal and spatial characteristics of MI when compared with physical execution.
Visual analogue scales were used to assess imagery vividness.
The presence of visual cues significantly reduced the patients' bradykinesia during MI and increased their imagery vividness.
Visual cueing optimizes MI quality for PD patients and is a potential tool to increase the efficacy of MI practice in PD rehabilitation.
PMID: 21778290
Profile of functional limitations and task performance among people with early- and middle-stage Parkinson disease.
Overall functional ability declines over time in people with Parkinson disease (PD).
Established benchmarks are needed to allow clinicians and researchers to facilitate meaningful interpretation of data.
The purposes of this study were: (1) to report typical values for standard measures of functional ability commonly used in intervention studies and clinical practice with individuals in the early and middle stages of PD and (2) to describe the profile of functional limitations using the Hoehn and Yahr (H&Y) stages of disease and Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) motor scores.
Cross-sectional data were obtained from 5 different studies.
Three hundred thirty-nine patients were evaluated for disease severity (UPDRS motor score); functional capacity (Continuous Scale Physical Functional Performance Test [CS-PFP]); balance and gait (Functional Reach Test [FRT], Timed "Up & Go" Test [TUG], 360-degree turn, Six-Minute Walk Test [6MWT], and Two-Minute Walk Test); and basic functional activities (supine-to-stand task, stand-to-supine task, and functional axial rotation [FAR]).
The mean UPDRS motor score for the sample was 39.2 (SD=12.93).
At each stage of PD (from least to most involved), scores on functional measures indicated a significant and progressively reduced functional status.
Limitations began early in the disease for the CS-PFP and FAR.
Losses in performance were consistent across all stages of disease for the CS-PFP, FRT, 6MWT, and FAR.
Several measures demonstrated meaningful losses of function only in later stages of disease.
Findings extend current appreciation of functional limitations that begin early in PD and can guide the choice of functional outcome measures at different stages of disease severity.
Data were obtained only from participants in H&Y stages 1 through 3 and only for some of the performance measures typically used.
The findings demonstrate that functional loss occurs at different points in the disease process, depending on the task under consideration.
The resulting profile of functional limitations provides benchmarks that clinicians and researchers can use to interpret and monitor status of patients.
PMID: 21777826
News in brief.
PMID: 21777824
Jay Nutt: a boatman's calling.
PMID: 21777821
CSF α-synuclein, tau, and amyloid β in Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21777421
Enhanced catecholamine transporter binding in the locus coeruleus of patients with early Parkinson disease.
Studies in animals suggest that the noradrenergic system arising from the locus coeruleus (LC) and dopaminergic pathways mutually influence each other.
Little is known however, about the functional state of the LC in patients with Parkinson disease (PD).
We retrospectively reviewed clinical and imaging data of 94 subjects with PD at an early clinical stage (Hoehn and Yahr stage 1-2) who underwent single photon computed tomography imaging with FP-CIT ([¹²³I] N-ω-fluoropropyl-2β-carbomethoxy-3β-(4-iodophenyl) tropane).
FP-CIT binding values from the patients were compared with 15 healthy subjects: using both a voxel-based whole brain analysis and a volume of interest analysis of a priori defined brain regions.
Average FP-CIT binding in the putamen and caudate nucleus was significantly reduced in PD subjects (43% and 57% on average, respectively; p < 0.001).
In contrast, subjects with PD showed an increased binding in the LC (166% on average; p < 0.001) in both analyses.
LC-binding correlated negatively with striatal FP-CIT binding values (caudate: contralateral, ρ = -0.28, p < 0.01 and ipsilateral ρ = -0.26, p < 0.01; putamen: contralateral, ρ = -0.29, p < 0.01 and ipsilateral ρ = -0.29, p < 0.01).
These findings are consistent with an up-regulation of noradrenaline reuptake in the LC area of patients with early stage PD, compatible with enhanced noradrenaline release, and a compensating activity for degeneration of dopaminergic nigrostriatal projections.
PMID: 21776258
24-Epibrassinolide, a Phytosterol from the Brassinosteroid Family, Protects Dopaminergic Cells against MPP-Induced Oxidative Stress and Apoptosis.
Oxidative stress and apoptosis are frequently cited to explain neuronal cell damage in various neurodegenerative disorders, such as Parkinson' s disease.
Brassinosteroids (BRs) are phytosterols recognized to promote stress tolerance of vegetables via modulation of the antioxidative enzyme cascade.
However, their antioxidative effects on mammalian neuronal cells have never been examined so far.
We analyzed the ability of 24-epibrassinolide (24-Epi), a natural BR, to protect neuronal PC12 cells from 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium- (MPP(+)-) induced oxidative stress and consequent apoptosis in dopaminergic neurons.
Our results demonstrate that 24-Epi reduces the levels of intracellular reactive oxygen species and modulates superoxide dismutase, catalase, and glutathione peroxidase activities.
Finally, we determined that the antioxidative properties of 24-Epi lead to the inhibition of MPP(+)-induced apoptosis by reducing DNA fragmentation as well as the Bax/Bcl-2 protein ratio and cleaved caspase-3.
This is the first time that the potent antioxidant and neuroprotective role of 24-Epi has been shown in a mammalian neuronal cell line.
PMID: 21775040
Impaired finger dexterity in Parkinson's disease is associated with praxis function.
A controversial concept suggests that impaired finger dexterity in Parkinson's disease may be related to limb kinetic apraxia that is not explained by elemental motor deficits such as bradykinesia.
To explore the nature of dexterous difficulties, the aim of the present study was to assess the relationship of finger dexterity with ideomotor praxis function and parkinsonian symptoms.
Twenty-five patients with Parkinson's disease participated in the study.
Their left and right arms were tested independently.
Testing was done in an OFF and ON state as defined by a modified version of the Movement Disorder Society-Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS).
Finger dexterity was assessed by a coin rotation (CR) task and ideomotor praxis using a novel test of upper limb apraxia (TULIA), in which the patients were requested to imitate and pantomime 48 meaningless, as well as communicative and tool-related gestures.
Coin rotation significantly correlated with TULIA irrespective of the motor state and arm involved, but not with the MDS-UPDRS.
This association was significantly influenced by Hoehn and Yahr stage.
The strong association of finger dexterity with praxis function but not the parkinsonian symptoms indicates that impaired finger dexterity in Parkinson's disease may be indeed apraxic in nature, yet, predominantly in advanced stages of the disease when cortical pathology is expected to develop.
The findings are discussed within a cognitive-motor model of praxis function.
PMID: 21774946
Population-based case-control study of cognitive function in early Parkinson's disease (NEDICES).
Population-based assessments of cognitive function in patients with early Parkinson's disease (PD) are rare.
We examined whether patients with early PD have cognitive deficits when compared with matched controls.
All participants were age 65 years or older (median=76 years) and were enrolled in the Neurological Disorders in Central Spain (NEDICES) study in central Spain.
We identified all participants with early PD (<5 years duration) (N=46).
These were matched to 138 controls.
Neuropsychological test scores were compared in PD patients vs.
controls.
In logistic regression models, we adjusted for the effects of confounding variables.
In these models, the dependent variable was the neuropsychological test score (lowest quartile vs.
all other quartiles) and the independent variable was PD vs.
control.
Sixteen of 46 patients (34.8%) with early PD were previously undiagnosed.
Subjective memory complaint was present in 27 (58.7%) PD patients vs.
51 (37.0%) controls (p=0.010).
In logistic regression models that adjusted for gender, education, and depressive symptoms or antidepressant use, PD patients performed less well on the 37-item version of the Mini-Mental State Examination (p=0.04), animal (p<0.001) and fruit fluency (p=0.04) as well as in a delayed free recall memory test (p=0.04) than controls.
In this population-based sample of older patients with early PD, the rate of subjective and object cognitive impairment was appreciable.
Patients with PD of less than five years duration performed relatively poorly on tests of global cognition, verbal fluency and memory.
Clinicians should be vigilant to these cognitive difficulties even in the early stages of PD.
PMID: 21772670
Cross-talk between apolipoprotein E and cytokines.
Apolipoprotein E (apoE) is a multifunctional glycosylated protein characterized by its wide tissue distribution.
Despite its importance in lipid transport and atherosclerosis pathogenesis, apoE is associated with neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson disease, and autoimmune disorders such as multiple sclerosis and psoriasis.
Among others, the role of apoE in modulating inflammation and oxidation is crucial in elucidating the risk factors of the above diseases since the function of apoE is closely linked with both proinflammatory and antiinflammatory cytokines.
Moreover, apoE modulates inflammatory and immune responses in an isoform-dependent manner.
Correspondingly, inflammatory cytokines can either upregulate or downregulate the production of apoE in various tissue types.
However, studies on the interactions between apoE and cytokines occasionally yield conflicting results, highlighting the complex roles of apoE and cytokines in various disorders.
The present paper summarizes the current knowledge about the cross-talk between apoE and cytokines, with emphasis on the effects of apoE on the Th1/Th2 balance.
PMID: 21772326
Policing Parkin with a UblD.
PMID: 21772145
Placebo analgesia and beyond: a melting pot of concepts and ideas for neuroscience.
In the last two decades, some of the neuroanatomical and neurophysiological substrates of the placebo effect have been elucidated.
What has emerged is the multifactorial nature of the placebo effect, such that there is not a single placebo effect but many.
Here we report on recent advances in our understanding of this phenomenon, with particular emphasis on its use as an experimental model to better clarify different brain mechanisms.
One of the most interesting findings in the past few years is that the placebo effect is a learning phenomenon, which is powerfully influenced by the manipulation of different variables.
The involvement of opioid mechanisms is supported by several studies on pain, but also by the exploration of new fields such as memory and cognition.
Nonopioid mechanisms have been described as well, for example, in pain, Parkinson's disease and anxiety.
Recent evidence confirms and extends previous findings on the key role of prefrontal regions in the placebo response.
The study of the placebo effect is paying dividends and bodes well for the future.
Whereas in clinical practice it can increase the efficacy of a therapy, in the experimental setting it represents an excellent tool for neuroscience.
PMID: 21772140
Anesthesia for deep brain stimulation.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is a well accepted treatment modality for many movement disorders such as Parkinson's disease and an increasing number of other functional neurological disorders like dystonias and epilepsy.
This review will highlight the recent developments in our knowledge regarding the effects of anesthetic agents on neurophysiologic recording and anesthetic management of patients undergoing the insertion of a DBS.
There are new indications for DBS as well as new therapeutic target nuclei that are being examined.
Better surgical technique and new imaging techniques like frameless stereotaxy are likely to improve patient tolerance of these procedures.
The effects of anesthetic drugs on nuclei microelectrode recording and the need for an awake and cooperative patient for intraoperative macrostimulation testing continue to be the challenge for the anesthesiologist.
Intracranial hemorrhage, seizures, and venous air embolism are the important perioperative complications needing urgent care.
There are reports of increased incidence of postoperative behavioral and cognitive problems after DBS insertion.
There will continue to be an increase in the use of DBS for many neurological and functional disorders, especially in the aging baby boomer population.
Anesthetic technique will vary depending on the prevalent practice in individual institutions and requirements of the specific surgical procedure.
PMID: 21771952
Parkinson disease: diagnostic utility of diffusion kurtosis imaging.
To examine the usefulness of diffusion kurtosis imaging for the diagnosis of Parkinson disease (PD).
Examinations were performed with the understanding and written consent of each subject, with local ethics committee approval, and in compliance with national legislation and Declaration of Helsinki guidelines.
Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging was performed in 30 patients with idiopathic PD (mean age, 64.5 years ± 3.4 [standard deviation]) and 30 healthy subjects (mean age, 65.0 years ± 5.1).
Mean kurtosis, fractional anisotropy, and mean, axial, and radial diffusivity of the basal ganglia were compared between the groups.
Disease severity was assessed by using Hoehn and Yahr staging and the motor section of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (mean scores, 2.0 and 33.6, respectively).
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was used to compare the diagnostic accuracies of the indexes of interest.
Pearson correlation coefficient analysis was used to correlate imaging findings with disease severity.
Mean kurtosis in the putamen was higher in the PD group (0.93 ± 0.15) than in the control group (0.71 ± 0.09) (P < .000416).
The area under the ROC curve (AUC) was 0.95 for both the ipsilateral putamen and the ipsilateral substantia nigra.
The mean kurtosis for the ipsilateral substantia nigra had the best diagnostic performance (mean cutoff, 1.10; sensitivity, 0.92; specificity, 0.87).
In contrast, AUCs for the tensor-derived indexes ranged between 0.43 (axial and radial diffusivity in substantia nigra) and 0.65 (fractional anisotropy in substantia nigra).
Diffusion kurtosis imaging in the basal ganglia, as compared with conventional diffusion-tensor imaging, can improve the diagnosis of PD.
PMID: 21769916
Sphingosine kinase 1/S1P pathway involvement in the GDNF-induced GAP43 transcription.
Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) is important for the development and maintenance of dopamine neurons (Lin et al.
[1993] Science 260: 1130-1132).
GDNF is neuroprotective in animal models of Parkinson disease, where dopamine neurons show selective degeneration.
We previously reported GDNF-induced SPHK1 gene expression in a neuroblastoma cell line, TGW (Murakami et al.
[2007] J Neurochem 102: 1585-1594).
In the present study, we focused on the regulatory mechanism of GAP43 (GDNF-induced neuronal phenotype) transcription to further elucidate physiological roles of GDNF-induced SPHK1 expression and activity.
Stable wild-type (SPHK1-WT) but not dominant-negative SPHK1 (SPHK1-DN) overexpression increased both control- and GDNF-induced GAP43 expression.
SPHK1-WT cells showed enhanced GDNF-induced sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) secretion compared with mock- and SPHK1-DN cells.
Exogenous S1P also increased GAP43 expression.
In TGW cells, PD98059, a MEK inhibitor, but not SB203580 (a p38 MAPK inhibitor) and LY294002 (a PI3K inhibitor) inhibited GDNF-induced GAP43 expression, suggesting the MEK/ERK pathway has a major role in GDNF-induced GAP43 transcription.
A G-protein-coupled receptor inhibitor, pertussis toxin, and S1P(1) and S1P(3) receptor antagonists (VPC23019 and CAY10444) also inhibited ERK activation.
Moreover, both S1P1 and S1P3 were serine-phosphorylated by GDNF, suggesting their activated states.
C/EBPβ transcription factor was induced by GDNF, and DNA pull-down and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed the C/EBP binding site between -131 bp and -98  bp from the first exon of GAP43.
Taken together, our results showed that in TGW cells, GDNF increased SPHK1 transcription, leading to the production and secretion of S1P.
Through MEK/ERK pathway, S1P stimulates GAP43 transcription with increased binding of C/EBPβ to the 5'-promoter.
PMID: 21769751
Cognition and Lewy body disease.
We're assisting in last years to an important change in clinical manifestations of Parkinson disease.
Nowadays motor symptoms have best treatments if we compare with those existing some decades ago, which in last term, permits other manifestations being the main disabilities in an advanced Parkinson disease.
Among these disabilities cognitives are the most severe due to it's prevalence and devastating consecuences.
We present the clinical case of a 72 aged woman who complains of cognitive and depressive symptoms, probably compatible with a depressive disorder, but finally diagnosed with Lewy body disease despite these cognitive manifestations are most common in advanced disease.
We' re showing an interesting case of Lewy body disease due to it's incipient symptomatology in cognitive manifestations (which makes it interesting for psichiatric value), motor manifestations (interesting for neurological value) and organic manifestations as complementary tests demostrate.
Finally, we justificate the usage of rivastigmine as the choice of treatment in these cases which onset is mainly composed by cognitive symptoms.
Key words: Parkinson, Lewy Bodies, dementia, cognitive impairment, rivastigmine, dopamine.
PMID: 21769124
Parkinson disease: Poor results for retinal cell transplants in Parkinson disease.
PMID: 21768919
Assessment of the effects of unilateral electrode dysfunction in patients with Parkinson disease undergoing bilateral subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation.
: Bilateral subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation (STN-DBS) is the gold standard surgical treatment for medically intractable Parkinson disease, and unilateral electrodes are reported to have beneficial effects.
However, assessment of patients after electrode failure needs to be established.
: To assess the effects of the remaining unilateral electrode in Parkinson disease after bilateral STN-DBS.
: Between May 2000 and March 2009, 8 patients had unilateral STN-DBS after bilateral STN-DBS.
We assessed clinical outcome by comparing the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) motor score, activities of daily living, levodopa-equivalent daily dosages, and quality of life according to the Short-Form 36 Health Survey between patients with unilateral and bilateral electrodes.
: Although ipsilateral and axial UPDRS motor scores were compromised, UPDRS motor scores contralateral to the side of the implant remained unaltered after removal of 1 electrode.
Although physical aspects of quality of life declined significantly with a unilateral electrode, pain and social functioning were not significantly affected.
No significant changes in activities of daily living, Hoehn and Yahr stage, or levodopa-equivalent daily dosage were observed after removal of 1 electrode.
: The UPDRS motor score with unilateral STN-DBS was compromised relative to bilateral STN-DBS for ipsilateral motor and axial symptoms.
When 1 electrode is compromised, revision of that electrode will eventually be required, but not immediately in all patients.
If a patient tolerates loss of 1 electrode according to motor score while maintaining activities of daily living and quality of life, it is possible to wait and observe the situation instead of immediately revising the electrode.
PMID: 21768599
Does vigorous exercise have a neuroprotective effect in Parkinson disease?
Parkinson disease (PD) is progressive, with dementia and medication-refractory motor problems common reasons for late-stage nursing-home placement.
Increasing evidence suggests that ongoing vigorous exercise/physical fitness may favorably influence this progression.
Parkinsonian animal models reveal exercise-related protection from dopaminergic neurotoxins, apparently mediated by brain neurotrophic factors and neuroplasticity (predicted from in vitro studies).
Similarly, exercise consistently improves cognition in animals, also linked to enhanced neuroplasticity and increased neurotrophic factor expression.
In these animal models, immobilization has the opposite effect.
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) may mediate at least some of this exercise benefit.
In humans, exercise increases serum BDNF, and this is known to cross the blood-brain barrier.
PD risk in humans is significantly reduced by midlife exercise, documented in large prospective studies.
No studies have addressed whether exercise influences dementia risk in PD, but exercised patients with PD improve cognitive scores.
Among seniors in general, exercise or physical fitness has not only been associated with better cognitive scores, but midlife exercise significantly reduces the later risk of both dementia and mild cognitive impairment.
Finally, numerous studies in seniors with and without dementia have reported increased cerebral gray matter volumes associated with physical fitness or exercise.
These findings have several implications for PD clinicians.
(1) Ongoing vigorous exercise and physical fitness should be highly encouraged.
(2) PD physical therapy programs should include structured, graduated fitness instruction and guidance for deconditioned patients with PD.
(3) Levodopa and other forms of dopamine replenishment therapy should be utilized to achieve the maximum capability and motivation for patients to maintain fitness.
PMID: 21768369
Impaired mitochondrial transport and Parkin-independent degeneration of respiratory chain-deficient dopamine neurons in vivo.
Mitochondrial dysfunction is heavily implicated in Parkinson disease (PD) as exemplified by the finding of an increased frequency of respiratory chain-deficient dopamine (DA) neurons in affected patients.
An inherited form of PD is caused by impaired function of Parkin, an E3 ubiquitin ligase reported to translocate to defective mitochondria in vitro to facilitate their clearance.
We have developed a reporter mouse to assess mitochondrial morphology in DA neurons in vivo and show here that respiratory chain deficiency leads to fragmentation of the mitochondrial network and to the formation of large cytoplasmic bodies derived from mitochondria.
Surprisingly, the dysfunctional mitochondria do not recruit Parkin in vivo, and neither the clearance of defective mitochondria nor the neurodegeneration phenotype is affected by the absence of Parkin.
We also show that anterograde axonal transport of mitochondria is impaired in respiratory chain-deficient DA neurons, leading to a decreased supply of mitochondria to the axonal terminals.
PMID: 21768365
Pink1 regulates the oxidative phosphorylation machinery via mitochondrial fission.
Mutations in PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1), a mitochondrial Ser/Thr kinase, cause an autosomal recessive form of Parkinson's disease (PD), PARK6.
To investigate the mechanism of PINK1 pathogenesis, we used the Drosophila Pink1 knockout (KO) model.
In mitochondria isolated from Pink1-KO flies, mitochondrial respiration driven by the electron transport chain (ETC) is significantly reduced.
This reduction is the result of a decrease in ETC complex I and IV enzymatic activity.
As a consequence, Pink1-KO flies also display a reduced mitochondrial ATP synthesis.
Because mitochondrial dynamics is important for mitochondrial function and Pink1-KO flies have defects in mitochondrial fission, we explored whether fission machinery deficits underlie the bioenergetic defect in Pink1-KO flies.
We found that the bioenergetic defects in the Pink1-KO can be ameliorated by expression of Drp1, a key molecule in mitochondrial fission.
Further investigation of the ETC complex integrity in wild type, Pink1-KO, PInk1-KO/Drp1 transgenic, or Drp1 transgenic flies indicates that the reduced ETC complex activity is likely derived from a defect in the ETC complex assembly, which can be partially rescued by increasing mitochondrial fission.
Taken together, these results suggest a unique pathogenic mechanism of PINK1 PD: The loss of PINK1 impairs mitochondrial fission, which causes defective assembly of the ETC complexes, leading to abnormal bioenergetics.
PMID: 21768216
Inhibitors of LRRK2 kinase attenuate neurodegeneration and Parkinson-like phenotypes in Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila Parkinson's disease models.
Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) have been identified as a genetic cause of familial Parkinson's disease (PD) and have also been found in the more common sporadic form of PD, thus positioning LRRK2 as important in the pathogenesis of PD.
Biochemical studies of the disease-causing mutants of LRRK2 implicates an enhancement of kinase activity as the basis of neuronal toxicity and thus possibly the pathogenesis of PD due to LRRK2 mutations.
Previously, a chemical library screen identified inhibitors of LRRK2 kinase activity.
Here, two of these inhibitors, GW5074 and sorafenib, are shown to protect against G2019S LRRK2-induced neurodegeneration in vivo in Caenorhabditis elegans and in Drosophila.
These findings indicate that increased kinase activity of LRRK2 is neurotoxic and that inhibition of LRRK2 activity can have a disease-modifying effect.
This suggests that inhibition of LRRK2 holds promise as a treatment for PD.
PMID: 21767974
Association analysis of PARP1 polymorphisms with Parkinson's disease.
Alpha-synuclein accumulation in intracellular inclusions, oxidative stress and microglia-mediated inflammation in the substantia nigra are crucial events in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease (PD).
Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP1), a DNA-binding enzyme and transcriptional regulator, plays an important role in modulating the cellular response to oxidative stress, inflammatory stimuli, and in apoptotic cell death.
Inhibition of PARP1 results in significant neuroprotection in PD animal models; moreover PARP1 has a physiological role in the regulation of alpha-synuclein expression.
A previous study had demonstrated that variants located within the PARP1 gene promoter reduce the risk of PD and delay the disease age at onset.
In light of these data, we carried out an association study to investigate whether variability within this gene is associated with PD risk and disease age at onset in an Italian cohort composed of 600 PD patients and 592 healthy controls.
To this purpose, we used a comprehensive tag SNP approach spanning the entire gene and the upstream and downstream regions.
We did not detect any significant association of the PARP1 gene with PD either at genotypic or haplotypic level; none of the 11 genotyped SNPs was significantly associated with PD age at onset.
We conclude that, despite previous evidence, PARP1 is not a susceptibility gene for PD in our population.
PMID: 21767798
[Benchmarking in patient care: depression in Parkinson's disease].
Depression is the most common mental disorder in patients suffering from Parkinson's disease (PD) with an average prevalence of about 40% to 50%.
Depression in PD has a major impact on the patient's health-related quality of life and caregivers' distress.
Although common depressive symptoms in PD are under-diagnosed and therefore often untreated in clinical practice.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the current status of treatment in PD patients with depression in Germany and to develop approaches to improve awareness and therapy.
The study was divided into three parts: 1.
a pre-study to evaluate treatment patterns in a registry of PD patients with and without depressive symptoms, 2.
a pilot trial to establish a valid and feasible questionnaire for patients with PD and depression, 3.
main study: quality measurement by benchmarking in 14 centres followed by a final phase for developing an integrated algorithm for the treatment of PD patients with depression.
In the main study only 27.6% of the patients received antidepressant therapy, and only 55% with moderate to severe depression were treated.
Only seven patients received behavioural therapy.
There were two groups: one with and the other without training and benchmark information.
No significant difference could be detected between the two treatment arms.
This study provided important data on the treatment of patients with PD and depression in Germany.
There are a number of reasons for the observed lack of efficacy in this study.
More studies are needed to develop an appropriate approach to performing benchmarking for the treatment of neurological disease.
PMID: 21767573
Young and middle-aged rats exhibit isometric forelimb force control deficits in a model of early-stage Parkinson's disease.
Deficits in manual motor control often accompany the early stages of Parkinson's disease (PD), and are often revealed through isometric force tasks.
In order to determine whether similar deficits occur in a rat model of early-stage PD, young (8 months) and middle-aged (18 months) rats were trained to produce sustained press-hold-release isometric forelimb responses that allowed for analyses of force output and spectral analysis of forelimb stability and tremor.
Rats then received a 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) infusion into the striatum contralateral to the trained forelimb and were tested for 4 weeks post-lesion.
The resulting partial striatal dopamine depletions (which at 41±12% and 43±6% in young and middle-aged rats, respectively, did not differ between the two groups) resulted in isometric forelimb deficits.
Specifically, rats exhibited significantly diminished force stability and increased high frequency (10-25Hz) tremor, indicating potential postural disturbances and increased postural tremor, respectively.
Durations of press-hold-release bouts were also increased post-lesion, suggesting difficulty in task disengagement.
Despite pre-lesion differences in some of the force measures, the effects of partial nigrostriatal DA depletion did not differ between the two age groups.
These results support the use of the press-while-licking task in preclinical studies modeling isometric force control deficits in PD.
PMID: 21767534
Pallidal stimulation: effect of pattern and rate on bradykinesia in the non-human primate model of Parkinson's disease.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) involves the delivery of continuous, fixed-frequency electrical pulses to specific brain regions; however the reliance of therapeutic benefit on the fixed-frequency nature of the stimulation pattern is currently unknown.
To address this, we investigated the effect of changes in the pattern and frequency of DBS in the internal segment of the globus pallidus (GPi) on bradykinesia in a single, hemi-parkinsonian monkey.
Therapeutic parameters (i.e., contacts, pulse width, amplitude) were established for fixed-frequency stimulation at 135 Hz based on improved movement times during a reach and retrieval task.
Thereafter, the pattern and frequency of stimulation were varied to assess the effect of variability, bursting and oscillatory patterns of stimulation on bradykinesia.
During fixed-frequency stimulation, performance improved as a function of increasing pulse rate (P<0.01).
Using a temporally irregular pattern at the same average frequency failed to alter therapeutic benefit relative to the fixed-frequency condition.
Introducing an 80 Hz burst pattern (20 bursts/s at 4 pulses/burst) improved bradykinesia (P<0.01) relative to both "OFF" and 80 Hz fixed-frequency conditions, yielding results comparable to fixed-frequency stimulation at 135 Hz with 40% less current drain.
Compared to burst and fixed-frequency stimulations, oscillatory patterns at 4 and 8 Hz were less effective.
These results suggest that lower frequency stimulation delivered in a regular bursting pattern may be equally effective and require lower energy than higher frequency continuous patterns of stimulation, thereby prolonging battery life and call into question the role of bursting activity in the pathogenesis of bradykinesia.
PMID: 21766003
Effects of Human Alpha-Synuclein A53T-A30P Mutations on SVZ and Local Olfactory Bulb Cell Proliferation in a Transgenic Rat Model of Parkinson Disease.
A transgenic Sprague Dawley rat bearing the A30P and A53T α-synuclein (α-syn) human mutations under the control of the tyrosine hydroxylase promoter was generated in order to get a better understanding of the role of the human α-syn mutations on the neuropathological events involved in the progression of the Parkinson's disease (PD).
This rat displayed olfactory deficits in the absence of motor impairments as observed in most early PD cases.
In order to investigate the role of the mutated α-syn on cell proliferation, we focused on the subventricular zone (SVZ) and the olfactory bulbs (OB) as a change of the proliferation could affect OB function.
The effect on OB dopaminergic innervation was investigated.
The human α-syn co-localized in TH-positive OB neurons.
No human α-syn was visualized in the SVZ.
A significant increase in resident cell proliferation in the glomerular but not in the granular layers of the OB and in the SVZ was observed.
TH innervation was significantly increased within the glomerular layer without an increase in the size of the glomeruli.
Our rat could be a good model to investigate the role of human mutated α-syn on the development of olfactory deficits.
PMID: 21766000
Serum adiponectin levels in advanced-stage Parkinson's disease patients.
Patients with advanced Parkinson's disease (PD) experience body weight loss and reductions in the most common cardiovascular risk factors.
At present, the pathogenetic mechanisms involved have not been elucidated.
Increased serum concentrations of adiponectin, which possesses antiatherogenic and anti-inflammatory properties, are associated with a reduction in cardiovascular risk.
The objective of this study was to determine adiponectin serum concentrations in PD patients.
Thirty PD patients underwent a full nutritional status assessment, including the determination of adiponectin serum concentrations.
Mean ± SD adiponectin concentrations were 9.59 ± 5.9 μg/mL (interquartile range: 5.92-12.9 μg/mL).
In PD patients, adiponectin serum levels were similar to those in normal-weight, healthy, young subjects and significantly higher than that in an aged-matched group of morbidly obese subjects.
Further studies are warranted to establish the role of adiponectin in the management of PD patients.
PMID: 21765244
Do co-morbidities and cognition impact functional change and discharge needs in Parkinson disease?
The aim of this study was to assess the impact of cognition, baseline motor function, and co-morbid medical conditions on functional change, discharge destination, and discharge needs in patients admitted to acute rehabilitation for Parkinson-related impairments.
This retrospective chart review study evaluated the records of patients admitted to acute rehabilitation over a 5-yr period with a primary impairment category of parkinsonism.
Functional status was measured at admission and discharge; 3-mo follow-up function was also collected in a sample of discharged patients.
Eighty-nine patients (mean age, 74.26 yrs) were admitted over the 5-yr time frame.
A more complicated Medicare tier diagnosis (tier 2) was associated with lower total and motor score Functional Independence Measure gains compared with tier 3 (P = 0.009 and P = 0.016, respectively).
Cognitive scores at admission were not related to need for caregivers upon discharge.
Overall Functional Independence Measure gain (adjusted R(2) = 0.073, P = 0.006) and Functional Independence Measure gain efficiency (adjusted R(2) = 0.142, P < 0.001) inversely correlated with age.
At the 3-mo follow-up, a random sample (38%) of patients contacted postdischarge demonstrated continued improvements.
Significant improvement may be seen after acute rehabilitation in patients with Parkinson disease, irrespective of cognitive impairment.
More complicated medical tier diagnoses result in less Functional Independence Measure gain, and older individuals with Parkinson disease are more likely to show less functional change.
However, functional improvements are still statistically significant.
PMID: 21764791
Amyloid imaging with (18)F-florbetaben in Alzheimer disease and other dementias.
Amyloid imaging with (18)F-labeled radiotracers will allow widespread use, facilitating research, diagnosis, and therapeutic development for Alzheimer disease.
The purpose of the study program was to compare cortical amyloid deposition using (18)F-florbetaben and PET in controls and subjects with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), vascular dementia (VaD), Parkinson disease (PD), and Alzheimer disease (AD).
One hundred nine subjects in 3 clinical studies at Austin Health were reviewed: 32 controls, 20 subjects with MCI, and 30 patients with AD, 11 with FTLD, 7 with DLB, 5 with PD, and 4 with VaD underwent PET after intravenous injection of 300 MBq of (18)F-florbetaben.
Standardized uptake value ratios (SUVR) using the cerebellar cortex as a reference region were calculated between 90 and 110 min after injection.
When compared with the other groups, AD patients demonstrated significantly higher SUVRs (P < 0.0001) in neocortical areas.
Most AD patients (96%) and 60% of MCI subjects showed diffuse cortical (18)F-florbetaben retention.
In contrast, only 9% of FTLD, 25% of VaD, 29% of DLB, and no PD patients and 16% of controls showed cortical binding.
Although there was a correlation between Mini Mental State Examination and β-amyloid burden in the MCI group, no correlation was observed in controls, FTLD or AD.
(18)F-florbetaben had high sensitivity for AD, clearly distinguished patients with FTLD from AD, and provided results comparable to those reported with (11)C-Pittsburgh Compound B in a variety of neurodegenerative diseases.
PMID: 21764406
Body weight gain and deep brain stimulation.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is a neurosurgical technique that has now been available for some 25 years.
It is used in the treatment of various motor disorders, e.g.
Parkinson's disease (PD), essential tremor and dystonia, and neuropsychiatric illnesses, e.g.
obsessive-compulsive disorder and Tourette syndrome.
The surgical targets of DBS include the thalamic ventralis intermedius nucleus (Vim), the globus pallidus internus (GPi) and more recently the subthalamic nucleus (STN), currently considered as the reference target in the treatment of PD.
In the last ten years, most studies in PD patients have described a rapid and marked weight gain in the months following DBS of the STN.
This weight gain sometimes induces obesity and can have metabolic repercussions.
The physiopathological mechanisms responsible for the weight gain are multifactorial (changes in energy metabolism and eating behaviour, reduction of motor complications, etc.).
This review reports current knowledge concerning weight changes in patients treated by DBS with different surgical targets.
It also describes the mechanisms responsible for weight gain and the health outcome for the patients.
PMID: 21764080
French translation and normation of the Parkinson Neuropsychometric Dementia Assessment (PANDA).
Cognitive impairment and depressive symptoms caused by Parkinson's disease (PD) are often underestimated in routine clinical practice, partly due to the lack of short screening tests.
The "Parkinson Neuropsychometric Dementia Assessment" (PANDA) is a new convenient tool, validated in German, to assess cognition in PD.
It consists of five cognitive tasks and a brief mood questionnaire, and is designed for the early detection of mild cognitive deficits as well as dementia.
To translate the PANDA into French and provide normative data for a French speaking population.
The translation was made by means of the translation/re-translation method.
The normation was conducted with 61 control subjects (CS).
The Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) was administered concurrently.
A comparison was made with the original study's control group (CG) to determine whether the German algorithms for converting the raw scores could also be used with the French version or whether a new procedure had to be developed.
All statistics were conducted with SPSS Statistics18.
There is a significant correlation between the PANDA total score and MMSE (r=0.42, p=0.001).
Analysis of the total converted scores shows no significant correlation with age (r=-0.19; p=0.14).
After correction for education, there is no significant difference between our CS and the original study's CG (t=1.50; p=0.14).
Our results indicate that the PANDA French translation can be used with the same transformation algorithms as the German version, when adding a correction for education.
PMID: 21764079
Assessment methods and factors associated with depression in Parkinson's disease.
Depression is a common problem experienced by patients with Parkinson's disease (PD).
Identifying depression in PD is difficult and the determinants of depression in PD are complex and debatable.
Here we review our recent studies which have (i) examined the validity of current depression rating scales in PD, (ii) introduced a self-reported and validated strategy to identify a lifetime history of depression in PD, and (iii) investigated genetic and non-genetic factors associated with depression in the context of PD.
Our research showed PD-specific cut-off values suitable to use for the Hamilton Depression Scales (HAMD and HDI) and the Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS-15) when dichotomising patients with and without a current depression.
Using the GDS-15 specific cut-off scores and a number of self-reported questions that screen for a lifetime history of depression, we developed a novel method to dichotomise PD patients according to current depression or a past history of depression.
This method was applied in a large-scale study examining the factors associated with depression in PD.
We clarified that the severity of PD is positively related to depression.
We also showed that a number of other clinical factors including a longer duration of PD, a younger PD onset age, frequent falls, a history of anxiety disorder and memory problems were associated with depression in PD.
In addition to these clinical factors, we observed associations between depression, and lower education levels, a history of smoking and a regular use of non-aspirin bases NSAIDs or analgesics.
No associations were found between depression in PD and common genetic variations examined across the serotonin and dopamine transporter genes.
Our studies provide a focus for future intervention strategies.
PMID: 21764078
Amyloid-β and τ biomarkers in Parkinson's disease-dementia.
Dementia is a frequent and devastating non-motor complication of advanced Parkinson's disease (PD).
There is growing evidence of a synergistic role of Alzheimer's-type brain lesions containing τ and amyloid-β (Aβ) proteins and cortical Lewy aggregates in PD-related dementia (PDD).
Therefore, biomarkers of both τ and Aβ may be seen as diagnostic and predictive markers of PDD.
Here, we review the available studies in PD and PDD using cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) total τ, phospho-τ, and/or Aβ levels, and PET probes targeting Alzheimer's-type lesions.
Overall, high CSF τ and phospho-τ levels and/or low CSF Aβ levels have been found in part of PDD patients, and a longitudinal study has found greater worsening in cognitive performance over time in non-demented PD patients with low baseline CSF Aβ levels.
Few studies are available on the use of PET imaging in PD, all of them using the Pittsburgh B compound (PIB), and with figures of about 30% of scans with PIB uptake in the AD-range in PDD.
We conclude that these CSF and PET markers deserve further evaluation as candidate biomarkers of dementia in PD.
According to this, we are currently undertaking a longitudinal project on the predictive value of dementia of the combined use of CSF τ and Aβ and (18)F-FDDNP PET in PD.
PMID: 21763483
A mutation in VPS35, encoding a subunit of the retromer complex, causes late-onset Parkinson disease.
To identify rare causal variants in late-onset Parkinson disease (PD), we investigated an Austrian family with 16 affected individuals by exome sequencing.
We found a missense mutation, c.1858G>A (p.Asp620Asn), in the VPS35 gene in all seven affected family members who are alive.
By screening additional PD cases, we saw the same variant cosegregating with the disease in an autosomal-dominant mode with high but incomplete penetrance in two further families with five and ten affected members, respectively.
The mean age of onset in the affected individuals was 53 years.
Genotyping showed that the shared haplotype extends across 65 kilobases around VPS35.
Screening the entire VPS35 coding sequence in an additional 860 cases and 1014 controls revealed six further nonsynonymous missense variants.
Three were only present in cases, two were only present in controls, and one was present in cases and controls.
The familial mutation p.Asp620Asn and a further variant, c.1570C>T (p.Arg524Trp), detected in a sporadic PD case were predicted to be damaging by sequence-based and molecular-dynamics analyses.
VPS35 is a component of the retromer complex and mediates retrograde transport between endosomes and the trans-Golgi network, and it has recently been found to be involved in Alzheimer disease.
PMID: 21763482
VPS35 mutations in Parkinson disease.
The identification of genetic causes for Mendelian disorders has been based on the collection of multi-incident families, linkage analysis, and sequencing of genes in candidate intervals.
This study describes the application of next-generation sequencing technologies to a Swiss kindred presenting with autosomal-dominant, late-onset Parkinson disease (PD).
The family has tremor-predominant dopa-responsive parkinsonism with a mean onset of 50.6 ± 7.3 years.
Exome analysis suggests that an aspartic-acid-to-asparagine mutation within vacuolar protein sorting 35 (VPS35 c.1858G>A; p.Asp620Asn) is the genetic determinant of disease.
VPS35 is a central component of the retromer cargo-recognition complex, is critical for endosome-trans-golgi trafficking and membrane-protein recycling, and is evolutionarily highly conserved.
VPS35 c.1858G>A was found in all affected members of the Swiss kindred and in three more families and one patient with sporadic PD, but it was not observed in 3,309 controls.
Further sequencing of familial affected probands revealed only one other missense variant, VPS35 c.946C>T; (p.Pro316Ser), in a pedigree with one unaffected and two affected carriers, and thus the pathogenicity of this mutation remains uncertain.
Retromer-mediated sorting and transport is best characterized for acid hydrolase receptors.
However, the complex has many types of cargo and is involved in a diverse array of biologic pathways from developmental Wnt signaling to lysosome biogenesis.
Our study implicates disruption of VPS35 and retromer-mediated trans-membrane protein sorting, rescue, and recycling in the neurodegenerative process leading to PD.
PMID: 21763451
OXPHOS toxicogenomics and Parkinson's disease.
Activities and quantities of several oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) system complexes are decreased in many Parkinson's disease (PD) patients.
Mutations in PD-associated nuclear genes affect OXPHOS function.
Moreover, the inactivation of other nuclear genes related to mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) replication and expression also leads to Parkinsonism.
MtDNA only encodes OXPHOS subunits and the RNAs required for their expression.
Mutations in mtDNA genes have also been associated with PD.
Furthermore, many xenobiotics that inhibit different OXPHOS complexes provoke Parkinsonism.
The binding sites for these venoms are usually mtDNA-encoded subunits.
However, and despite the existence of mutations or toxicants that can cause Parkinsonism, PD only rarely results from isolated genetic or environmental factors.
Combinations of nuclear and mitochondrial genetic and environmental factors have additive effects and increase the risk of PD.
It is also possible that population polymorphisms in mtDNA genes, affecting interactions with different xenobiotics, may behave as susceptibility factors for developing PD only in the presence of that particular xenobiotic.
Therefore, a deeper analysis of the OXPHOS function in PD is required if we want to unravel the complexities of this disorder.
PMID: 21762928
Radionuclide brain imaging correlates of cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease (PD).
A subtle cognitive impairment can be detected early in the course of Parkinson's disease (PD).
Executive, memory and visuospatial functions are specifically affected, but the underlying pathophysiological basis is not well elucidated yet and may be heterogeneous.
The recent identification of a PD-related cognitive metabolic pattern (PDCP), including hypometabolism in associative frontal, parietal and posterior limbic structures, has integrated the classical notion of a striato-frontal syndrome at the basis of cognitive dys-function.
Recent evidence suggests that whilst executive dys-function is seen in virtually all PD patients, visuospatial and memory impairment may share a higher risk for the subsequent development of dementia.
By means of perfusion SPECT and [18F]FDG-PET, cortical dys-function may be highlighted since the early stages, it is more evident in PD patients with Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI), and reaches the maximum in PD dementia (PDD).
Posterior temporo-parieto-occipital dys-function in associative and limbic cortex, closely resembling that found in Alzheimer's disease patients, is found in PDD, with a more severe occipital hypometabolism and a relatively milder hypometabolism in medial temporal lobe structures.
Furthermore, deficit of acetylcholinesterase (AchE) can be found by means of [11C]MP4A-PET already in early stage of PD, especially in posterior regions, then becoming more severe in PDD and in dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).
Administration of AchE inhibitors to PDD patients increased brain metabolism in bilateral frontal and left parietal regions, and left posterior cingulate.
Finally, the recent availability of radiopharmaceuticals able to disclose amyloid brain deposition has allowed to demonstrate amyloid load in a part of patients with PDD, possibly due to diffuse rather than neuritic plaques.
Brain PET and SPECT have strongly contributed to the understanding of the pathophysiology of cognitive impairment in PD and may serve as probes to monitor the effects of therapeutic interventions.
PMID: 21762927
Mechanisms of orthostatic hypotension and supine hypertension in Parkinson disease.
Non-motor aspects of Parkinson disease (PD) are now recognized to be important both clinically and scientifically.
Among these facets are abnormalities in blood pressure regulation.
As much as 40% of PD patients have orthostatic hypotension (OH), which is usually associated with supine hypertension (SH).
Symptoms of OH range from light-headedness to falls with serious trauma.
SH, while typically asymptomatic, poses a significant increased risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.
Neuroimaging, neurochemical, and neuropharmacological studies indicate cardiac and extra-cardiac sympathetic noradrenergic denervation and baroreflex failure in virtually all PD patients with OH, and cardiac sympathetic denervation has been confirmed histopathologically.
Mechanisms of SH in PD+OH remain poorly understood.
The diurnal blood pressure profile shows increased variability that is correlated with decreased baroreflex gain and with increased morbidity and mortality.
Treatment should be individually tailored according to the timing of OH or SH, using primarily short-acting sympathomimetic medications in the daytime for OH and short-acting antihypertensive in the nighttime for SH.
Future research is needed to understand better and attenuate blood pressure fluctuations through manipulations that improve baroreflex function.
PMID: 21762841
Treatment dilemma in comorbidity of schizophrenia and idiopathic Parkinson's disease.
Extrapyramidal symptoms are frequently found in patients with schizophrenia.
Most are attributed as drug-induced parkinsonism, but comorbidity of idiopathic Parkinson's disease is also possible.
We report a 59-year-old male with a diagnosis of schizophrenia for 32 years.
Progressive hand tremor was noted from age 53; and then masked face, bradykinesia, dysphagia, sialorrhea; and unsteady shuffling gait became markedly exacerbated, even after discontinuing all antipsychotics for 6 months.
The diagnosis of idiopathic Parkinson's disease was confirmed by Tc99m TRODAT SPECT.
The dilemma of psychopharmacological treatment to control both disorders was encountered.
Based on the review of treatment for Parkinson's disease psychosis (PDP), the recommended treatments suggest the utilization of quetiapine, clozapine, or aripiprazole.
However, monotherapy with each of the three atypical antipsychotics failed due to poor efficacy or worsening of parkinsonism symptoms.
After a 2-month cautious titration, a combination of quetiapine 50 mg/day and clozapine 37.5 mg/day finally achieved satisfactory efficacy.
This case report illustrates the dilemma of treating a patient with schizophrenia and comorbid idiopathic Parkinson's disease, which differed from PDP and required more clinical data for a proper treatment recommendation.
PMID: 21761143
Successful subthalamic stimulation in genetic Parkinson's disease caused by duplication of the α-synuclein gene.
The α-synuclein gene (SNCA) multiplication causes autosomal dominant Parkinson's disease (PD).
Particularly triplication, but also duplication, of the SNCA is associated with early-onset rapidly progressing parkinsonism with increased risk of cognitive impairment.
There is no report about the effect and safety of Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS) in carriers of this mutation and, in general, data in patients with genetic parkinsonism are scarce.
We report a one-year prospective follow-up of subthalamic nucleus (STN) DBS in a 46-year old female carrier of SNCA duplication who developed PD at the age of 41 years, and rapidly showed disabling motor fluctuations and dyskinesias refractory to pharmacological strategies.
One year after surgery there was a clinically relevant improvement in motor features with a reduction of 64% in UPDRS III in "off medication" and a complete abolition of peak dose dyskinesias.
Patient did not report procedure-related adverse events following STN-DBS except for stimulation-induced right foot dystonia relieved by modulating stimulation parameters.
Postoperative cognitive testing showed a decline in executive functions, mostly verbal fluency and attention shifting, compared with presurgical assessment.
STN-DBS is safe and effective in patients with SNCA duplication showing a clinical pattern similar to idiopathic PD.
Our case suggests that clinical phenotype rather genotype is the main predictor for DBS outcome.
PMID: 21760898
Motor skill learning, retention, and control deficits in Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease, which affects the basal ganglia, is known to lead to various impairments of motor control.
Since the basal ganglia have also been shown to be involved in learning processes, motor learning has frequently been investigated in this group of patients.
However, results are still inconsistent, mainly due to skill levels and time scales of testing.
To bridge across the time scale problem, the present study examined de novo skill learning over a long series of practice sessions that comprised early and late learning stages as well as retention.
19 non-demented, medicated, mild to moderate patients with Parkinson's disease and 19 healthy age and gender matched participants practiced a novel throwing task over five days in a virtual environment where timing of release was a critical element.
Six patients and seven control participants came to an additional long-term retention testing after seven to nine months.
Changes in task performance were analyzed by a method that differentiates between three components of motor learning prominent in different stages of learning: Tolerance, Noise and Covariation.
In addition, kinematic analysis related the influence of skill levels as affected by the specific motor control deficits in Parkinson patients to the process of learning.
As a result, patients showed similar learning in early and late stages compared to the control subjects.
Differences occurred in short-term retention tests; patients' performance constantly decreased after breaks arising from poorer release timing.
However, patients were able to overcome the initial timing problems within the course of each practice session and could further improve their throwing performance.
Thus, results demonstrate the intact ability to learn a novel motor skill in non-demented, medicated patients with Parkinson's disease and indicate confounding effects of motor control deficits on retention performance.
PMID: 21760537
Parkin-mediated protection of dopaminergic neurons in a chronic MPTP-minipump mouse model of Parkinson disease.
Loss-of-function mutations in the ubiquitin ligase parkin are the major cause of recessively inherited early-onset Parkinson disease (PD).
Impairment of parkin activity caused by nitrosative or dopamine-related modifications may also be responsible for the loss of dopaminergic (DA) neurons in sporadic PD.
Previous studies have shown that viral vector-mediated delivery of parkin prevented DA neurodegeneration in several animal models, but little is known about the neuroprotective actions of parkin in vivo.
Here, we investigated mechanisms of neuroprotection of overexpressed parkin in a modified long-term mouse model of PD using osmotic minipump administration of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP).
Recombinant adeno-associated viral vector-mediated intranigral delivery of parkin prevented motor deficits and DA cell loss in the mice.
Ser129-phosphorylated α-synuclein-immunoreactive cells were increased in the substantia nigra of parkin-treated mice.
Moreover, delivery of parkin alleviated the MPTP-induced decrease of the active phosphorylated form of Akt.
On the other hand, upregulation of p53 and mitochondrial alterations induced by chronic MPTP administration were barely suppressed by parkin.
These results suggest that the neuroprotective actions of parkin may be impaired in severe PD.
PMID: 21757959
An old problem not yet resolved: the association of several neurodegenerative disorders.
PMID: 21757958
Association between essential tremor and other neurodegenerative diseases: what is the epidemiological evidence?
The possible links between essential tremor (ET) and Parkinson's disease (PD) and, more recently, between ET and Alzheimer's disease (AD) have been of great interest, particularly with the emergence of postmortem data suggesting that ET itself may be a neurodegenerative disease.
Given the very high population prevalence of ET, its possible role as a risk factor for PD and AD is of special significance.
At the center of this debate is the burgeoning evidence from epidemiological studies, examining whether there is an increased co-occurrence of these conditions within the same individuals or within families.
We conducted a PubMed search from 1966 to March 2011 and reviewed the epidemiological evidence, restricting our analyses to studies that generated quantifiable measures of association (odds ratios or relative risks), thereby being able to assess the role of chance.
The most robust evidence, from case-control, prospective and familial aggregation studies, indicates that ET is associated with increased odds and increased risks of both PD and AD.
There is reasonable epidemiological evidence to support a link between ET and these neurodegenerative diseases.
Further studies are needed to corroborate the current results, provide additional estimates of effect and begin to explore the mechanistic underpinnings for these intriguing associations.
PMID: 21757872
Subthalamic local field beta oscillations during ongoing deep brain stimulation in Parkinson's disease in hyperacute and chronic phases.
In the past years, local field potential (LFP) signals recorded from the subthalamic nucleus (STN) in patients undergoing deep brain stimulation (DBS) for Parkinson's disease (PD) disclosed that DBS has a controversial effect on STN beta oscillations recorded 2-7 days after surgery for macroelectrode implantation.
Nothing is known about these DBS-induced oscillatory changes 30 days after surgery.
We recorded STN LFPs during ongoing DBS in 7 patients with PD, immediately (hyperacute phase) and 30 days (chronic phase) after surgery.
STN LFP recordings showed stationary intranuclear STN beta LFP activity in hyperacute and chronic phases, confirming that beta peaks were also present in chronic recordings.
Power spectra of nuclei with significant beta activity (54% of the sample) showed that it decreased significantly during DBS (p=0.021) under both recording conditions.
The time course of beta activity showed more evident DBS-induced changes in the chronic than in the hyperacute phase (p=0.014).
DBS-induced changes in STN beta LFPs in patients undergoing DBS in chronic phase provide useful information for developing a new neurosignal-controlled adaptive DBS system.
PMID: 21757228
Generation of isogenic pluripotent stem cells differing exclusively at two early onset Parkinson point mutations.
Patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from somatic cells provide a unique tool for the study of human disease, as well as a promising source for cell replacement therapies.
One crucial limitation has been the inability to perform experiments under genetically defined conditions.
This is particularly relevant for late age onset disorders in which in vitro phenotypes are predicted to be subtle and susceptible to significant effects of genetic background variations.
By combining zinc finger nuclease (ZFN)-mediated genome editing and iPSC technology, we provide a generally applicable solution to this problem, generating sets of isogenic disease and control human pluripotent stem cells that differ exclusively at either of two susceptibility variants for Parkinson's disease by modifying the underlying point mutations in the α-synuclein gene.
The robust capability to genetically correct disease-causing point mutations in patient-derived hiPSCs represents significant progress for basic biomedical research and an advance toward hiPSC-based cell replacement therapies.
PMID: 21756926
Motor asymmetry and estimation of body-scaled aperture width in Parkinson's disease.
The present study examined how asymmetrical motor symptomatology helps predict the pattern of perceptual judgements of body-scaled aperture width in lateralised Parkinson's disease (PD).
Eleven patients with PD predominantly affecting the left side of their body (LPD), 16 patients with PD predominantly affecting their right side (RPD), and 16 healthy controls made forced-choice judgements about whether or not they would fit without turning their shoulders through a life-sized schematic doorway shown on a large screen.
Whereas control and LPD groups made accurate estimations of body-scaled aperture width, RPD patients significantly underestimated aperture width relative to their body, perceiving doorways on average that were 12% narrower than their bodies as wide enough to allow them to pass through without rotation.
Across all patients, estimates of body-scaled aperture width correlated with ratio of right-to-left symptom severity.
These perceptual errors may indicate a mismatch between the neural representation of external space and that of body size in PD.
PMID: 21755318
Electrical stimulation for the suppression of pathological tremor.
Pathological tremor is manifested as an involuntary oscillation of one or more body parts.
Tremor greatly decreases the quality of life and often prevents the patient from performing daily activities.
We hypothesized that sensors-driven multichannel electrical stimulation could stabilize affected joints by activating the antagonistic muscles during involuntary activation of agonist muscles and vice versa (out-of-phase stimulation).
Here, we present the new system (hardware and software) and the testing of its operation.
The hardware consists of a multichannel stimulator and inertial sensors for feedback.
The software implements adaptive sensors-driven control for the out-of-phase stimulation.
The system was initially applied to healthy persons at the wrist and elbow joints to test the efficiency of the hardware and software solutions.
Predefined rhythmic stimulation resulted in tremulous movement, which subjects could not prevent; yet, they were still able to functionally use their hand.
The system was then applied to seven patients with Parkinson's disease and essential tremor for minimization of the wrist joint tremor.
In six patients, the adaptive out-of-phase stimulation resulted in a significant decrease in the amplitude of tremor (67 ± 13%).
In one patient, the stimulation did not result in the expected reduction of tremor.
PMID: 21753169
Up with the lark: a panoptic view of Parkinson disease.
PMID: 21753163
Phenotype in parkinsonian and nonparkinsonian LRRK2 G2019S mutation carriers.
Using a family study design, we describe the motor and nonmotor phenotype in probands with LRRK2 G2019S mutations and family members and compare these individuals to patients with idiopathic Parkinson disease (iPD) and unrelated controls.
Probands with G2019S mutations and their first-degree relatives, subjects with iPD, and unrelated control subjects were identified from 4 movement disorders centers.
All underwent neurologic examinations and tests of olfaction, color vision, anxiety, and depression inventories.
Tremor was more often a presenting feature among 25 individuals with LRRK2-associated PD than among 84 individuals with iPD.
Subjects with LRRK2-PD had better olfactory identification compared with subjects with iPD, higher Beck Depression Inventory scores, and higher error scores on Farnsworth-Munsell 100-Hue test of color discrimination.
Postural or action tremor was more common among 29 nonmanifesting mutation carriers compared with 53 noncarriers within the families.
Nonparkinsonian family members had higher Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale motor scores, more constipation, and worse color discrimination than controls, regardless of mutation status.
Although tremor is a more common presenting feature of LRRK2-PD than iPD and some nonmotor features differed in degree, the phenotype is largely overlapping.
Postural or action tremor may represent an early sign.
Longitudinal evaluation of a large sample of nonmanifesting carriers will be required to describe any premotor phenotype that may allow early diagnosis.
PMID: 21753159
Olfactory dysfunction in LRRK2 G2019S mutation carriers.
Olfactory dysfunction is an established nonmotor feature of idiopathic Parkinson disease (PD), which may precede disease onset.
Olfaction is likely disturbed in patients with PD with leucine-rich repeat kinase (LRRK2) G2019S mutations, although the degree of impairment is debated.
It is also unclear whether mutation carriers who have not yet manifested with PD have olfactory disturbances.
Thirty-one subjects with LRRK2 G2019S mutation-related PD (PD-manifesting carriers [PD-MC]), 30 subjects with PD without mutations (PD noncarriers [PD-NC]), 28 mutation carrier family members (nonmanifesting carriers [NMC]), and 46 controls completed the University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test (UPSIT).
Generalized estimating equations were applied to determine whether olfactory score was associated with PD and LRRK2 mutation status.
As expected, having PD was associated with impaired olfaction regardless of LRRK2 mutation status.
More importantly, however, impaired olfaction was increased overall in LRRK2 carriers both with and without PD, though the impairment was only present in a subset of NMCs.
Compared to controls, the mean score was lower among NMC (difference = -3.518, p = 0.006), MC (difference = -7.677, p < 0.0001), and idiopathic PD (PD-NC) (difference = -13.810, p < 0.0001).
Olfaction was better among MC (PD-MC) than non-LRRK2 PD (PD-NC) (difference = 6.13, p = 0.0012).
Group differences from the continuous analysis were maintained in dichotomous analysis stratifying at 15th percentile for age and gender.
Olfaction is impaired in LRRK2 G2019S-mutation related PD, although less overall than other PD.
Further, olfaction is impaired in a subset of LRRK2 NMC, suggesting that olfaction may be a marker for development of PD in this group, and that longitudinal studies are warranted.
PMID: 21753118
A lysosomal lair for a pathogenic protein pair.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder that affects movement.
Although many of the causes of PD remain unclear, a consistent finding is the abnormal accumulation of the protein α-synuclein.
In a recent issue of Cell, Mazzuli et al.
provide a molecular explanation for the unexpected link between PD and Gaucher's disease, a glycolipid lysosomal storage disorder caused by loss of the enzyme glucocerebrosidase (GBA).
They report a reciprocal connection between loss of GBA activity and the accumulation of α-synuclein in lysosomes that establishes a bidirectional positive feedback loop with pathogenic consequences.
Understanding how lysosomes are implicated in PD may reveal new therapeutic targets for treating this disease.
PMID: 21753008
Cortical stimulation evokes abnormal responses in the dopamine-depleted rat basal ganglia.
The motor cortex (MC) sends massive projections to the basal ganglia.
Motor disabilities in patients and animal models of Parkinson's disease (PD) may be caused by dopamine (DA)-depleted basal ganglia that abnormally process the information originating from MC.
To study how DA depletion alters signal transfer in the basal ganglia, MC stimulation-induced (MC-induced) unitary responses were recorded from the basal ganglia of control and 6-hydroxydopamine-treated hemi-parkinsonian rats anesthetized with isoflurane.
This report describes new findings about how DA depletion alters MC-induced responses.
MC stimulation evokes an excitation in normally quiescent striatal (Str) neurons projecting to the globus pallidus external segment (GPe).
After DA-depletion, the spontaneous firing of Str-GPe neurons increases, and MC stimulation evokes a shorter latency excitation followed by a long-lasting inhibition that was invisible under normal conditions.
The increased firing activity and the newly exposed long inhibition generate tonic inhibition and a disfacilitation in GPe.
The disfacilitation in GPe is then amplified in basal ganglia circuitry and generates a powerful long inhibition in the basal ganglia output nucleus, the globus pallidus internal segment.
Intra-Str injections of a behaviorally effective dose of DA precursor l-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine effectively reversed these changes.
These newly observed mechanisms also support the generation of pauses and burst activity commonly observed in the basal ganglia of parkinsonian subjects.
These results suggest that the generation of abnormal response sequences in the basal ganglia contributes to the development of motor disabilities in PD and that intra-Str DA supplements effectively suppress abnormal signal transfer.
PMID: 21752979
Characterization of Helicobacter pylori cagA and vacA genotypes among Alaskans and their correlation with clinical disease.
Helicobacter pylori infection is common in Alaska.
The development of severe H.
pylori disease is partially determined by the virulence of the infecting strain.
Here we present vacA and cagA genotype data for H.
pylori strains isolated from Alaskans and their correlation with clinical disease.
We enrolled patients scheduled for esophagogastroduodenoscopy and positive for H.
pylori infection.
Gastric biopsy specimens from the stomach antrum and fundus were cultured.
We performed PCR analysis of the H.
pylori vacA gene and for the presence of the cagA gene and cagA empty site.
We genotyped 515 H.
pylori samples from 220 Native and 66 non-Native Alaskans.
We detected the cagA gene in 242/286 (85%) persons; of 222 strains that could be subtyped, 95% (212) were non-Asian cagA and 3% (6) were East Asian cagA.
After removing mixed infections (n = 17), 83% of H.
pylori strains had either the vacA s1m1 (120/269) or s2m2 (103/269) genotype.
Sixty-six percent (68/103) of H.
pylori strains with the vacA s2m2 genotype also contained the cagA gene.
Infection with an H.
pylori strain having the cagA gene or vacA s1m1 genotype (compared with s1m2 and s2m2) was associated with a decreased risk of esophagitis (P = 0.003 and 0.0003, respectively).
Infection with an H.
pylori strain having the vacA s1m1 genotype (compared with s1m2 and s2m2) was associated with an increased risk of peptic ulcer disease (PUD) (P = 0.003).
The majority of H.
pylori strains in this study carried the non-Asian cagA gene and either the vacA s1m1 or s2m2 genotype.
A majority of H.
pylori strains with the vacA s2m2 genotype also contained the cagA gene.
There was an association of H.
pylori genotype with esophagitis and PUD.
PMID: 21752398
Emotion recognition impairment in Parkinson's disease patients without dementia.
Previous research has shown dementia and mild cognitive impairment to be present in some Parkinson's disease (PD) patients.
Nevertheless, it is still not clear whether PD patients are also impaired on facial emotion recognition, nor it is whether this possible deficit is independent other cognitive impairment.
The aim of this study is to assess the presence of emotion recognition deficits in a sample of PD patients with normal cognitive abilities, evaluated with several cognitive tasks widely used to detect cognitive impairment in this patient group.
40 non-demented (MMSE scores>25) PD patients and 19 healthy older adults matched on demographic characteristics took part in the study.
All of them were evaluated with a neuropsychological battery including tests aimed to assess the cognitive domains mainly affected by PD, as well as a facial emotion recognition task.
t-test analysis showed significant differences between PD and control groups in 6 cognitive tasks which were introduced in a sequential logistic regression analysis.
The results confirmed the existence of a facial emotion recognition deficit in PD patients after controlling for demographic and cognitive characteristics of the participants.
Although none of the PD patients fulfilled criteria for dementia, many of them appeared to present deficits on recognition of facial emotions.
This task should therefore be incorporated into future research to study the full range of early cognitive dysfunctions and non-motor symptoms presents in PD patients, and inclusion of this task in assessment protocols should be considered.
PMID: 21751608
Nonmotor symptom complex of Parkinson's disease--an under-recognized entity.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder, after Alzheimer's disease.
The cardinal clinical features of PD include asymmetric onset of bradykinesia, rigidity, and resting tremor.
Most patients of idiopathic PD present with one or more of the cardinal motor features.
Apart from these, various nonmotor symptoms (NMS) also occur in PD and constitute a major clinical challenge, as they are common, but often overshadowed by the dominance of motor symptoms.
NMS can present at any stage of the disease including early and pre-motor phase of PD.
Several NMS such as olfactory dysfunction, constipation, REM behaviour disorder, depression may antedate the motor signs, symptoms and diagnosis of PD by a number of years.
Since, NMS add significantly to the overall disability caused by PD, their early recognition and treatment may go a long way in improving the quality of life of PD patients as well as the economic burden on the carers.
The identification of NMS can be improved by the application of quantitative and validated instruments and scales for their assessment.
PMID: 21750523
How might physical activity benefit patients with Parkinson disease?
Parkinson disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive motor and nonmotor impairments.
These impairments incline many patients towards a sedentary lifestyle, which has many deleterious consequences.
Accumulating evidence suggests that patients with PD might benefit from physical activity and exercise in a number of ways, from general improvements in health to disease-specific effects and, potentially, disease-modifying effects (suggested by animal data).
Many issues remain to be addressed, including the need to perform clinical trials to demonstrate these presumed benefits of physical activity and exercise in patients with PD.
These trials must also address safety issues, such as an increased risk of falls and cardiovascular complications in more-active patients.
Identifying ways to induce a sustained behavioral change, using specifically tailored programs that address potential barriers such as depression, apathy and postural instability, may lead to an improved quality of life in individuals with PD.
PMID: 21748396
Use of sensitive devices to assess the effect of medication on attentional demands of precision and power grips in individuals with Parkinson disease.
Deficits in fine motor control are a common early symptom in people with Parkinson disease (PD) and may serve as an ideal marker for the response to therapeutic interventions and progression of the disease.
The long-term goal of this research is to develop sensitive clinical markers that can be used to accurately assess disease progression and the response to therapeutic interventions.
The purpose of this preliminary study was to examine the effects of medication on the attentional demands of precision (Pre) and power (Pow) grips in individuals with PD.
In order to assess force control during precision and power grip, we used an instrumented twist-cap device.
Performance on the motor task was quantified using peak force levels (PF) and the time to reach peak force (TTP).
To assess attentional demands of the motor task, participants performed an auditory analog of the Stroop test while performing the motor task.
Dual-task cost (DTC) for all outcome variables was calculated.
Dual-task cost for response latency (RL DTC) for both grips were greater (P < 0.005) when participants were on medications('ONMeds').
Mean [95%CI]: Pre = 25.7[14.7-36.7], Pow = 37.08[26.5-47.7]) compared with off medications('OFFMeds') (Pre = 12.6[1.5-23.6], Pow = 10.98[0.4-21.6]), suggesting that force control during both grip tasks may remain attentionally demanding even on medications.
PMID: 21747966
NRF2 activation restores disease related metabolic deficiencies in olfactory neurosphere-derived cells from patients with sporadic Parkinson's disease.
Without appropriate cellular models the etiology of idiopathic Parkinson's disease remains unknown.
We recently reported a novel patient-derived cellular model generated from biopsies of the olfactory mucosa (termed olfactory neurosphere-derived (hONS) cells) which express functional and genetic differences in a disease-specific manner.
Transcriptomic analysis of Patient and Control hONS cells identified the NRF2 transcription factor signalling pathway as the most differentially expressed in Parkinson's disease.
We tested the robustness of our initial findings by including additional cell lines and confirmed that hONS cells from Patients had 20% reductions in reduced glutathione levels and MTS [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium, inner salt] metabolism compared to cultures from healthy Control donors.
We also confirmed that Patient hONS cells are in a state of oxidative stress due to higher production of H(2)O(2) than Control cultures.
siRNA-mediated ablation of NRF2 in Control donor cells decreased both total glutathione content and MTS metabolism to levels detected in cells from Parkinson's Disease patients.
Conversely, and more importantly, we showed that activation of the NRF2 pathway in Parkinson's disease hONS cultures restored glutathione levels and MTS metabolism to Control levels.
Paradoxically, transcriptomic analysis after NRF2 pathway activation revealed an increased number of differentially expressed mRNAs within the NRF2 pathway in L-SUL treated Patient-derived hONS cells compared to L-SUL treated Controls, even though their metabolism was restored to normal.
We also identified differential expression of the PI3K/AKT signalling pathway, but only post-treatment.
Our results confirmed NRF2 as a potential therapeutic target for Parkinson's disease and provided the first demonstration that NRF2 function was inducible in Patient-derived cells from donors with uniquely varied genetic backgrounds.
However, our results also demonstrated that the response of PD patient-derived cells was not co-ordinated in the same way as in Control cells.
This may be an important factor when developing new therapeutics.
PMID: 21747034
Enlarged substantia nigra hyperechogenicity and risk for Parkinson disease: a 37-month 3-center study of 1847 older persons.
To evaluate whether enlarged substantia nigra hyperechogenicity (SN+) is associated with an increased risk for Parkinson disease (PD) in a healthy elderly population.
Longitudinal 3-center observational study with 37 months of prospective follow-up.
Individuals 50 years or older without evidence of PD or any other neurodegenerative disease.
Of 1847 participants who underwent a full medical history, neurological assessment, and transcranial sonography at baseline, 1535 could undergo reassessment.
Incidence of new-onset PD in relation to baseline transcranial sonography status.
There were 11 cases of incident PD during the follow-up period.
In participants with SN+ at baseline, the relative risk for incident PD was 17.37 (95% confidence interval, 3.71-81.34) times higher compared with normoechogenic participants.
In this prospective study, we demonstrate for the first time a highly increased risk for PD in elderly individuals with SN+.
Transcranial sonography of the midbrain may therefore be a promising primary screening procedure to define a risk population for imminent PD.
PMID: 21747033
Serum insulinlike growth factor 1 as possible marker for risk and early diagnosis of Parkinson disease.
The level of serum insulinlike growth factor 1 (IGF-1) is increased in idiopathic Parkinson disease (PD).
To assess whether the (1) IGF-1 level is increased in patients with PD at the time of diagnosis, (2) increased IGF-1 level is related to impaired motor function in healthy individuals, and (3) detection of increased IGF-1 level will help to identify persons at risk for PD.
Cross-sectional cohort study.
Serum IGF-1 was measured in 15 patients with newly diagnosed untreated PD and 139 healthy elderly individuals.
Participants at risk for PD (n = 11) were defined as having altered motor function according to the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale, Part III (UPDRS-III), and dopaminergic dysfunction as indicated by sonographically determined substantia nigra hyperechogenicity.
The IGF-1 level was higher in patients with PD compared with healthy participants (P = .004) and inversely correlated with the UPDRS-III score (ρ = -0.77).
The IGF-1 level was not related to motor function in the healthy group.
However, there was no significant difference between the IGF-1 level in the at-risk subgroup vs the PD patients (corrected P = .15), and the IGF-1 level was positively correlated with the UPDRS-III score (ρ = 0.80).
Serum IGF-1 monitoring may be valuable in the diagnosis of PD and for the identification of individuals with a putatively increased risk for PD.
PMID: 21747030
In vivo assessment of vesicular monoamine transporter type 2 in dementia with lewy bodies and Alzheimer disease.
To assess the diagnostic potential of imaging striatal monoaminergic terminal integrity with the vesicular monoamine transporter type 2 (VMAT2) radioligand (18)F 9-fluropropyl-(+)-dihydrotetrabenazine ([(18)F]AV-133) and positron emission tomography to distinguish dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) from Alzheimer disease (AD).
Design, Setting, and.
Nine patients with DLB, 10 patients with AD, 20 patients with Parkinson disease (PD), and 10 healthy age-matched control subjects underwent [(18)F]AV-133 positron emission tomography studies.
VMAT2 density was calculated through normalized tissue uptake value ratios at 120 to 140 minutes postinjection using the primary visual cortex as the reference region.
Comparison of the tissue ratio for [(18)F]AV-133 between the different clinical diagnostic groups.
Lower VMAT2 densities were observed in patients with DLB when compared with patients with AD especially in the posterior putamen (caudate: mean [SD], 1.24 [0.6] vs 2.83 [0.9]; P < .001; effect size = 2.1; anterior putamen: mean [SD], 0.90 [0.5] vs 3.01 [0.9]; P < .001; effect size = 2.9; posterior putamen: mean [SD], 0.62 [0.5] vs 2.87 [0.8]; P < .001; effect size = 3.4).
Compared with healthy controls, [(18)F]AV-133 tissue ratios were significantly lower by 88% and 74% in the posterior putamen, 74% and 65% in the anterior putamen, and 53% and 51% in the caudate nucleus of patients with PD and DLB, respectively.
In contrast to patients with PD and DLB, no reductions were observed in patients with AD.
[(18)F]AV-133 allows assessment of nigrostriatal degeneration in Lewy body diseases.
[(18)F]AV-133 can robustly detect reductions of dopaminergic nigrostriatal afferents in patients with DLB and assist in the differential diagnosis from AD.
PMID: 21747029
Patterns and trends in antipsychotic prescribing for Parkinson disease psychosis.
Antipsychotic (AP) use is common in Parkinson disease (PD), but APs can worsen parkinsonism, evidence for efficacy is limited, and use in patients with dementia increases mortality.
To examine the frequency and characteristics, including changes over time, of AP use in a large cohort of patients with PD.
Using Veterans Affairs data from fiscal year (FY) 2008, rates and predictors of AP prescribing were determined for patients with PD and psychosis stratified by dementia status (N = 2597) and a comparison group of patients with dementia and psychosis without PD (N = 6907).
Fiscal year 2008 and FY2002 data were compared to examine changes in AP prescribing over time.
Department of Veterans Affairs outpatient facilities.
Outpatients with PD and psychosis and outpatients without PD with dementia and psychosis, all receiving care at Veterans Affairs facilities in FY2002 and FY2008.
Antipsychotic prescribing, including overall, class, and specific medications.
In FY2008, 50% of patients with PD having a diagnosis of psychosis were prescribed an AP.
Among treated patients, the atypical AP quetiapine was most frequently prescribed (66%), but approximately 30% received high-potency APs.
Clozapine was rarely prescribed (<2%).
In multivariate models, diagnoses of PD and dementia were associated with AP use.
Comparing FY2008 with FY2002, AP use in PD was unchanged, with decreases in risperidone and olanzapine use offset by an increase in quetiapine prescribing and the introduction of aripiprazole.
Half of the patients with PD and psychosis receive APs, not uncommonly high-potency agents associated with worsening parkinsonism, and frequency of use has been unchanged since the "black box" warning for AP use in patients with dementia was issued.
Recent trends are a shift to quetiapine use and the common use of aripiprazole.
As psychosis and dementia are frequently comorbid in PD, safety risks associated with AP use in this population need to be assessed.
PMID: 21745757
β-Glucocerebrosidase gene mutations in two cohorts of Greek patients with sporadic Parkinson's disease.
An increasing number of clinical, neuropathological and experimental evidence linking Gaucher disease and a spectrum of synucleinopathies, including Parkinson's disease (PD) has emerged over the last decade.
In particular, several studies, despite individual differences, have shown that mutations in the β-glucocerebrosidase gene (GBA) are a risk factor for PD.
Recently a study from Northern Greece has shown a significant overrepresentation of such mutations only in patients with early onset PD.
In the present study 8 different GBA mutations covering 87% of the mutations identified in Gaucher disease patients diagnosed in Greece were investigated in two ethnic Greek cohorts of patients with sporadic Parkinson's disease.
Cohort A included patients residing and originating from Thessaly, Central Greece (n=100) and cohort B included patients residing and/or originating from the greater area of Athens (n=105).
Age-gender-ethnicity matched healthy individuals from the same areas were included as controls (n=206).
In patients of cohort A 11 carriers of GBA mutations were identified (5/11:N370S, 2/11:L444P, 2/11: D409H;H255Q, 1/11:H255Q, 1/11D409H) as opposed to 3 in the controls (n=105) (1/3:N370S, 1/3:H255Q, 1/3:Y108C) (p=0.021, OR 4.2, 95% CI=1.14-15.54).
In patients of cohort B 10 carriers of GBA mutations were identified (4/10:L444P, 4/10:D409H;H255Q, 1/10:N370S, 1/10:IVS10-1G→A) as opposed to 4 in controls (n=101) (3/4:N370S, 1/4:L444P).
However the difference was not statistically significant (p=0.113, OR 2.5, 95% CI=0.77-8.42).
In both cohorts, patients with PD harboring a GBA mutation had an earlier onset of symptoms than non-carriers (p=0.034, p=0.004).
The overall difference in the number of carriers identified in PD patients and controls was statistically significant (p=0.006; OR 3.24; 95% CI=1.35-7.81).
The association was reinforced in the early onset PD patients (EOPD; n=28, p=0.000, OR 11.37; 95% CI=3.73-34.6).
In conclusion GBA mutations were identified with increased frequency in both geographical cohorts of patients with sporadic PD studied compared to control individuals, with the difference being statistically significant only in cohort A.
An impressive association with EOPD was found and one third of the EOPD patients examined harbored a GBA mutation.
Qualitative differences regarding the type of mutations and/or their relative frequencies were observed between cohorts A and B of PD patients.
Genetic and/or environmental factors may account for the observed differences.
PMID: 21745745
Neurosurgical convection-enhanced delivery of treatments for Parkinson's disease.
Convection-enhanced delivery (CED) is a promising neurosurgical technique for the delivery of potential therapeutic agents to the Parkinson's disease (PD)-affected striatum.
CED utilises stereotactic insertion of a catheter to the striatum and continuous infusion to distribute agents in the brain parenchyma.
Insufficient attention to the details of CED may have contributed to early failures of translating candidate therapeutic agents from the laboratory to PD patients.
A literature review was performed to examine the factors that govern CED in the laboratory as well as translation in PD and we found that although there have been significant developments in implant design, infusion parameters and infusate composition, there have not been enough comparative trials of different technologies.
Further optimisation of CED is required before it can be applied in the clinical setting and this will require a step-by-step breakdown of the different elements of delivery for independent testing.
We conclude that CED is a promising technique for delivering therapeutic agents to the striatum for the treatment of PD but further refinements are necessary for successful clinical translation.
The risk is that early clinical translation of exciting new therapies may lead to therapeutic failure which is not due to the agent in question but simply the neurosurgical delivery.
PMID: 21745543
Proprioceptive deficits in Parkinson's disease patients with freezing of gait.
Recent research has proposed that proprioceptive deficits may exist in Parkinson's disease (PD); however, proprioception has not been studied in those who experience freezing of gait (FOG).
Proprioception was investigated through stimulation of proprioceptive receptors via patellar tendon vibration.
In a force matching task to either 10% or 30% maximal voluntary contraction, response to vibration with and without vision of a force target was compared between 15 PD with FOG (PD-FOG), 16 PD without FOG (PD non-FOG), and 15 non-PD control participants (Controls).
In a 15-s trial, vision of the target was provided for the first 10 s but in the last 5 s, four conditions were possible: (i) vision, no vibration; (ii) vision, vibration; (iii) no vision, no vibration; or (iv) no vision, vibration.
The expected healthy response to vibration was an overshoot of the target.
Controls and PD non-FOG did not perform significantly different with or without: vibration or vision.
PD-FOG performed similarly to Controls and PD non-FOG in the baseline condition (i).
Errors by PD-FOG on the other conditions (ii-iv) were significantly different from the baseline condition but were not significantly different from each other.
The PD-FOG group significantly undershot the target when vibration was added [F((2,36))=4.8376, P<0.02] and when vision was removed [F((2,36))=4.8376, P<0.02].
It is suggested that any deviation from normal sensory availability contributes to severe deficits in PD-FOG.
PMID: 21745139
The influence of the zebrafish genetic background on Parkinson's disease-related aspects.
Zebrafish are increasingly used to study neurodegenerative conditions such as Parkinson's disease (PD).
In rodents, the influence of the genetic background on important experimental parameters in PD research such as susceptibility to toxin exposure or motor behavior is well established.
In contrast, little is known about the impact of the genetic background in commonly used zebrafish wild-type strains on these important experimental parameters.
We determined the effect of the genetic background in five commonly used zebrafish wild-type strains on crucial, PD-related aspects, in particular the number of ascending dopaminergic neurons, their susceptibility to PD-related neurotoxins, and the expression levels of five genes involved in oxidative stress defense, protein degradation, cell death, and apoptosis.
We also investigated whether the susceptibility to morpholino-mediated knockdown of the PD gene DJ-1 may have a varying effect on neuronal cell loss depending on the genetic background.
Finally, we determined the influence of the genetic background on spontaneous motor behavior.
There was remarkably little variation between the different wild-type strains for most parameters investigated.
However, the susceptibility to the neurotoxin 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium differed between the five investigated strains and so did their spontaneous motor behavior.
PMID: 21742734
Abnormal bidirectional plasticity-like effects in Parkinson's disease.
Levodopa-induced dyskinesia is a major complication of long-term dopamine replacement therapy for Parkinson's disease that becomes increasingly problematic in advanced Parkinson's disease.
Although the cause of levodopa-induced dyskinesias is still unclear, recent work in animal models of the corticostriatal system has suggested that levodopa-induced dyskinesias might result from abnormal control of synaptic plasticity.
In the present study, we aimed to explore control of plasticity in patients with Parkinson's disease with and without levodopa-induced dyskinesias by taking advantage of a newly developed protocol that tests depotentiation of pre-existing long-term potentiation-like synaptic facilitation.
Long-term potentiation-like plasticity and its reversibility were studied in the motor cortex of 10 healthy subjects, 10 patients with Parkinson's disease and levodopa-induced dyskinesias, who took half of the regular dose of levodopa and 10 patients with Parkinson's disease without levodopa-induced dyskinesias, who took either half or the full dose of levodopa.
Patients with Parkinson's disease without levodopa-induced dyskinesias had normal long-term potentiation- and depotentiation-like effects when they took their full dose of levodopa, but there was no long-term potentiation-like effect when they were on half dose of levodopa.
In contrast, patients with levodopa-induced dyskinesias could be successfully potentiated when they were on half their usual dose of levodopa; however, they were unresponsive to the depotentiation protocol.
The results suggest that depotentiation is abnormal in the motor cortex of patients with Parkinson's disease with levodopa-induced dyskinesias and that their long-term potentiation-like plasticity is more readily affected by administration of levodopa than their clinical symptoms.
PMID: 21742527
Aggregation of α-synuclein in brain samples from subjects with glucocerebrosidase mutations.
Recent studies show an increased frequency of mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gene (GBA1) in patients with α-synucleinopathies including Parkinson disease.
Some patients with Gaucher disease (GD) develop parkinsonism with α-synuclein-positive inclusions post mortem.
Proteins were extracted from the cerebral cortex of subjects with synucleinopathies with and without GBA1 mutations, controls and patients with GD.
Patients with GBA1-associated synucleinopathies showed aggregation of oligomeric forms of α-synuclein in the SDS-soluble fraction, while only monomeric forms of α-synuclein were seen in subjects with GBA1 mutations without parkinsonism.
Thus, brains from patients with GBA1-associated parkinsonism show biochemical characteristics typical of Lewy body disorders.
PMID: 21741874
Parkinson's disease: the non-motor issues.
Non-motor symptoms (NMS) of Parkinson's disease remain the most under-appreciated and under-researched when taken as a whole.
Data is emerging that it is the "totaL" burden of NMS that is the major determinant of quality of life not a single NMS such as depression for instance.
Only recently validated tools such as the NMSQuest which empowers patients to declare NMS and the NMS scale, the SCOPA scales, and the modified version of the MDS-UPDRS have become available and validated for bedside clinical assessment of NMS.
For the first time clinical trials have been incorporating non-motor measures as outcome measures and clinical recommendations for treatment of non-motor symptoms of PD are being published.
This review aims to address some of these topical and "real life" aspects of modern day management of Parkinson's.
PMID: 21741729
Apolipoprotein E genotypes and the risk of Parkinson disease.
We examined apolipoprotein E (ApoE) genotypes in relation to Parkinson's disease (PD) among 786 cases and 1537 controls, all non-Hispanic Caucasians.
Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were derived from multivariate logistic regression models, adjusting for year of birth, sex, smoking status, daily caffeine intake, and family history of PD.
Compared with participants with ApoE ε33, ε4 carriers (ε34/ε44) had significantly lower odds for having PD (OR, 0.75; 95% CI, 0.59-0.94; p = 0.01), whereas ε2 carriers (ε23/ε22) did not (OR, 0.95; 95% CI, 0.73-1.24; p = 0.71).
Subgroup analyses showed similar results.
In addition, we conducted a meta-analysis which confirmed our primary findings (ε34/ε44 vs.
ε33: OR, 0.90; 95% CI, 0.81-0.99; p = 0.024 and ε23/ε22 vs.
ε33: OR, 1.10; 95% CI, 0.97-1.23; p = 0.13).
In PD patients, the prevalence of dementia appeared to be higher among ε4 carriers (compared with ε33: OR, 1.59; 95% CI, 0.98-2.58; p = 0.06), but lower among ε2 carriers (OR, 0.75; 95% CI, 0.40-1.42; p = 0.38), although neither test was statistically significant.
Our study suggested that the ApoE ε4 allele may be associated with a lower PD risk among non-Hispanic Caucasians.
PMID: 21741663
Subjective emotional experience at different stages of Parkinson's disease.
Subjective emotional experience is thought to rely on a large cortical-subcortical network including orbitofrontal and cingulate frontostriatal circuits together with the mesolimbic dopaminergic system that modulates their activity.
Parkinson's disease (PD) provides a model for exploring this issue.
By using an original emotion induction procedure, the present study examined to what extent subjective experience of emotion of PD patients at different stages of the disease was modulated by emotion in the same way as healthy individuals.
A battery of film excerpts was used to elicit different emotional feelings (happiness, anger, fear, sadness, disgust, and neutral) in 15 newly diagnosed PD patients, 18 patients with advanced PD and 15 matched controls.
The newly diagnosed patients were examined in two conditions: "on" and "off" dopaminergic medication.
Participants reported the intensity of their emotional feelings on a scale consisting of 10 emotional categories.
Results indicated that PD patients at different stages of the disease did not significantly differ from the controls in the self-reported emotional experience to the presented film excerpts.
Moreover, analyses conducted within the newly diagnosed PD group (on-dopa vs.
off-dopa conditions) indicated that the patients' emotional reactivity to the presented film excerpts was not significantly modulated by dopaminergic medication.
These results thus question the possible role of dopaminergic pathways in subjective emotional experience, at least in this sample and in the context of emotion induction.
PMID: 21741444
Genetic studies of the protein kinase AKT1 in Parkinson's disease.
The protein kinase AKT1 belongs to the Akt family and is a potent mediator of cell growth and survival and fully activated when phosphorylated.
The AKT family has been found to be phosphorylated to a lesser extent in the dopaminergic cells of Parkinson's disease patients compared to control individuals, which might influence cell survival.
Several publications support the implication of AKT1 in disorders of the dopaminergic system including bipolar disease and schizophrenia.
In 2008 an association study performed in a Greek Parkinson's disease case-control material reported the identification of a protective AKT1 haplotype.
Based on their work we have performed a replication study in a Swedish Parkinson's disease cohort.
We genotyped the four single nucleotide polymorphims (SNPs): rs2494743, rs2498788, rs2494746 and rs1130214 in a case-control material consisting of 243 Parkinson patients and 315 controls.
We did not find any associations with Parkinson's disease for either the individual SNPs or any of the haplotypes.
In contrast to previously published results, our data do not support the hypothesis of genetic variants in AKT1 confering protection against Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21741364
Neuroprotective cytokines repress PUMA induction in the 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP(+)) model of Parkinson's disease.
The hematopoietic cytokines erythropoietin (Epo) and granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) provide neuroprotection in several in vitro and in vivo models of Parkinson's disease (PD).
The molecular mechanism by which Epo and G-CSF signals reduce the neuronal death in PD is not clear.
Here, we show that in rat pheochromocytoma PC12 cells, Epo and G-CSF efficiently repressed the 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP(+))-induced expression of the proapoptotic protein PUMA (p53 up-regulated modulator of apoptosis).
Accordingly, Epo and G-CSF treatment reduced the PC12 cell fraction that underwent apoptosis by MPP(+) treatment and thus improved cell viability.
Downregulation of PUMA expression by Epo and G-CSF in MPP(+)-treated PC12 cells seems to be mediated by repression of p53, as the expression of p53 was increased by MPP(+)-treatment and reduced by Epo and G-CSF.
Together, these results suggest that the neuroprotective activities of Epo and G-CSF in an experimental model of PD involve the repression of the apoptosis-inducing action of PUMA.
PMID: 21741338
Egg forensics: An appraisal of DNA sequencing to assist in species identification of illegally smuggled eggs.
Psittaciformes (parrots and cockatoos) are charismatic birds, their plumage and capacity for learning make them highly sought after pets.
The illegal trade in parrots and cockatoos poses a serious threat to the viability of native populations; in addition, species transported to non-endemic areas may potentially vector disease and genetically 'pollute' local native avifauna.
To reduce the logistical difficulties associated with trafficking live birds, smugglers often transport eggs.
This creates a problem for authorities in elucidating accurate species identification without the laborious task of incubation and hand rearing until a morphological identification can be made.
Here, we use 99 avian eggs seized from carriers coming into and within Australia, as a result of suspected illegal trade.
We investigate and evaluate the use of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) to accurately identify eggs to family, genus or species level.
However, Identification of a species based on percentage mtDNA similarities is difficult without good representations of the inter- and intra-levels of species variation.
Based on the available reference database, we were able to identify 52% of the eggs to species level.
Of those, 10 species from eight genera were detected, all of which belong to the parrot (Psittacidae) and cockatoo (Cacatuidae) families.
Of the remaining 48%, a further 36% of eggs were identified to genus level, and 12% identified to family level using our assignment criteria.
Clearly the lack of validated DNA reference sequences is hindering our ability to accurately assign a species identity, and accordingly, we advocate that more attention needs to be paid to establishing validated, multi locus mtDNA reference databases for exotic birds that can both assist in genetic identifications and withstand legal scrutiny.
PMID: 21740438
Amantadine attenuates levodopa-induced dyskinesia in mice and rats preventing the accompanying rise in nigral GABA levels.
Amantadine is the only drug marketed for treating levodopa-induced dyskinesia.
However, its impact on basal ganglia circuitry in the dyskinetic brain, particularly on the activity of striatofugal pathways, has not been evaluated.
We therefore used dual probe microdialysis to investigate the effect of amantadine on behavioral and neurochemical changes in the globus pallidus and substantia nigra reticulata of 6-hydroxydopamine hemi-lesioned dyskinetic mice and rats.
Levodopa evoked abnormal involuntary movements (AIMs) in dyskinetic mice, and simultaneously elevated GABA release in substantia nigra reticulata (∼3-fold) but not globus pallidus.
Glutamate levels were unaffected in both areas.
Amantadine (40 mg/kg, i.p.), ineffective alone, attenuated (∼50%) AIMs expression and prevented the GABA rise.
Moreover, it unraveled a facilitatory effect of levodopa on pallidal glutamate levels.
Levodopa also evoked AIMs expression and a GABA surge (∼2-fold) selectively in the substantia nigra of dyskinetic rats.
However, different from mice, glutamate levels rose simultaneously.
Amantadine, ineffective alone, attenuated (∼50%) AIMs expression preventing amino acid increase and leaving unaffected pallidal glutamate.
Overall, the data provide neurochemical evidence that levodopa-induced dyskinesia is accompanied by activation of the striato-nigral pathway in both mice and rats, and that the anti-dyskinetic effect of amantadine partly relies on the modulation of this pathway.
PMID: 21739275
Translocation and oligomerization of Bax is regulated independently by activation of p38 MAPK and caspase-2 during MN9D dopaminergic neurodegeneration.
Bax is translocated into the mitochondrial membrane and oligomerized therein to initiate mitochondrial apoptotic signaling.
Our previous study indicated that reactive oxygen species (ROS)-mediated activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and caspase is critically involved in 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA)-mediated neurodegeneration.
Here, we specifically attempted to examine whether and how these death signaling pathways may be linked to Bax translocation and oligomerization.
We found that 6-OHDA treatment triggered translocation and oligomerization of Bax onto the mitochondria in MN9D dopaminergic neuronal cells.
These events preceded cytochrome c release into the cytosol.
Cross-linking assay revealed that co-treatment with a ROS scavenger or a pan-caspase inhibitor inhibited 6-OHDA-induced Bax oligomerization.
Among several candidates of ROS-activated MAPKs and caspases, we found that co-treatment with PD169316 or VDVAD specifically inhibited 6-OHDA-induced Bax oligomerization, suggesting critical involvement of p38 MAPK and caspase-2.
Consequently, overexpression of a dominant negative form of p38 MAPK or a shRNA-mediated knockdown of caspase-2 indeed inhibited 6-OHDA-induced Bax oligomerization.
However, activation of p38 MAPK and caspase-2 was independently linked to oligomerization of Bax.
This specificity was largely confirmed with a Bax 6A7 antibody known to detect activated forms of Bax on the mitochondria.
Taken together, our data suggest that there is an independent amplification loop of Bax translocation and oligomerization via caspase-2 and p38 MAPK during ROS-mediated dopaminergic neurodegeneration.
PMID: 21738693
Comparison of endothelial progenitor cells in Parkinson's disease patients treated with levodopa and levodopa/COMT inhibitor.
Levodopa treatment in Parkinson's disease (PD) increases in serum homocysteine levels due to its metabolism via catechol O-methyltransferase.
Endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) have the capacity to differentiate into mature endothelial cells and are markers for endothelial functions and cardiovascular risks.
Along with traditional vascular risk factors, hyperhomocysteinemia is known to decrease the level of EPCs.
In the present study, we hypothesized that that levodopa-induced hyperhomocysteinemia leads to a change in EPC levels.
We prospectively enrolled PD patients who had been prescribed either levodopa/carbidopa (PD-L group, n = 28) or levodopa/carbidopa/COMT inhibitor (PD-LC group, n = 25) for more than 1 year.
The number of circulating EPCs was measured by flow cytometry using dual staining of anti-CD34 and anti-KDR antibodies.
The EPCs were divided into tertiles based on their distributions and a logistic regression analysis was used to estimate independent predictors of the highest tertile of EPCs.
The number of endothelial progenitor cells was significantly decreased in PD-L patients (118±99/mL) compared with either PD-LC patients (269±258/mL, p = 0.007) or controls (206±204/mL, p = 0.012).
The level of homocysteine was significantly increased in PD-L patients (14.9±5.3 µmol/L) compared with either PD-LC patients (11.9±3.0 µmol/L, p = 0.028) or controls (11.1±2.5 µmol/L, p = 0.012).
The level of homocysteine was negatively correlated with endothelial progenitor cell levels (r = -0.252, p = 0.028) and was an independent predictor of the highest tertile of endothelial progenitor cell levels (OR; 0.749 [95% CI: 0.584-0.961]).
These data indicate that a higher consumption of EPC for restoration of endothelial damage may be associated with chronic levodopa treatment in PD patients.
PMID: 21738687
Regulation of LRRK2 expression points to a functional role in human monocyte maturation.
Genetic variants of Leucine-Rich Repeat Kinase 2 (LRRK2) are associated with a significantly enhanced risk for Parkinson disease, the second most common human neurodegenerative disorder.
Despite major efforts, our understanding of LRRK2 biological function and regulation remains rudimentary.
In the present study we analyze LRRK2 mRNA and protein expression in sub-populations of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs).
LRRK2 mRNA and protein was found in circulating CD19(+) B cells and in CD14(+) monocytes, whereas CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells were devoid of LRRK2 mRNA.
Within CD14(+) cells the CD14(+)CD16(+) sub-population of monocytes exhibited high levels of LRRK2 protein, in contrast to CD14(+)CD16(-) cells.
However both populations expressed LRRK2 mRNA.
As CD14(+)CD16(+) cells represent a more mature subset of monocytes, we monitored LRRK2 expression after in vitro treatment with various stress factors known to induce monocyte activation.
We found that IFN-γ in particular robustly increased LRRK2 mRNA and protein levels in monocytes concomitant with a shift of CD14(+)CD16(-) cells towards CD14(+)CD16(+) cells.
Interestingly, the recently described LRRK2 inhibitor IN-1 attenuated this shift towards CD14(+)CD16(+) after IFN-γ stimulation.
Based on these findings we speculate that LRRK2 might have a role in monocyte maturation.
Our results provide further evidence for the emerging role of LRRK2 in immune cells and regulation at the transcriptional and translational level.
Our data might also reflect an involvement of peripheral and brain immune cells in the disease course of PD, in line with increasing awareness of the role of the immune system in PD.
PMID: 21738488
A two-stage meta-analysis identifies several new loci for Parkinson's disease.
A previous genome-wide association (GWA) meta-analysis of 12,386 PD cases and 21,026 controls conducted by the International Parkinson's Disease Genomics Consortium (IPDGC) discovered or confirmed 11 Parkinson's disease (PD) loci.
This first analysis of the two-stage IPDGC study focused on the set of loci that passed genome-wide significance in the first stage GWA scan.
However, the second stage genotyping array, the ImmunoChip, included a larger set of 1,920 SNPs selected on the basis of the GWA analysis.
Here, we analyzed this set of 1,920 SNPs, and we identified five additional PD risk loci (combined p<5×10(-10), PARK16/1q32, STX1B/16p11, FGF20/8p22, STBD1/4q21, and GPNMB/7p15).
Two of these five loci have been suggested by previous association studies (PARK16/1q32, FGF20/8p22), and this study provides further support for these findings.
Using a dataset of post-mortem brain samples assayed for gene expression (n = 399) and methylation (n = 292), we identified methylation and expression changes associated with PD risk variants in PARK16/1q32, GPNMB/7p15, and STX1B/16p11 loci, hence suggesting potential molecular mechanisms and candidate genes at these risk loci.
PMID: 21738487
Web-based genome-wide association study identifies two novel loci and a substantial genetic component for Parkinson's disease.
Although the causes of Parkinson's disease (PD) are thought to be primarily environmental, recent studies suggest that a number of genes influence susceptibility.
Using targeted case recruitment and online survey instruments, we conducted the largest case-control genome-wide association study (GWAS) of PD based on a single collection of individuals to date (3,426 cases and 29,624 controls).
We discovered two novel, genome-wide significant associations with PD-rs6812193 near SCARB2 (p = 7.6 × 10(-10), OR = 0.84) and rs11868035 near SREBF1/RAI1 (p = 5.6 × 10(-8), OR = 0.85)-both replicated in an independent cohort.
We also replicated 20 previously discovered genetic associations (including LRRK2, GBA, SNCA, MAPT, GAK, and the HLA region), providing support for our novel study design.
Relying on a recently proposed method based on genome-wide sharing estimates between distantly related individuals, we estimated the heritability of PD to be at least 0.27.
Finally, using sparse regression techniques, we constructed predictive models that account for 6%-7% of the total variance in liability and that suggest the presence of true associations just beyond genome-wide significance, as confirmed through both internal and external cross-validation.
These results indicate a substantial, but by no means total, contribution of genetics underlying susceptibility to both early-onset and late-onset PD, suggesting that, despite the novel associations discovered here and elsewhere, the majority of the genetic component for Parkinson's disease remains to be discovered.
PMID: 21738024
Impulse control disorders associated with dopaminergic medication in patients with pituitary adenomas.
Impulse control disorders (ICDs) such as pathological gambling, compulsive shopping, compulsive eating, and hypersexuality are a matter of growing interest, especially in patients with Parkinson disease who are on dopamine replacement therapy.
It was recently reported that ICDs are associated with other disorders also treated with dopaminergic drugs (dopamine agonists) such as restless legs syndrome, multiple system atrophy, progressive supranuclear palsy, and fibromyalgia.
The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of ICDs in patients with pituitary adenomas who take dopamine agonists (DAs).
Twenty consecutive patients with pituitary adenomas (mostly prolactinomas) taking DAs were assessed.
All participated in a structured interview focused on ICDs, which was conducted by a physician.
Two (10%) of 20 subjects had a condition diagnosed as ICD.
The first patient is a 35-year-old man with giant macroprolactinoma who was alternately treated with different types of DAs (cabergoline, bromocriptine, and quinagolide).
He developed compulsive eating and pathological gambling.
The second patient is a 53-year-old man with macroprolactinoma who suffered from severe hypersexuality after cabergoline was begun.
This study demonstrates the importance of systematic screening for ICDs in patients taking dopaminergic medication regardless of their primary condition.
PMID: 21737877
Modulation of subthalamic T-type Ca(2+) channels remedies locomotor deficits in a rat model of Parkinson disease.
An increase in neuronal burst activities in the subthalamic nucleus (STN) is a well-documented electrophysiological feature of Parkinson disease (PD).
However, the causal relationship between subthalamic bursts and PD symptoms and the ionic mechanisms underlying the bursts remain to be established.
Here, we have shown that T-type Ca(2+) channels are necessary for subthalamic burst firing and that pharmacological blockade of T-type Ca(2+) channels reduces motor deficits in a rat model of PD.
Ni(2+), mibefradil, NNC 55-0396, and efonidipine, which inhibited T-type Ca(2+) currents in acutely dissociated STN neurons, but not Cd(2+) and nifedipine, which preferentially inhibited L-type or the other non–T-type Ca(2+) currents, effectively diminished burst activity in STN slices.
Topical administration of inhibitors of T-type Ca(2+) channels decreased in vivo STN burst activity and dramatically reduced the locomotor deficits in a rat model of PD.
Cd(2+) and nifedipine showed no such electrophysiological and behavioral effects.
While low-frequency deep brain stimulation (DBS) has been considered ineffective in PD, we found that lengthening the duration of the low-frequency depolarizing pulse effectively improved behavioral measures of locomotion in the rat model of PD, presumably by decreasing the availability of T-type Ca(2+) channels.
We therefore conclude that modulation of subthalamic T-type Ca(2+) currents and consequent burst discharges may provide new strategies for the treatment of PD.
PMID: 21737418
L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia is associated with regional increase of striatal dynorphin peptides as elucidated by imaging mass spectrometry.
Opioid peptides are involved in various pathophysiological processes, including algesia, epilepsy, and drug dependence.
A strong association between L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia (LID) and elevated prodynorphin mRNA levels has been established in both patients and in animal models of Parkinson's disease, but to date the endogenous prodynorphin peptide products have not been determined.
Here, matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI) imaging mass spectrometry (IMS) was used for characterization, localization, and relative quantification of striatal neuropeptides in a rat model of LID in Parkinson's disease.
MALDI IMS has the unique advantage of high sensitivity and high molecular specificity, allowing comprehensive detection of multiple molecular species in a single tissue section.
Indeed, several dynorphins and enkephalins could be detected in the present study, including dynorphin A(1-8), dynorphin B, α-neoendorphin, MetEnkRF, MetEnkRGL, PEnk (198-209, 219-229).
IMS analysis revealed elevated levels of dynorphin B, α-neoendorphin, substance P, and PEnk (220-229) in the dorsolateral striatum of high-dyskinetic animals compared with low-dyskinetic and lesion-only control rats.
Furthermore, the peak-intensities of the prodynorphin derived peptides, dynorphin B and α-neoendorphin, were strongly and positively correlated with LID severity.
Interestingly, these LID associated dynorphin peptides are not those with high affinity to κ opioid receptors, but are known to bind and activate also μ- and Δ-opioid receptors.
In addition, the peak intensities of a novel endogenous metabolite of α-neoendorphin lacking the N-terminal tyrosine correlated positively with dyskinesia severity.
MALDI IMS of striatal sections from Pdyn knockout mice verified the identity of fully processed dynorphin peptides and the presence of endogenous des-tyrosine α-neoendorphin.
Des-tyrosine dynorphins display reduced opioid receptor binding and this points to possible novel nonopioid receptor mediated changes in the striatum of dyskinetic rats.
Because des-tyrosine dynorphins can only be detected by mass spectrometry, as no antibodies are available, these findings highlight the importance of MALDI IMS analysis for the study of molecular dynamics in neurological diseases.
PMID: 21737311
Dreaming and cognition in patients with frontotemporal dysfunction.
Individuals with Parkinson's disease (PD) and temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) have hallucinations and mild cognitive dysfunction.
The objective of this work was to study dreams in PD and TLE patients using a common functional model of dream production involving the limbic and paralimbic structures.
Dreams were characterised in early-stage PD (19 males) and TLE patients (52) with dream diaries classified by the Hall van de Castle system and were compared with matched controls.
In PD, there were significant differences between patients' dreams and those of controls: animals, physical aggression, and a befriender were more common in patients, and aggressor and bodily misfortunes were less common.
The dreams of patients with frontal dysfunction showed more aggressive features.
TLE patients had lower recall than PD patients and a higher proportion of dreams involving family and familiar settings, lower proportions involving success, and a higher incidence of frontal dysfunction.
The dreams of PD and TLE patients share important features.
PMID: 21736911
The influence and the mechanism of docosahexaenoic acid on a mouse model of Parkinson's disease.
This study aimed to investigate the effects of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) on the oxidative stress that occurs in an experimental mouse model of Parkinson's disease (PD).
An experimental model of PD was created by four intraperitoneal injections of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) (4 × 20 mg/kg, at 12h intervals).
Docosahexaenoic acid was given daily by gavage for 4 weeks (36 mg/kg/day).
The motor activity of the mice was evaluated via the pole test, and the dopaminergic lesion was determined by immunohistochemical analysis for tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)-immunopositive cells.
The activity of antioxidant enzymes in the brain were determined by spectrophotometric assays and the concentration of thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances (TBARS) were measured as an index of oxidative damage.
The number of apoptotic dopaminergic cells significantly increased in MPTP-treated mice compared to controls.
Although DHA significantly diminished the number of cell deaths in MPTP-treated mice, it did not improve the decreased motor activity observed in the experimental PD model.
Docosahexaenoic acid significantly diminished the amount of cell death in the MPTP+DHA group as compared to the MPTP group.
TBARS levels in the brain were significantly increased following MPTP treatment.
Glutathione peroxidase (GPx) and catalase (CAT) activities of brain were unaltered in all groups.
The activity of brain superoxide dismutase (SOD) was decreased in the MPTP-treated group compared to the control group, but DHA treatment did not have an effect on SOD activity in the MPTP+DHA group.
Our current data show that DHA treatment exerts neuroprotective actions on an experimental mouse model of PD.
There was a decrease tendency in brain lipid oxidation of MPTP mice but it did not significantly.
PMID: 21736878
Return of bradykinesia after subthalamic stimulation ceases: relationship to electrode location.
In 20 subjects we quantified the rate at which subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation effects on Parkinson's bradykinesia "washed-out" after stimulation ceased.
We found that wash-out was a two-step process, consisting of an initial fast decrease in stimulation's therapeutic effect, followed by a further, slow decline.
Moreover, the relative contribution of the fast and slow components differed between patients.
Finally, we found that lateral stimulation caused more of the fast-decaying component, while medial stimulation caused more of the slow-decaying component.
This implies the existence of at least two separate mechanisms by which subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation improves bradykinesia, associated with activation of spatially separate zones in the vicinity of the subthalamic nucleus.
PMID: 21735482
Hypersexuality and pathological gambling in Parkinson's disease: A cross-sectional case-control study.
Substance and behavioral addictions have already been described separately or in combination in Parkinson's disease.
However, no comparisons of the prevalence of addictive behaviors in patients with Parkinson's disease and the general population have been published.
The objective of this study was to compare the prevalence and characteristics of addictions (gambling, hypersexuality, tobacco, and alcohol) in patients with Parkinson's disease and in a matched, paired sample from the general population.
After matching for age, sex, and complete field questionnaires on addictions, we had 115 data sets.
No difference was observed between Parkinson's disease and control populations concerning pathological gambling (0.87% vs 0.87%, P = .99), tobacco addiction (1.7% vs 1.7%, P = .99), and alcohol dependence (2.6% vs 3.5%, P = .71).
The Parkinson's disease group showed 2 cases of sexual addiction (1.7% vs 0, P = .15).
Our results indicate that patients with Parkinson's disease do not have specific profiles for tobacco or alcohol addiction and pathological gambling compared with the general population.
PMID: 21734494
Genetics of Parkinson's disease and essential tremor.
This review summarizes some key findings of the past few years on the genetics of the two common movement disorders Parkinson's disease and essential tremor.
Within the last two years, genome-wide association (GWA) analyses have revealed a number of novel low-risk susceptibility variants for Parkinson's disease, among them HLA-DRB5, BST1, ACMSD, STK39, MCCC1/LAMP3, SYT11, and CCDC62/HIP1R) and have confirmed LINGO1 as risk factor for essential tremor.
The identification of copy number variations in the Parkin gene in healthy control individuals suggests no major role of these variations in late onset Parkinson's disease.
Drosophila studies on Parkin and Pink1 have uncovered a role in the mitochondrial quality control pathway in the pathogenesis of the disease.
LRRK2 has been found to interact with the microRNAs processing protein Argonaut, thereby affecting protein translation.
Notably, despite the high familial risk for essential tremor no high-risk gene has been found to date.
The possibility of a nonmendelian transmission in some cases is discussed.
GWA studies and positional cloning approaches have led to the identification of a number of risk genes for Parkinson's disease, which give novel insights into pathogenic pathways of the disease.
In contrast, our knowledge of the genetics of essential tremor is scarce.
Except for LINGO1, no other risk gene has so far been identified.
New technologies such as next generation high throughput sequencing might help to identify more risk genes.
PMID: 21734329
[Thiamine and its derivatives in the regulation of cell metabolism].
For over 70 years thiamine (vitamin B1) has aroused the interest of biologists, biochemists and medical doctors because of its multilateral participation in key biochemical and physiological processes.
The thiamine molecule is composed of pyrimidine and thiazole rings which are linked by a methylene bridge.
It is synthesized by microorganisms, fungi and plants, whereas animals and humans have to obtain it from food.
There are several known forms of vitamin B1 inside cells: free thiamine, three phosphate esters (mono-, di-, and triphosphate), and the recently found adenosine thiamine triphosphate.
Thiamine has a dual, coenzymatic and non-coenzymatic role.
First of all, it is a precursor of thiamin diphosphate, which is a coenzyme for over 20 characterized enzymes which are involved in cell bioenergetic processes leading to the synthesis of ATP.
Moreover, these enzymes take part in the biosynthesis of pentose (required for the synthesis of nucleotides), amino acids and other organic compounds of cell metabolism.
On the other hand, recent discoveries show the non-coenzymatic role of thiamine derivatives in the process of regulation of gene expression (riboswitches in microorganisms and plants), the stress response, and perhaps so far unknown signal transduction pathways associated with adverse environmental conditions, or transduction of nerve signals with participation of thiamine triphosphate and adenosine thiamine triphosphate.
From the clinical point of view thiamine deficiency is related to beri-beri, Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease, Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome and other pathologies of the nervous system, and it is successfully applied in medical practice.
On the other hand, identifying new synthetic analogues of thiamine which could be used as cytostatics, herbicides or agents preventing deficiency of vitamin B1 is currently the major goal of the research.
In this paper we present the current state of knowledge of thiamine and its derivatives, indicating the participation of these compounds in the regulation of cell metabolism at both the coenzymatic and non-coenzymatic level.
PMID: 21734182
GBA-associated PD presents with nonmotor characteristics.
To evaluate whether there exists distinct characteristics in glucocerebrosidase (GBA)-associated Parkinson disease (PD) with regard to motor and nonmotor symptoms as well as imaging characteristics assessed by transcranial sonography (TCS).
Twenty patients with PD with heterozygous GBA mutations (N370S, L444P) (GBA-PD) in comparison to 20 patients with sporadic PD negative for GBA mutations (sPD) were included.
We assessed motor impairment with the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale-III.
Nonmotor symptoms were evaluated using the Montreal Cognitive Assessment, Neuropsychiatric Inventory, revised form of the Beck Depression Inventory, Parkinson Disease Sleep Scale, Sniffin' Sticks, and Unified Multiple System Atrophy Rating Scale items 9-12.
TCS imaging was used to detect morphologic characteristics.
Patients with GBA-PD more often had a variety of nonmotor symptoms, namely dementia, neuropsychiatric disturbances, and autonomic dysfunction, and had more severe cases, than patients with sPD.
They also demonstrated a higher prevalence of a reduced echogenicity of the brainstem raphe assessed by TCS.
Especially nonmotor symptoms seem to be very common in GBA-PD.
Further studies are needed to validate these observations in order to better understand the pathogenesis of GBA-PD and develop specific therapeutic concepts.
PMID: 21733529
Negative impact of borderline global cognitive scores on quality of life after subthalamic nucleus stimulation in Parkinson's disease.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the subthalamic nucleus (STN) significantly improves quality of life (QoL) in Parkinson's disease (PD).
Dementia is considered as a contraindication for STN-DBS.
However, no controlled study assessed the impact of STN-DBS on the QoL and motor outcome in PD patients with a borderline global cognitive impairment.
We studied clinical baseline and progression parameters in a cohort of STN-DBS patients with a global cognitive score still in the non-demented range but scoring in the lowest quartile of the Mattis Dementia Rating Scale (MDRS), a measure of global cognitive functioning.
Data from a German randomised controlled study comparing DBS (60 patients) with best medical treatment (BMT, 59 patients) were analysed.
Changes in patients' QoL scores were assessed using the Parkinson's disease questionnaire (PDQ-39) at baseline and at the 6 months follow up.
Patients were split into four groups according to their MDRS performance at baseline and these groups were compared in the context of motor outcome and QoL.
Twelve out of sixty patients of the STN-DBS group scored in the lowest quartile of the MDRS (range between one hundred thirty and one hundred thirty seven points).
An individual analysis revealed that 3 of 12 patients showed a clinical relevant improvement in QoL whereas the group statistics did not reveal any significant improvement in QoL measures after STN-DBS compared to the BMT group.
Since this failure to improve in QoL cannot be explained by a failure to improve in motor functions, stimulation settings and psychiatric scales after STN-DBS, the failure to improve in QoL in patients with a borderline global cognitive score might be specifically related to lower cognitive functioning.
PMID: 21733194
Occupational risk factors for Parkinson's disease: a case-control study in Japan.
The evidence for associations between occupational factors and the risk of Parkinson's disease (PD) is inconsistent.
We assessed the risk of PD associated with various occupational factors in Japan.
We examined 249 cases within 6 years of onset of PD.
Control subjects were 369 inpatients and outpatients without neurodegenerative disease.
Information on occupational factors was obtained from a self-administered questionnaire.
Relative risks of PD were estimated using odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) based on logistic regression.
Adjustments were made for gender, age, region of residence, educational level, and pack-years of smoking.
Working in a professional or technical occupation tended to be inversely related to the risk of PD: adjusted OR was 0.59 (95% CI: 0.32-1.06, P = 0.08).
According to a stratified analysis by gender, the decreased risk of PD for persons in professional or technical occupations was statistically significant only for men.
Adjusted ORs for a professional or technical occupation among men and women were 0.22 (95% CI: 0.06-0.67) and 0.99 (0.47-2.07), respectively, and significant interaction was observed (P = 0.048 for homogeneity of OR).
In contrast, risk estimates for protective service occupations and transport or communications were increased, although the results were not statistically significant: adjusted ORs were 2.73 (95% CI: 0.56-14.86) and 1.74 (95% CI: 0.65-4.74), respectively.
No statistical significance was seen in data concerning exposure to occupational agents and the risk of PD, although roughly a 2-fold increase in OR was observed for workers exposed to stone or sand.
The results of our study suggest that occupational factors do not play a substantial etiologic role in this population.
However, among men, professional or technical occupations may decrease the risk of PD.
PMID: 21731989
Electrocardiography Series. What is the cause of the regular wide QRS complex tachycardia?
Regular broad QRS complex tachycardias may be ventricular in origin or due to supraventricular tachycardia with aberrancy.
Antidromic atrioventricular re-entrant tachycardia occurring in Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome is a third possibility.
The electrocardiogram is a key tool for distinguishing these tachycardias, which have differing causes, prognoses and treatment strategies.
Ventricular tachycardia may be monomorphic or polymorphic.
The management of ventricular tachycardia depends on clinical symptoms and is influenced by the presence of structural heart disease.
PMID: 21731658
In silico gene prioritization by integrating multiple data sources.
Identifying disease genes is crucial to the understanding of disease pathogenesis, and to the improvement of disease diagnosis and treatment.
In recent years, many researchers have proposed approaches to prioritize candidate genes by considering the relationship of candidate genes and existing known disease genes, reflected in other data sources.
In this paper, we propose an expandable framework for gene prioritization that can integrate multiple heterogeneous data sources by taking advantage of a unified graphic representation.
Gene-gene relationships and gene-disease relationships are then defined based on the overall topology of each network using a diffusion kernel measure.
These relationship measures are in turn normalized to derive an overall measure across all networks, which is utilized to rank all candidate genes.
Based on the informativeness of available data sources with respect to each specific disease, we also propose an adaptive threshold score to select a small subset of candidate genes for further validation studies.
We performed large scale cross-validation analysis on 110 disease families using three data sources.
Results have shown that our approach consistently outperforms other two state of the art programs.
A case study using Parkinson disease (PD) has identified four candidate genes (UBB, SEPT5, GPR37 and TH) that ranked higher than our adaptive threshold, all of which are involved in the PD pathway.
In particular, a very recent study has observed a deletion of TH in a patient with PD, which supports the importance of the TH gene in PD pathogenesis.
A web tool has been implemented to assist scientists in their genetic studies.
PMID: 21731633
Simvastatin prevents dopaminergic neurodegeneration in experimental parkinsonian models: the association with anti-inflammatory responses.
In addition to their original applications to lowering cholesterol, statins display multiple neuroprotective effects.
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors interact closely with the dopaminergic system and are strongly implicated in therapeutic paradigms of Parkinson's disease (PD).
This study aims to investigate how simvastatin impacts on experimental parkinsonian models via regulating NMDA receptors.
Regional changes in NMDA receptors in the rat brain and anxiolytic-like activity were examined after unilateral medial forebrain bundle lesion by 6-hydroxydopamine via a 3-week administration of simvastatin.
NMDA receptor alterations in the post-mortem rat brain were detected by [³H]MK-801(Dizocilpine) binding autoradiography.
6-hydroxydopamine treated PC12 was applied to investigate the neuroprotection of simvastatin, the association with NMDA receptors, and the anti-inflammation.
6-hydroxydopamine induced anxiety and the downregulation of NMDA receptors in the hippocampus, CA1(Cornu Ammonis 1 Area), amygdala and caudate putamen was observed in 6-OHDA(6-hydroxydopamine) lesioned rats whereas simvastatin significantly ameliorated the anxiety-like activity and restored the expression of NMDA receptors in examined brain regions.
Significant positive correlations were identified between anxiolytic-like activity and the restoration of expression of NMDA receptors in the hippocampus, amygdala and CA1 following simvastatin administration.
Simvastatin exerted neuroprotection in 6-hydroxydopamine-lesioned rat brain and 6-hydroxydopamine treated PC12, partially by regulating NMDA receptors, MMP9 (matrix metalloproteinase-9), and TNF-a (tumour necrosis factor-alpha).
Our results provide strong evidence that NMDA receptor modulation after simvastatin treatment could partially explain its anxiolytic-like activity and anti-inflammatory mechanisms in experimental parkinsonian models.
These findings contribute to a better understanding of the critical roles of simvastatin in treating PD via NMDA receptors.
PMID: 21730160
CNS expression of glucocerebrosidase corrects alpha-synuclein pathology and memory in a mouse model of Gaucher-related synucleinopathy.
Emerging genetic and clinical evidence suggests a link between Gaucher disease and the synucleinopathies Parkinson disease and dementia with Lewy bodies.
Here, we provide evidence that a mouse model of Gaucher disease (Gba1(D409V/D409V)) exhibits characteristics of synucleinopathies, including progressive accumulation of proteinase K-resistant α-synuclein/ubiquitin aggregates in hippocampal neurons and a coincident memory deficit.
Analysis of homozygous (Gba1(D409V/D409V)) and heterozygous (Gba1(D409V/+) and Gba1(+/-)) Gaucher mice indicated that these pathologies are a result of the combination of a loss of glucocerebrosidase activity and a toxic gain-of-function resulting from expression of the mutant enzyme.
Importantly, adeno-associated virus-mediated expression of exogenous glucocerebrosidase injected into the hippocampus of Gba1(D409V/D409V) mice ameliorated both the histopathological and memory aberrations.
The data support the contention that mutations in GBA1 can cause Parkinson disease-like α-synuclein pathology, and that rescuing brain glucocerebrosidase activity might represent a therapeutic strategy for GBA1-associated synucleinopathies.
PMID: 21730104
The natural history of treated PD in an incident, community-based cohort: does the future begin?
PMID: 21729402
Self-awareness of motor dysfunction in patients with Huntington's disease in comparison to Parkinson's disease and cervical dystonia.
Individuals suffering from Huntington's disease (HD) have been shown to present with poor self-awareness of a variety of symptoms.
The aim of this study was to better assess the self-awareness of motor symptoms and activities of daily living (ADL) impairment in HD, in comparison to Parkinson's disease (PD) and cervical dystonia (CD).
In particular, the anosognosia/anosodiaphoria of involuntary movements has been investigated.
Self-awareness was tested in 23 patients with HD by comparing patient and caregiver ratings in reference to clinical control groups (25 PD with dyskinesias, PDdys; 21 PD without dyskinesias, PDndys; and 20 with CD).
Patients were assessed neurologically by relevant rating scales.
Self-awareness was tested using a scale based on 15 films demonstrating 3 types of motor symptoms (chorea/dyskinesias, parkinsonism, torticollis) as well as the Self-Assessment Parkinson's Disease Disability Scale.
General cognitive status, verbal learning, cognitive control, and mood were also analyzed.
Our results indicate that self-awareness of choreic movements was affected more severely in HD than in PDdys, despite comparable cognitive status.
Patient-proxy agreement on ADL impairment was roughly similar in all clinical groups.
The results are discussed in the context of orbitofrontal-limbic pathology as a potential trigger of anosognosia/anosodiaphoria in individuals with HD.
PMID: 21728911
A cost-effectiveness analysis of levodopa/carbidopa intestinal gel compared to standard care in late stage Parkinson's disease in the UK.
Evaluation of cost-effectiveness of levodopa/carbidopa intestinal gel (LCIG), compared to standard care (SC) in patients with advanced Parkinson's disease (aPD) in the UK.
Markov model to quantify costs and outcomes associated with LCIG versus SC in aPD patients at Hoehn and Yahr (H&Y) stages 3, 4 or 5 experiencing >50% OFF time per day.
Time horizon was lifetime, LCIG treatment was assumed to last maximal 5 years after which patients revert to SC.
Model comprised 12 aPD health states according to H&Y status and daily time spent in OFF state.
Cost analyses are reported from a UK NHS and Personal Social Services perspective.
Uncertainties were assessed through one-way sensitivity analyses.
COMPARATORS: LCIG, providing patients with continuous dopaminergic stimulation to maximise functional ON time during the day and SC, defined as medically determined best available oral medication.
Cost-effectiveness, based on quality adjusted life years gained, presented as an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio.
Lifetime analysis yields an incremental cost per QALY of £36,024 for LCIG compared to SC (incremental cost £39,644, QALY gain 1.1).
Results were sensitive to time on treatment, health state on treatment initiation, and estimates of long term benefit (OWSA results from £32,127 to £66,421 per QALY).
Findings must be considered in the context of the study limitations which were mainly due to data availability constraints.
LCIG is an effective treatment, reducing OFF time and improving quality of life in advanced PD.
It provides value for money in levodopa-responsive aPD patients with severe motor fluctuations when no other treatment options are effective or suitable.
Given LCIG is an orphan drug, it is reasonable to suggest that it may be considered cost-effective in the UK setting.
However, further research is needed to complete current data gaps and increase robustness of the model.
PMID: 21728428
Interference from retrieval cues in Parkinson's disease.
Existing studies on memory interference in Parkinson's disease (PD) patients have provided mixed results and it is unknown whether PD patients have problems in overcoming interference from retrieval cues.
We investigated this issue by using a part-list cuing paradigm.
In this paradigm, after the study of a list of items, the presentation of some of these items as retrieval cues hinders the recall of the remaining ones.
We tested PD patients' (n = 19) and control participants' (n = 16) episodic memory in the presence and absence of part-list cues, using initial-letter probes, and following either weak or strong serial associative encoding of list items.
Both PD patients and control participants showed a comparable and significant part-list cuing effect after weak associative encoding (13% vs.
12% decrease in retrieval in part-list cuing vs.
no part-list cuing -control- conditions in PD patients and control participants, respectively), denoting a similar effect of cue-driven interference in the two populations when a serial retrieval strategy is hard to develop.
However, only PD patients showed a significant part-list cuing effect after strong associative encoding (20% vs.
5% decrease in retrieval in patients and controls, respectively).
When encoding promotes the development of an effective serial retrieval strategy, the presentation of part-list cues has a specifically disruptive effect in PD patients.
This indicates problems in strategic retrieval, probably related to PD patients' increased tendency to rely on external cues.
Findings in control conditions suggest that less effective encoding may have contributed to PD patients' memory performance.
PMID: 21726554
Deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus transiently enhances loss-chasing behaviour in patients with Parkinson's disease.
Dopaminergic treatments are associated with impulse control disorders such as pathological gambling in a subset of patients with Parkinson's Disease.
While deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus has been reported to reduce symptoms of impulse control disorders in some Parkinson's Disease patients, little is known about its specific effects on gambling behaviour.
In this experiment, we investigated the effects of deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus on one of the central features of pathological gambling: the tendency to chase losses.
Loss-chasing is associated with impaired control over gambling behaviour and it is one of the most salient features of pathological gambling as it presents in the clinic.
Twenty two patients with advanced idiopathic Parkinson's Disease and chronically implanted subthalamic nucleus electrodes for deep brain stimulation completed a simple laboratory model of loss-chasing behaviour twice: once with and once without stimulation.
Exploratory analysis indicated that deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus increased the value of losses chased by patients with Parkinson's Disease when shifting from off- to on-stimulation.
These effects were not attributable to changes in state affect or to the motor impairments produced by the withdrawal of deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus.
The effects of the stimulation on the value of losses chased were more pronounced in female than in male patients and reduced in patients taking dopamine receptor agonists.
Collectively, these results suggest that deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus can transiently alter the evaluation of accumulated losses during gambling episodes in idiopathic Parkinson's Disease.
PMID: 21726270
Hirano body - rich subtypes of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
Background.
In definite Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, morphological and immunohistochemical patterns are useful to identify molecular subtypes.
Severe cerebellar pathology and hippocampal involvement helps to identify VV subtypes.
The rare VV1 variant (<1%), more frequent in young individuals, is additionally characterised by the presence of ballooned neurons in affected areas.
In 1985 Cartier et al.
described a family cluster of 3 individuals with an ataxic CJD form, showing, in addition to severe cerebellar and hippocampal involvement, the presence of frequent Hirano bodies (HB) in CA1 pyramidal neurons.
HB are frequently found in aged individuals with Alzheimer pathology although they are not a specific finding.
Aims and methods.
In this study we evaluated the presence of HB in hippocampi of 54 genetically and molecularly characterized CJD cases, aiming to elucidate whether additional morphological features could be helpful to point to molecular subtypes.
Results.
We identified 9 cases (4 VV1, 1 out of 3 MV2K, 3 out of 6 MV2K+2C, and one MV carrying a 96 bpi) with abundant, partly bizarre and clustered HB in CA1-sector, not observed in other subtypes.
The presence of HB was independent of hippocampal involvement by the disease itself.
Conclusions.
Clusters of abundant HB might be found in rare CJD subtypes such as VV1, MV2K/MV2K+2C, and some genetic cases.
In addition to histopathological and PrP immunohistochemical deposition patterns, their presence might be a useful additional morphologic feature that could point to the molecular subtype, especially when genetic and/or WB analyses are not available.
PMID: 21725324
Direct generation of functional dopaminergic neurons from mouse and human fibroblasts.
Transplantation of dopaminergic neurons can potentially improve the clinical outcome of Parkinson's disease, a neurological disorder resulting from degeneration of mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons.
In particular, transplantation of embryonic-stem-cell-derived dopaminergic neurons has been shown to be efficient in restoring motor symptoms in conditions of dopamine deficiency.
However, the use of pluripotent-derived cells might lead to the development of tumours if not properly controlled.
Here we identified a minimal set of three transcription factors--Mash1 (also known as Ascl1), Nurr1 (also known as Nr4a2) and Lmx1a--that are able to generate directly functional dopaminergic neurons from mouse and human fibroblasts without reverting to a progenitor cell stage.
Induced dopaminergic (iDA) cells release dopamine and show spontaneous electrical activity organized in regular spikes consistent with the pacemaker activity featured by brain dopaminergic neurons.
The three factors were able to elicit dopaminergic neuronal conversion in prenatal and adult fibroblasts from healthy donors and Parkinson's disease patients.
Direct generation of iDA cells from somatic cells might have significant implications for understanding critical processes for neuronal development, in vitro disease modelling and cell replacement therapies.
PMID: 21725254
Pedunculopontine nucleus stimulation improves gait freezing in Parkinson disease.
Pedunculopontine nucleus (PPN) stimulation is a novel therapy for Parkinson disease.
However, controversies remain regarding the clinical application of this new therapy, including patient selection, electrode positioning, and how best to assess outcomes.
To clarify the clinical application of PPN stimulation in Parkinson disease.
Five consecutive patients with Parkinson disease complicated by severe gait freezing, postural instability, and frequent falls (all persisting even while the patient was on medication) received bilateral stimulation of the mid-lower PPN without costimulation of other brain targets.
Outcomes were assessed prospectively over 2 years with gait-specific questionnaires and the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale (part III).
The primary outcome, the Gait and Falls Questionnaire score, improved significantly with stimulation.
Benefits were maintained over 2 years.
Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale (part III) items assessing gait and posture were relatively insensitive to these treatment effects.
Beneficial effects often appeared to outlast stimulation for hours or longer.
Thus, single-session on- vs off-stimulation assessments may be susceptible to "delayed washout effects." Stimulation of the PPN did not change akinesia scores or dopaminergic medication requirements.
Bilateral stimulation of the mid-lower PPN (more caudal than previous reports) without costimulation of other brain targets may be beneficial for the subgroup of patients with Parkinson disease who experience severe gait freezing and postural instability with frequent falls, which persist even while on medication.
Choosing appropriate outcome measures and accounting for the possibility of prolonged stimulation washout effects appear to be important for detecting the clinical benefits.
PMID: 21725242
Impulse control disorders in Parkinson's disease: recent advances.
The aim is to review the recent advances in the epidemiology and pathophysiology of impulse control disorders (ICDs) in Parkinson's disease.
Large cross-sectional and case-control multicentre studies show that ICDs in Parkinson's disease are common, with a frequency of 13.6%.
These behaviours are associated with impaired functioning and with depressive, anxiety and obsessive symptoms, novelty seeking and impulsivity.
Behavioural subtypes demonstrate differences in novelty seeking and impulsivity, suggesting pathophysiological differences.
Observational and neurophysiological studies point towards a potential mechanistic overlap between behavioural (ICDs) and motor (dyskinesias) dopaminergic sequelae.
Converging data suggest dopamine agonists in ICDs appear to enhance learning from rewarding outcomes and impulsive choice.
ICD patients also have enhanced risk preference and impaired working memory.
Neuroimaging data point towards enhanced bottom-up ventral striatal dopamine release to incentive cues, gambling tasks and reward prediction, and possible inhibition of top-down orbitofrontal influences.
Dopamine agonist-related ventral striatal hypoactivity to risk is consistent with impaired risk evaluation.
Recent large-scale studies and converging findings are beginning to provide an understanding of mechanisms underlying ICDs in Parkinson's disease, which can guide prevention of these behaviours and optimize therapeutic approaches.
PMID: 21725093
John and James Parkinson's first description of acute appendicitis and its associated complications of perforation and death.
PMID: 21724849
Regulation of intracellular manganese homeostasis by Kufor-Rakeb syndrome-associated ATP13A2 protein.
Mutations in the ATP13A2 gene are associated with Kufor-Rakeb syndrome (KRS) and are found also in patients with various other types of parkinsonism.
ATP13A2 encodes a predicted lysosomal P5-type ATPase that plays important roles in regulating cation homeostasis.
Disturbance of cation homeostasis in brains is indicated in Parkinson disease pathogenesis.
In this study, we explored the biological function of ATP13A2 as well as the pathogenic mechanism of KRS pathogenic ATP13A2 mutants.
The results revealed that wild-type ATP13A2, but not the KRS pathogenic ATP13A2 mutants, protected cells from Mn(2+)-induced cell death in mammalian cell lines and primary rat neuronal cultures.
In addition, wild-type ATP13A2 reduced intracellular manganese concentrations and prevented cytochrome c release from mitochondria compared with the pathogenic mutants.
Furthermore, endogenous ATP13A2 was up-regulated upon Mn(2+) treatment.
Our results suggest that ATP13A2 plays important roles in protecting cells against manganese cytotoxicity via regulating intracellular manganese homeostasis.
The study provides a potential mechanism of KRS and parkinsonism pathogenesis.
PMID: 21724446
Effects of parkinsonism on health status in welding exposed workers.
Previous studies suggest that welders frequently display parkinsonian signs, such as bradykinesia and tremor.
Demonstrating that these parkinsonian findings are associated with reductions in quality of life (QoL) or health status could have important repercussions for worker safety and performance.
Subjects included 394 active workers exposed to welding fumes and evaluated for parkinsonism by movement disorders experts in a worksite-based epidemiology study.
Subjects were diagnosed with parkinsonism if the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale motor subsection part 3 (UPDRS3) score was ≥15.
All subjects completed a Parkinson's disease (PD) symptom questionnaire and the PDQ39, a widely used QoL and health status measure for PD.
Total PDQ39 score and all subscores were greater in welders with parkinsonism than welders without parkinsonism, with the most significant differences observed for mobility, emotional well-being, and activities of daily living (ADL's).
The PDQ39 scores for welding exposed workers with parkinsonism were similar to scores seen in a group of early PD patients.
Parkinsonism in active, welding exposed workers is associated with reductions in health status and QoL affecting a broad range of categories and within the range seen in early PD.
PMID: 21724402
The pathophysiological mechanisms underlying freezing of gait in Parkinson's Disease.
Freezing of gait is a paroxysmal phenomenon most commonly found in patients with advanced Parkinson's Disease.
The pathophysiological mechanisms underlying this behaviour remain uncertain despite a well-characterised phenotype.
Freezing behaviour extends beyond gait to affecting speech and upper limb function, suggesting that there is likely to be a universal mechanism underlying the phenomenon.
This paper identifies the essential features required for a comprehensive model of freezing and evaluates a number of hypotheses that seek to explain the phenomenon.
It appears likely that the pathophysiology of freezing involves context-dependant dysfunction across multiple levels of the neurological system, including cortical, subcortical and brainstem regions.
PMID: 21724193
Intensive voice treatment (LSVT®LOUD) for Parkinson's disease following deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus.
Intensive voice therapy (LSVT(®)LOUD) can effectively manage voice and speech symptoms associated with idiopathic Parkinson disease (PD).
This small-group study evaluated voice and speech in individuals with and without deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus (STN-DBS) before and after LSVT LOUD, to determine whether outcomes for surgical subjects were comparable to non-surgical cohorts.
Eight subjects with PD (four with STN-DBS and four without) received LSVT LOUD four times a week for four weeks.
Four additional subjects with PD remained untreated.
Voice intensity (SPL), Vowel Articulation Index (VAI), the Voice Handicap Index (VHI), and a structured interview were evaluated before and after treatment and again six months later.
Both treated groups showed significant increases in SPL from pre to post and six-month follow up.
VAI was significantly higher for the treated groups compared to the untreated subjects at follow up.
Several treated individuals had significant clinical improvement in VHI scores, particularly within the LSVT-DBS group.
Treated individuals reported improvements in voice and speech in structured interviews; however, answers suggest more variable long-term maintenance within the LSVT-DBS group.
The untreated group exhibited no significant changes in any measure throughout the study.
Results support LSVT LOUD for treating voice and speech in individuals with PD following STN-DBS surgery.
However, modifications may be required to maintain functional improvements.
Learning outcomes: As a result of this activity, the participant will be able to (1) describe how deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus may affect voice and speech in Parkinson disease; (2) describe the effects of intensive voice therapy (LSVT(®)LOUD) on people with PD both with and without STN-DBS; (3) describe how individuals with STN-DBS maintained treatment effects over time.
PMID: 21723913
L-DOPA: a scapegoat for accelerated neurodegeneration in Parkinson's disease?
There is consensus that amelioration of the motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease is most effective with L-DOPA (levodopa).
However, this necessary therapeutic step is biased by an enduring belief that L-DOPA is toxic to the remaining substantia nigra dopaminergic neurons by itself, or by specific metabolites such as dopamine.
The concept of L-DOPA toxicity originated from pre-clinical studies conducted mainly in cell culture, demonstrating that L-DOPA or its derivatives damage dopaminergic neurons due to oxidative stress and other mechanisms.
However, the in vitro data remain controversial as some studies showed neuroprotective, rather than toxic action of the drug.
The relevance of this debate needs to be considered in the context of the studies conducted on animals and in clinical trials that do not provide convincing evidence for L-DOPA toxicity in vivo.
This review presents the current views on the pathophysiology of Parkinson's disease, focusing on mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative/proteolytic stress, the factors that can be affected by L-DOPA or its metabolites.
We then critically discuss the evidence supporting the two opposing views on the effects of L-DOPA in vitro, as well as the animal and human data.
We also address the problem of inadequate experimental models used in these studies.
L-DOPA remains the symptomatic 'hero' of Parkinson's disease.
Whether it contributes to degeneration of nigral dopaminergic neurons, or is a 'scapegoat' for explaining undesirable or unexpected effects of the treatment, remains a hotly debated topic.
PMID: 21723784
Exploring the link between glucocerebrosidase mutations and parkinsonism.
Clinical, genetic and pathological studies demonstrate that mutations in glucocerebrosidase (GBA), which encodes the lysosomal enzyme deficient in Gaucher disease (GD), are risk factors for Parkinson disease (PD) and related disorders.
Some patients with GD and Gaucher carriers develop parkinsonism.
Furthermore, subjects with PD have an increased frequency of GBA mutations.
GBA-mutation carriers exhibit diverse parkinsonian phenotypes and have glucocerebrosidase-positive Lewy bodies.
Although the mechanism for this association is unknown, we present several theories, including protein aggregation, prion transmission, lipid accumulation and impaired autophagy, mitophagy or trafficking.
Each model has inherent limitations, and a second-hit mutation might be essential.
Elucidation of the basis for this link will have important consequences for studying these diseases and should provide insights into lysosomal pathways and potential treatment strategies.
PMID: 21723568
Sexual problems in Parkinson's disease: the multidimensional nature of the problem and of the intervention.
Sexual problems are common in Parkinson's disease and contribute to poor quality of life of patients and partners.
Nonmotor and motor disease manifestations can affect sexual function.
This article reviews the progressive and multidimensional sexual manifestations and provides practical suggestions for taking sexual history and treating sexual problems, which may enable clinicians to contribute to the sexual wellbeing of patients.
PMID: 21722545
Severe agitation following deep brain stimulation for parkinsonism.
The use of deep brain stimulation has become increasingly common for the treatment of movement disorders, including Parkinson disease.
Although deep brain stimulation is generally very successful in alleviating the extrapyramidal symptoms of Parkinson disease, side effects can occur.
This case report describes a patient presenting to the emergency department in a state of extreme aggression 3 days after a change in the parameters of his bilateral subthalamic nucleus stimulator.
We review the complications of deep brain stimulation relevant to the emergency physician and provide some practical information on stimulator adjustment in an emergency.
PMID: 21722302
Unfolded proteins and endoplasmic reticulum stress in neurodegenerative disorders.
The stimuli for neuronal cell death in neurodegenerative disorders are multi-factorial and may include genetic predisposition, environmental factors, cellular stressors such as oxidative stress and free radical production, bioenergy failure, glutamate-induced excitotoxicity, neuroinflammation, disruption of Ca(2+) -regulating systems, mitochondrial dysfunction and misfolded protein accumulation.
Cellular stress disrupts functioning of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), a critical organelle for protein quality control, leading to induction of the unfolded protein response (UPR).
ER stress may contribute to neurodegeneration in a range of neurodegenerative disorders.
This review summarizes the molecular events occurring during ER stress and the unfolded protein response and it specifically evaluates the evidence suggesting the ER stress response plays a role in neurodegenerative disorders.
PMID: 21721909
Pramipexole for the treatment of early Parkinson's disease.
Pramipexole is a nonergolinic dopamine agonist, with high affinity for the D2 subfamily of dopamine receptors.
Pramipexole is efficacious for the symptomatic treatment of early Parkinson's Disease (PD) and its early use, before that of levodopa can delay the emergence of levodopa-related motor complication.
Dosage should be increased gradually from a starting dose of 0.375 mg/day up to a maximum of 4.5 mg/day in equally divided doses taken three times per day with pramipexole immediate-release or equivalent daily dosages once-daily with pramipexole extended-release.
Pramipexole can also improve depressive symptoms and possibly health-related quality of life in PD.
Nonetheless, its use is not devoid of tolerability problems.
While peripheral adverse drug reactions, such as nausea, vomiting or orthostatic hypotension, can be effectively treated and usually pose few problems to most patients, neuropsychiatric events can seriously limit the use of pramipexole in some cases.
Indeed, excessive daytime somnolence, impulse-control disorders, hallucinations or delusions can severely affect patients, causing important personal or social handicap.
Patients should be informed about the risk of such neuropsychiatric complications and their presence should be actively detected at each consultation.
More effort will have to be put into further studying the risk-benefit ratio of pramipexole and other dopamine agonists in the treatment of early PD.
PMID: 21721907
Can α-synuclein be targeted in novel therapies for Parkinson's disease?
PMID: 21721555
The A53T mutation is key in defining the differences in the aggregation kinetics of human and mouse α-synuclein.
Despite a 95% sequence similarity, the aggregation of human and mouse α-synuclein is remarkably different, as the human form is slower than the mouse form in forming fibrils but is associated with Parkinson's disease in both humans and transgenic mice.
Here, the amino acid code underlying these differences is investigated by comparing the lag times, growth rates, and secondary structure propensities of a systematic series of eight human-mouse chimeras.
Fluorescence analysis of these variants shows that the A53T substitution dominates the growth kinetics, while the lag phase is affected by a combination of the A53T and S87N substitutions.
The secondary structure propensities derived from an NMR chemical shift analysis of the monomeric forms of the human-mouse variants enable us to establish a link between the changes in the conformational properties in the region of position 53 upon mutation and the corresponding changes in growth rates.
These results suggest that the presence of an alanine residue at position 53 may be an evolutionary adaptation to minimize Parkinson's disease in humans and indicates that effective drug development efforts may be directed to target this N-terminal region of the sequence.
PMID: 21720849
Neuropathology underlying clinical variability in patients with synucleinopathies.
Abnormal aggregates of the synaptic protein, α-synuclein, are the dominant pathology in syndromes known as the synucleinopathies.
The cellular aggregation of the protein occurs in three distinct types of inclusions in three main clinical syndromes.
α-Synuclein deposits in neuronal Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites in idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), as well as incidentally in a number of other conditions.
In contrast, α-synuclein deposits largely in oligodendroglial cytoplasmic inclusions in multiple system atrophy (MSA).
Lastly, α-synuclein also deposits in large axonal spheroids in a number of rarer neuroaxonal dystrophies.
Disorders are usually defined by their most dominant pathology, but for the synucleinopathies, clinical heterogeneity within the main syndromes is well documented.
MSA was originally viewed as three different clinical phenotypes due to different anatomical localization of the lesions.
In PD, recent meta-analyses have identified four main clinical phenotypes, and clinicopathological correlations suggest that more severe and more rapid progression of pathology with chronological age, as well as the involvement of additional neuropathologies, differentiates these phenotypes.
In DLB, recent large studies show that clinical diagnosis is too insensitive to identify the syndrome itself, although clinicopathological studies suggest variable clinical features occur in the different pathological forms of this syndrome (pure DLB, DLB with Alzheimer's disease (AD), and AD with amygdala predominant Lewy pathology).
The recognition of considerable heterogeneity within the synucleinopathy syndromes is important for the identification of factors involved in changing their pathological phenotype.
PMID: 21719744
A prospective study of bowel movement frequency and risk of Parkinson's disease.
The authors prospectively examined bowel movement frequency at baseline in relation to future Parkinson's disease risk in the Health Professionals Follow-up Study (HPFS) during 2000-2006 (33,901 men) and the Nurses' Health Study (NHS) during 1982-2006 (93,767 women).
During the follow-up (6 years for the HPFS and 24 years for the NHS), the authors identified 156 incident male Parkinson's disease cases (HPFS) and 402 female cases (NHS).
In the HPFS, compared with men with daily bowel movements, men with a bowel movement every 3 days or less had a multivariate-adjusted relative risk of 4.98 (95% confidence interval (CI): 2.59, 9.57) for developing Parkinson's disease in the next 6 years.
In the NHS, the corresponding relative risk was 2.15 (95% CI: 0.76, 6.10), and the risk of Parkinson's disease was not elevated beyond 6 years of follow-up (relative risks = 1.25 for years 7-12, 0.54 for years 13-18, and 0.88 for years 19-24).
When these 2 cohorts were combined, the pooled relative risks for Parkinson's disease in the next 6 years were 0.75, 1 (referent), 2.62, and 3.93 (95% CI: 2.26, 6.84) (P(trend) < 0.0001) across 4 bowel movement categories.
In conclusion, infrequent bowel movements may antedate the onset of cardinal motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease and may contribute to the identification of populations with higher than average Parkinson's disease risk.
PMID: 21719443
Genetic activation of Nrf2 signaling is sufficient to ameliorate neurodegenerative phenotypes in a Drosophila model of Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is the most common neurodegenerative movement disorder.
Oxidative stress has been associated with the etiology of both sporadic and monogenic forms of PD.
The transcription factor Nrf2, a conserved global regulator of cellular antioxidant responses, has been implicated in neuroprotection against PD pathology.
However, direct evidence that upregulation of the Nrf2 pathway is sufficient to confer neuroprotection in genetic models of PD is lacking.
Expression of the PD-linked gene encoding α-synuclein in dopaminergic neurons of Drosophila results in decreased locomotor activity and selective neuron loss in a progressive age-dependent manner, providing a genetically accessible model of PD.
Here we show that upregulation of the Nrf2 pathway by overexpressing Nrf2 or its DNA-binding dimerization partner, Maf-S, restores the locomotor activity of α-synuclein-expressing flies.
Similar benefits are observed upon RNA-interference-mediated downregulation of the prime Nrf2 inhibitor, Keap1, as well as in conditions of keap1 heterozygosity.
Consistently, the α-synuclein-induced dopaminergic neuron loss is suppressed by Maf-S overexpression or keap1 heterozygosity.
Our data validate the sustained upregulation of the Nrf2 pathway as a neuroprotective strategy against PD.
This model provides a genetically accessible in vivo system in which to evaluate the potential of additional Nrf2 pathway components and regulators as therapeutic targets.
PMID: 21719292
Neuromelanin magnetic resonance imaging of nigral volume loss in patients with Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by progressive degeneration of melanin-containing neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc).
Pathological change has not been detected by neuroimaging techniques in patients with PD in vivo.
We examined 80 patients with PD to determine whether degeneration of the SNc is detectable in vivo by MRI.
The age-matched controls consisted of 54 patients who had suffered mild acute ischemic stroke.
Axial T1-weighted MRI were obtained with a 3-Tesla MRI scanner.
The border of the neuromelanin-sensitive region in the SNc was traced manually on these images, and the volume of this area was calculated.
The mean volumes for the left and right SNc were significantly reduced in patients with PD compared to the controls.
Volume loss became marked in parallel with disease severity and duration.
Neuromelanin MRI may be considered as a biomarker of nigral degeneration in patients with PD.
PMID: 21718966
Comparison of virtual reality versus physical reality on movement characteristics of persons with Parkinson's disease: effects of moving targets.
To compare the performance of reaching for stationary and moving targets in virtual reality (VR) and physical reality in persons with Parkinson's disease (PD).
A repeated-measures design in which all participants reached in physical reality and VR under 5 conditions: 1 stationary ball condition and 4 conditions with the ball moving at different speeds.
University research laboratory.
Persons with idiopathic PD (n=29) and age-matched controls (n=25).
Not applicable.
Success rates and kinematics of arm movement (movement time, amplitude of peak velocity, and percentage of movement time for acceleration phase).
In both VR and physical reality, the PD group had longer movement time (P<.001) and lower peak velocity (P<.001) than the controls when reaching for stationary balls.
When moving targets were provided, the PD group improved more than the controls did in movement time (P<.001) and peak velocity (P<.001), and reached a performance level similar to that of the controls.
Except for the fastest moving ball condition (0.5-s target viewing time), which elicited worse performance in VR than in physical reality, most cueing conditions in VR elicited performance generally similar to those in physical reality.
Although slower than the controls when reaching for stationary balls, persons with PD increased movement speed in response to fast moving balls in both VR and physical reality.
This suggests that with an appropriate choice of cueing speed, VR is a promising tool for providing visual motion stimuli to improve movement speed in persons with PD.
More research on the long-term effect of this type of VR training program is needed.
PMID: 21718949
Correlative single photon emission computed tomography imaging of [123I]altropane binding in the rat model of Parkinson's.
This study used the dopamine transporter (DAT) probe, [(123)I]-2β-carbomethoxy-3β-(4-fluorophenyl)-N-(3-iodo-E-allyl)nortropane ([(123)I]altropane), to assess the DAT levels in the 6-hydroxydopamine rat model of Parkinson's disease.
We sought to assess if the right to left [(123)I]altropane striatal ratios correlated with dopamine content in the striatum and substantia nigra and with behavioural outcomes.
[(123)I]altropane images taken pre- and postlesion were acquired before and after the transplantation of neural stem/progenitor cells.
The images obtained using [(123)I]altropane and single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) were compared with specific behavioural tests and the dopamine content assessed by high-performance liquid chromatography.
[(123)I]altropane binding correlated with the content of dopamine in the striatum; however, [(123)I]altropane binding did not correlate with the dopamine content in the substantia nigra.
There was a significant correlation of altropane ratios with the cylinder test and the postural instability test, but not with amphetamine rotations.
The low coefficient of determination (r(2)) for these correlations indicated that [(123)I]altropane SPECT was not a good predictor of behavioural outcomes.
Our data reveal that [(123)I]altropane predicts the integrity of the striatal dopamine nerve terminals, but does not predict the integrity of the nigrostriatal system.
[(123)I]altropane could be a useful marker to measure dopamine content in cell replacement therapies; however, it would not be able to evaluate outcomes for neuroprotective strategies.
PMID: 21718702
Structured regions of α-synuclein fibrils include the early-onset Parkinson's disease mutation sites.
α-Synuclein (AS) fibrils are the major component of Lewy bodies, the pathological hallmark of Parkinson's disease (PD).
Here, we use results from an extensive investigation employing solid-state NMR to present a detailed structural characterization and conformational dynamics quantification of full-length AS fibrils.
Our results show that the core extends with a repeated structural motif.
This result disagrees with the previously proposed fold of AS fibrils obtained with limited solid-state NMR data.
Additionally, our results demonstrate that the three single point mutations associated with early-onset PD-A30P, E46K and A53T-are located in structured regions.
We find that E46K and A53T mutations, located in rigid β-strands of the wild-type fibrils, are associated with major and minor structural perturbations, respectively.
PMID: 21718277
Cognitive impairment predicts fatal incident stroke: findings from a national sample of older adults.
To investigate the effect of cognitive impairment on fatal and nonfatal incident stroke in older adults.
A large, national, prospective, population-based study of a representative cohort of older Canadians followed over a 10-year period.
Secondary analyses were conducted using data from the Canadian Study of Health and Aging, a population-based study of older adults followed prospectively from 1991 to 2001.
Nine thousand four hundred fifty-one adults aged 65 and older who had not previously been diagnosed with stroke at baseline (in 1991).
In addition to known risk factors, the independent contribution of cognitive function (diagnosed in a clinical examination) was examined as a risk for stroke in older adults.
Multinomial logistic regression analyses showed that cognitive impairment was associated with twice the odds of fatal incident stroke, controlling for well-established risk factors.
This study provides further evidence for the need to consider cognitive function in relation to stroke risk in older populations.
PMID: 21718226
Obituary for Leslie Henderson.
PMID: 21716022
Dose-response relationship between cumulative mercury exposure index and specific uptake ratio in the striatum on Tc-99m TRODAT SPECT.
Tc-99m TRODAT is an agent for dopamine transporters and measuring dopamine innervation of the striatum.
An association between Parkinson disease and body burden mercury level has been reported in the scientific published data.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of mercury exposure on dopamine transporters in the striatum measured by Tc-99m TRODAT single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT).
Study subjects included 17 workers who worked in a lamp factory at risk for mercury vapor exposure and 15 age-matched healthy controls.
All subjects received Tc-99m TRODAT SPECT, brain computed tomography scan, and neurologic examinations.
Biologic urine mercury levels at the end of a work week were assessed for workers.
There were significant differences in specific uptake ratio (SUR) in the striatum, caudate, and putamen between mercury exposure workers and healthy controls on Tc-99m TRODAT SPECT (all P < 0.001).
The results showed a significantly negative correlation between urine and cumulative mercury levels and SUR in the striatum on Tc-99m TRODAT SPECT by Pearson analysis (r = -0.501, P = 0.040; r = -0.563, P = 0.019).
After adjusting for age, gender, and body mass index, cumulative mercury exposure index (Cum Hg) was demonstrated to be the statistically significant predictor for SUR in the striatum, caudate, and putamen on Tc-99m TRODAT SPECT by multiple linear regression analysis (β = -0.543, P = 0.018; β = -0.521, P = 0.033; β = -0.465, P = 0.048).
Mercury exposure has significantly negative effect on dopamine transporters in the striatum.
There is dose-response relationship between cumulative mercury exposure index (Cum Hg) and SUR in the striatum on Tc-99m TRODAT brain SPECT.
PMID: 21715213
What motivates Parkinson's disease patients to enter clinical trials?
Limited data is available regarding motivations and concerns of Parkinson's disease (PD) patients when participating in clinical trials (CTs).
Knowledge of these factors may improve the recruitment and quality of future trials.
To assess the motivations and concerns of PD patients concerning participation in CTs and to evaluate the extent to which patients understand informed consent materials and placebo effect concept.
Cross-sectional study in PD patients enrolled in CTs between 2002 and 2007.
Two questionnaires designed for placebo-controlled and active-controlled studies were mailed to patients.
From the 93/127 replied questionnaires (response rate: 73.2%) 91 were evaluable.
Fifty-nine percent of the participants were women with a mean age of 66.8 years.
The main reasons for participating in CTs were to help the advance of science (63.7%), to gain access to a better treatment (56.0%), and to benefit others (51.6%).
Risk of adverse events (49.5%) and negative effects of treatment (35.2%) were the major concerns.
Ninety percent reported they had understood the informed consent.
Of 80 patients included in placebo-controlled studies, 63.9% understood the placebo effect concept.
Globally, 66% of patients would participate in another CT and 41.6% in a placebo-controlled trial.
The main motivations of PD patients to participate in CTs were the benefit to the patient himself and to others.
The major concern was safety.
PD patients understood the informed consent, but more educational efforts must be made to explain the placebo effect.
Most PD patients were very positive toward CTs and would participate in another trial.
PMID: 21715166
Repetitive stepping in place identifies and measures freezing episodes in subjects with Parkinson's disease.
Freezing of gait (FOG) in Parkinson's disease (PD) is challenging to measure.
We asked whether a repetitive stepping in place (SIP) task on force plates could identify freezing episodes (FEs) in PD subjects, self-classified as "freezers", using the validated FOG questionnaire (FOG-Q) and whether a computerized algorithm could provide automatic detection of FEs during SIP.
Thirty PD subjects and nine age-matched controls completed the SIP task.
PD subjects were assessed using the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating motor Scale (UPDRS-III) and the FOG-Q.
The identification of "freezers" using the SIP task correlated with the FOG-Q (r=0.80, P<0.001).
The specificity and sensitivity of identifying freezers using the SIP task reached 93% and 87%.
The number and duration of FEs detected by the algorithm correlated with visual inspection (r=0.97, r=0.998, P<0.001).
Freezers had larger SIP asymmetry compared to controls (P=0.02) and non-freezers (P=0.03) as well as larger arhythmicity (P=0.003 and P<0.001, respectively).
UPDRS subscores were higher in freezers compared to non-freezers (P<0.05).
These results suggest that the SIP task is a useful tool to detect freezing in PD and is correlated with FOG-Q.
SIP cycle asymmetry and stride time variability were worse in freezers, similar to that shown in FOG studies.
Detection of the number and duration of FEs using a computerized algorithm correlated with independent visual inspection of records.
PMID: 21714071
ATP13A2 variability in Taiwanese Parkinson's disease.
Mutations in ATP13A2 have been reported to associate with Parkinson's disease (PD).
This study investigates the contribution of genetic variants in ATP13A2 to Taiwanese PD.
ATP13A2 cDNA fragments from 65 early onset PD (onset <50 years) were sequenced.
The identified variants were validated in a cohort of PD (n = 493) and ethnically matched controls (n = 585).
A novel heterozygous G1014S, located at the conserved seventh transmembrane domain of ATP13A2 protein, was identified in an early onset PD patient, which was absent in 585 normal controls.
Additionally, a reported heterozygous A746T was found in two PD patients and four controls.
The clinical features and 99mTc-TRODAT-1 single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) image of the patients carrying G1014S and A746T were similar to that of idiopathic PD.
One normal control with A746T showed an asymmetric reduction of 99mT TRODAT-1 uptake in the right striatum.
Under oxidative stress or apoptotic stimulus, lymphoblastoid cells carrying either A764T or G1014S showed increased caspase 3 activity compared with the controls.
The rates of decay for G1014S and A746T proteins were more or less reduced in cycloheximide chase experiment.
In silico modeling of G1014S exhibited a more stable feature than wild-type, and G1014S is mislocalized mainly in the intralysosomal space, which is coherent with the prediction of prohibiting N-myristoylation and membrane association.
We therefore hypothesize that rare variants of ATP13A2 may contribute to PD susceptibility in Taiwan.
The role played by ATP13A2 variants in PD remains to be clarified.
PMID: 21714009
Increased muscle belly and tendon stiffness in patients with Parkinson's disease, as measured by myotonometry.
Based on Davis's law, greater tonus of the muscle belly in individuals with Parkinson's disease can create greater tension in the tendon, leading to structural adjustment and an increase in tendon stiffness.
Our study aimed to separately assess passive stiffness in the muscle belly and tendon in medicated patients with Parkinson's disease, using myotonometry.
We tested 12 patients with Parkinson's disease and 12 healthy matched controls.
Passive stiffness of muscle belly and tendon was estimated by myotonometry, electromyography, and mechanomyography in relaxed biceps and triceps brachii muscles.
Compared with controls, patients with Parkinson's disease had higher stiffness in the muscle belly and tendon of the biceps brachii and in the tendon of the triceps brachii.
In patients with Parkinson's disease, there was a positive correlation between muscle belly stiffness and parkinsonian rigidity in the biceps brachii.
Patients with Parkinson's disease have higher passive stiffness of the muscle belly and tendon than healthy matched controls.
PMID: 21714003
Kin-cohort analysis of LRRK2-G2019S penetrance in Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21712955
Efficient allele-specific targeting of LRRK2 R1441 mutations mediated by RNAi.
Since RNA interference (RNAi) has the potential to discriminate between single nucleotide changes, there is growing interest in the use of RNAi as a promising therapeutical approach to target dominant disease-associated alleles.
Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene have been linked to dominantly inherited Parkinson's disease (PD).
We focused on three LRRK2 mutations (R1441G/C and the more prevalent G2109S) hoping to identify shRNAs that would both recognize and efficiently silence the mutated alleles preferentially over the wild-type alleles.
Using a luciferase-based reporter system, we identified shRNAs that were able to specifically target the R1441G and R1441C alleles with 80% silencing efficiency.
The same shRNAs were able to silence specifically mRNAs encoding either partial or full-length mutant LRRK2 fusion proteins, while having a minimal effect on endogenous wild-type LRRK2 expression when transfected in 293FT cells.
Shifting of the mutant recognition site (MRS) from position 11 to other sites (4 and 16, within the 19-mer window of our shRNA design) reduced specificity and overall silencing efficiency.
Developing an allele-specific RNAi of G2019S was problematic.
Placement of the MRS at position 10 resulted in efficient silencing of reporters (75-80%), but failed to discriminate between mutant and wild-type alleles.
Shifting of the MRS to positions 4, 5, 15, 16 increased the specificity of the shRNAs, but reduced the overall silencing efficiency.
Consistent with previous reports, these data confirm that MRS placement influences both allele-specificity and silencing strength of shRNAs, while further modification to hairpin design or MRS position may lead to the development of effective G2019S shRNAs.
In summary, the effective shRNA against LRRK2 R1441 alleles described herein suggests that RNAi-based therapy of inherited Parkinson's disease is a viable approach towards developing effective therapeutic interventions for this serious neurodegenerative disease.
PMID: 21712347
GDNF fails to exert neuroprotection in a rat α-synuclein model of Parkinson's disease.
The neuroprotective effect of the glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor has been extensively studied in various toxic models of Parkinson's disease.
However, it remains unclear whether this neurotrophic factor can protect against the toxicity induced by the aggregation-prone protein α-synuclein.
Targeted overexpression of human wild-type α-synuclein in the nigrostriatal system, using adeno-associated viral vectors, causes a progressive degeneration of the nigral dopamine neurons and the development of axonal pathology in the striatum.
In the present study, we investigated, using different paradigms of delivery, whether glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor can protect against the neurodegenerative changes and the cellular stress induced by α-synuclein.
We found that viral vector-mediated delivery of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor into substantia nigra and/or striatum, administered 2-3 weeks before α-synuclein, was inefficient in preventing the wild-type α-synuclein-induced loss of dopamine neurons and terminals.
In addition, glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor overexpression did not ameliorate the behavioural deficit in this rat model of Parkinson's disease.
Quantification of striatal α-synuclein-positive aggregates revealed that glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor had no effect on α-synuclein aggregation.
These data provide the evidence for the lack of neuroprotective effect of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor against the toxicity of human wild-type α-synuclein in an in vivo model of Parkinson's disease.
The difference in neuroprotective efficacy of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor seen in our model and the commonly used neurotoxin models of Parkinson's disease, raises important issues pertinent to the interpretation of the results obtained in preclinical models of Parkinson's disease, and their relevance for the therapeutic use glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor in patients with Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21710916
Parochialism and biased reviews.
PMID: 21709601
A polymorphism located at an ATG transcription start site of the heme oxygenase-2 gene is associated with classical Parkinson's disease.
Oxidative stress and iron deposition is related to Parkinson's disease (PD).
Heme oxygenase 2 (HMOX2) catalyzes the cleavage of the heme ring to form biliverdin with release of iron and carbon monoxide.
This study aims to analyze variations in the HMOX2 gene in patients with PD.
We mapped four single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and copy number variations of the HMOX2 gene in 691 patients with PD and 747 healthy individuals.
We identified a highly homogeneous association of the HMOX2 SNP rs2270363 homozygous G/G genotype with patients with classical PD phenotype compared with healthy individuals.
We identified three patients with PD and two control individuals with a single copy of the HMOX2 gene.
No individuals with zero or more than two gene copies were identified.
We describe for the first time, copy number variations in the HMOX2 gene and an association of the SNP rs2270363 with PD risk.
PMID: 21709594
Subthalamic nucleus targeting using interpeduncular cistern as an internal landmark.
Internal landmarks for the subthalamic nucleus (STN) have been used in past.
This study uses a yet-unused internal landmark to refine STN targeting.
To determine the effect of the width of the interpeduncular cistern (IPC) on STN targeting during placement of deep brain stimulation (DBS) for Parkinson disease.
Fifty consecutive patients with Parkinson disease underwent 90 STN DBS implantations.
X, Y, and Z coordinates for the tip of the DBS electrodes and the active contact were recorded.
Internal landmarks such as width of the third ventricle, width of IPC at a predefined point, and anterior commissure-posterior commissure length were measured.
Statistical analysis was done using linear regression analysis and Pearson correlation coefficient.
The average IPC diameter at the predefined point was 7.59 mm (range, 5- to 14 mm).
Average X, Y, and Z coordinates for the location of the tip of lead were 11.5, -3.5, -5.4, and those of the location of active contact were 12.5, -1.9, -1.4 from the midcommissural point.
The mediolateral location of the tip of the DBS as well as the location of the active contact for long-term stimulation were greatly dependent on IPC width (r = 0.83) (P = .0022).
The width of the IPC is a strong predictor of laterality of STN DBS electrode placement in patients with Parkinson disease.
It can be used as an additional internal landmark for refining STN targeting using the simple formula X coordinate for STN target = 0.6 × IPC width + 7 mm.
PMID: 21709584
Iodine-123 fluoropropyl-carbomethoxy-3-β-(4-iodophenyltropane) single-photon emission computed tomography findings before and after electroconvulsive therapy in major depressive disorder with Parkinsonism.
To date, only a few cases of improvement of Parkinsonism in depressed patients treated with electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) have been reported.
However, no functional imaging data are available to support this finding.
To describe the first observation of increase in dopamine transporter uptake after ECT.
Iodine-123 fluoropropyl-carbomethoxy-3-β-(4-iodophenyltropane) single-photon emission computed tomographic imaging was conducted in a 77-year-old depressed patient displaying symptoms of Parkinson disease (PD) before and after a series of 12 bilateral ECTs.
The patient displayed improvement in PD symptoms and increase in dopamine transporter uptake after ECT.
Our observation suggests that the PD symptoms and decrease in striatal uptake appearing in the context of a depressive episode might warrant further attention, as they might be reversible.
PMID: 21708898
Parkin' control: regulation of PGC-1α through PARIS in Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21708388
Effect of deep brain stimulation on pain in Parkinson disease.
Pain is a well-recognized feature of Parkinson disease (PD), and for some patients it is the most disabling symptom.
Patients with PD may experience various types of pain, and the treatment of their pain depends on its presumed cause.
However, in many patients, both pain that appears to be unrelated to PD and PD-related pain can be alleviated by medical and surgical interventions that target the motor symptoms of PD.
In this article we review reports on the improvement of pain in PD by surgical interventions such as subthalamic deep brain stimulation (STN DBS), and discuss the possible mechanisms by which STN DBS improves pain in PD.
PMID: 21708261
Nitric oxide and DOPAC-induced cell death: from GSH depletion to mitochondrial energy crisis.
The molecular mechanisms inherent to cell death associated with Parkinson's disease are not clearly understood.
Diverse pathways, sequence of events and models have been explored in several studies.
Recently, we have proposed an integrative mechanism, encompassing the interaction of nitric oxide (•NO) and a major dopamine metabolite, dihydroxyphenylacetic (DOPAC), leading to a synergistic mitochondrial dysfunction and cell death that may be operative in PD.
In this study, we have studied the sequence of events underlying the mechanisms of cell death in PC12 cells exposed to •NO and DOPAC in terms of: a) free radical production; b) modulation by glutathione (GSH); c) energetic status and d) outer membrane mitochondria permeability.
Using Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) it is shown the early production of oxygen free radicals followed by a depletion of GSH reflected by an increase of GSSG/GSH ratio in the cells treated with the mixture of •NO/DOPAC, as compared with the cells individually exposed to each of the stimulus.
Glutathione ethyl ester (GSH-EE) and N-acetylcysteine (NAC) may rescue cells from death, increasing GSH content and preventing ATP loss in cells treated with the mixture DOPAC/•NO but failed to exert similar effects in the cells challenged only with •NO.
The depletion of GSH is accompanied by a decreased activity of mitochondrial complex I.
At a later stage, the concerted action of DOPAC and •NO include a rise in the ratio Bax/Bcl-2, an observation not evident when cells were exposed only to •NO.
The results support a free radical-induced pathway leading to cell death involving the concerted action of DOPAC and •NO and the critical role of GSH in maintaining a functional mitochondria.
PMID: 21707858
Serum homocysteine and physical exercise in patients with Parkinson's disease.
Hyperhomocysteinemia is a major risk factor for cerebral and peripheral vascular diseases, as well as cortical and hippocampal injury, including an increased risk of dementia and cognitive impairment.
Elevated serum homocysteine (Hcy) concentrations are common in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) who have been treated with levodopa; however, physical exercises can help reduce Hcy concentrations.
The aim of the present study was to compare serum Hcy levels in patients with PD who partook in regular physical exercises, sedentary PD patients, and healthy controls.
Sixty individuals were enrolled in the present study across three groups: (i) 17 patients who did not partake of any type of exercise; (ii) 24 PD patients who exercised regularly; and (iii) 19 healthy individuals who did not exercise regularly.
All participants were evaluated by Hoehn and Yahr scale, the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) and Schwab and England scale (measure daily functionality).
The serum levels of Hcy were analyzed by blood samples collected of each participant.
An analysis of variance and a Tukey's post hoc test were applied to compare and to verify differences between groups.
Pearson's correlation and stepwise multiple regression analyses were used to consider the association between several variables.
Mean plasma Hcy concentrations in individuals who exercised regularly were similar to those in the healthy controls and significantly lower than those in the group that did not exercise at all (P= 0.000).
In addition, patients who did not exercise were receiving significantly higher doses of levodopa than those patients who exercised regularly (P= 0.001).
A positive relationship between levodopa dose and Hcy concentrations (R(2) = 0.27; P= 0.03) was observed in patients who did not exercise, but not in those patients who exercised regularly (R(2) = 0.023; P= 0.15).
The results of the present study suggest that, even with regular levodopa therapy, Hcy concentrations in PD patients who exercise regularly are significantly lower than in patients who do not exercise and are similar Hcy concentrations in healthy controls.
PMID: 21706828
[The development and validation of a new comprehensive self-completing questionnaire for symptoms in Parkinson's disease (MASAC-PD 31)].
Patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) suffer from various symptoms.
In order to identify untreated symptoms within the limited time of a clinical interview, we developed a new self-completing questionnaire (MASAC-PD 31).
The questionnaire consists of two parts (5 domains, 31 items); Part I intended at rating the motor symptoms and activities of daily living (ADL) during both "on" and "off" periods, and Part II aimed at screening and assessing mainly the non-motor symptoms, such as sleep-related difficulties, autonomic symptoms, cognition, mood and others.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the validity, reliability, and clinical usefulness of the questionnaire.
Based on the number of valid answers in a pilot trial, MASAC-PD 31 was refined by improving the expression and layout.
Of the initially enrolled 107 patients attending three hospitals, 102 patients were included in the final analysis.
Correlations of the scores on the MASAC-PD 31 with other clinical scales were evaluated.
A second trial consisting of 57 participants was conducted a month later to assess the test-retest reproducibility of the questionnaire.
The average time needed to complete MASAC-PD 31 was 17 min (range: 3-90 min).
Each of the domains in Part I showed high internal consistency (Cronbach's alpha: 0.663 for "on" motor) and strong correlations with preexisting indices (Spearman's correlation coefficient: 0.547, 0.544, and 0.571 for "on" motor against "on" UPDRS, PDQ-39, and Schwab & England ADL scale, respectively).
The questions in the Part II domains also showed strong correlations with preexisting scales.
Most of the items showed high reproducibility (weighted kappa coefficient) and consistency.
This new comprehensive questionnaire was shown to be valid and reliable for assessing the motor disability in patients with PD.
Moreover, it may be useful in clinical management for identifying clinically unrecognized symptoms, especially non-motor problems.
PMID: 21706376
Plasma ceruloplasmin ferroxidase activity correlates with the nigral sonographic area in Parkinson's disease patients: a pilot study.
Increased area of the substantia nigra (SN) associated to iron deposition has been proposed as a specific marker for Parkinson's disease (PD).
Echogenicity, assessed by transcranial sonography (TCS), has been used to measure such an iron deposition.
On the other hand, ferroxidase activity is known to play a role in brain iron metabolism and thus could be involved in increased SN echogenicity of PD patients.
The present study was conducted to search for a possible correlation between both markers: TCS of SN and plasma ferroxidase activity.
Twenty-one PD patients and 13 healthy volunteers (HV) were included.
Mean SN sonographic areas were 0.31 cm² for PD patients and 0.12 cm² for HV (P < 0.001), while plasma ferroxidase activity was reduced in PD patients (P < 0.001).
Interestingly, plasma ferroxidase activity was inversely correlated with the SN size by TCS (R² = 0.31), suggesting a relationship between the two markers.
PMID: 21705424
A block to pre-prepared movement in gait freezing, relieved by pedunculopontine nucleus stimulation.
Gait freezing and postural instability are disabling features of Parkinsonian disorders, treatable with pedunculopontine nucleus stimulation.
Both features are considered deficits of proximal and axial musculature, innervated predominantly by reticulospinal pathways and tend to manifest when gait and posture require adjustment.
Adjustments to gait and posture are amenable to pre-preparation and rapid triggered release.
Experimentally, such accelerated release can be elicited by loud auditory stimuli--a phenomenon known as 'StartReact'.
We observed StartReact in healthy and Parkinsonian controls.
However, StartReact was absent in Parkinsonian patients with severe gait freezing and postural instability.
Pedunculopontine nucleus stimulation restored StartReact proximally and proximal reaction times to loud stimuli correlated with gait and postural disturbance.
These findings suggest a relative block to triggered, pre-prepared movement in gait freezing and postural instability, relieved by pedunculopontine nucleus stimulation.
PMID: 21705259
Levodopa ameliorated anorectal constipation in de novo Parkinson's disease: The QL-GAT study.
Gastrointestinal tract (GIT) dysfunction is common in Parkinson's disease (PD) patients.
However, it remains unclear whether levodopa affects GIT function in PD.
To perform an open study of levodopa's effects on anorectal constipation in de novo PD patients by the quantitative lower-gastrointestinal autonomic test (QL-GAT).
Nineteen unselected de novo PD patients (10 men, 9 women; mean age, 66 years; mean duration of the disease, 2.2 years) were recruited for the study.
Eighteen of the patients reported constipation.
These patients were treated with 200/20 mg b.i.d.
of levodopa/carbidopa for 3 months.
Pre- and post-treatment, objective parameters in the QL-GAT that comprised the colonic transit time (CTT) and rectoanal videomanometry were obtained.
Levodopa was well tolerated by all patients.
There was a trend toward subjective improvements in bowel frequency and difficulty defecating.
Levodopa did not significantly change CTT of the total colon or any segment of the colon.
During rectal filling, levodopa significantly lessened the first sensation (p < 0.05).
It also tended to augment the amplitude of spontaneous phasic rectal contraction (not statistically significant).
During defecation, levodopa significantly lessened the amplitude in paradoxical sphincter contraction upon defecation (PSD) (p < 0.01).
It also tended to augment the amplitude of rectal contraction and lessen the amplitude of abdominal strain (not statistically significant).
Overall, levodopa significantly lessened post-defecation residuals (p < 0.05).
The QL-GAT in the present study showed for the first time that levodopa augmented rectal contraction, lessened PSD, and thereby ameliorated anorectal constipation in de novo PD patients.
PMID: 21705162
Factors related to functional independence in females with Parkinson's disease: a systematic review.
Males and females may exhibit diverse expressions of Parkinson's disease (PD) as a result of biological and social differences.
In general, a higher incidence of PD is found among males (RR=1.5) compared to females.
However, rigidity, postural instability and levodopa-induced dyskinesia are more prevalent in females with PD.
These fluctuations affect motor performance and impact functional ability.
This systematic review suggests that there is minimal research literature with respect to females living with PD.
Specifically, the influence of physical ability in females with PD is underemphasized, considering its contribution to functional daily living and quality of life.
Three intervention and nine functional assessment studies met inclusion criteria (n=302; mean age=65.5±8.3 years, 44% female).
Reports suggest that females with PD have different gait patterns compared to 'healthy' age-matched females and males with PD.
Females with PD experience increased freezing of gait as compared to males with PD.
Dynamic balance was reduced in females compared to males with PD.
Differences in cardiorespiratory fitness compared to healthy age-matched females was inconclusive.
Studies were rated to be of moderate quality (20±5.4/32) and future studies should focus on improving sex-matched recruitment, randomized group allocation, and blinding of evaluators to ensure unbiased results.
Regardless, the specific impact of PD on females warrants further investigation.
PMID: 21705027
Cerebral basis of visual hallucinations in Parkinson's disease: structural and functional MRI studies.
The presence of visual hallucinations (VH) is a significant predictor of dementia in Parkinson's disease (PD) and it is associated with a more rapid cognitive decline.
Non-demented PD patients with VH present greater neuropsychological impairment than those without VH in domains such as verbal and visual memory, language comprehension, and visuospatial and visuoperceptive functions.
Frontal dysfunction has also been described in PD with VH, including deficits in verbal fluency, sustained attention, and inhibition.
In PD with VH, structural and functional abnormalities within the primary visual system and visual association areas, including ventral and dorsal pathways, have been reported.
Structural MRI studies have shown that non-demented PD patients with VH present grey matter reduction in parieto-occipital areas and the hippocampal head.
A follow-up study performed at a mean of 30 months revealed that unlike PD patients without VH, PD patients with VH frequently develop dementia associated with progressive atrophy in limbic, paralimbic and neocortical areas.
Functional MRI (fMRI) studies have revealed altered activation in occipito-temporal and frontal areas in response to simple and complex visual stimuli in PD patients with VH, suggesting a marked impairment in bottom-up visual processing, as well as an attentional deficit in the pathophysiology of VH in PD.
PMID: 21705023
Clinical EEG in cognitively impaired patients with Parkinson's Disease.
Parkinson's Disease Dementia (PD-D) is one of the most important non-motor signs in advanced PD and is the most influencing factor predicting nursing home placement.
PD-related Mild Cognitive Impairment (PD-MCI) is a potential prodromal stage of PD-D.
The Grand Total EEG (GTE) score is a rating scale for clinical EEG (Electroencephalography) analyses which is useful in the evaluation of different types of dementia.
The purpose of the present study was to investigate the relationship between a short version of the GTE score and severity of cognitive deficits in PD.
Nineteen patients with PD underwent neuropsychological testing and resting state EEG.
Significant correlations with deteriorating cognition (combined Mini Mental Status Examination/Clock Drawing Test) were found for the overall short GTE score (Spearman Rank correlation, ρ=-.6; p<.05) and for the subscore "Frequency of Rhythmic Background Activity" (ρ=-.6; p<.05), indicating that these EEG measures increase with deteriorating cognition.
PMID: 21705022
Motor and non-motor correlates of olfactory dysfunction in Parkinson's disease.
Hyposmia is highly prevalent in the motor phase of Parkinson's disease (PD) and is an established pre-motor sign of PD that may precede the onset of motor symptoms by as long as 5 years.
The data presented here are part of an ongoing study to determine the relationship of the olfactory deficit in PD with both motor and non-motor features of the disease.
The study population so far includes 96 patients with a clinical diagnosis of PD (UK PD Society Brain Bank criteria; mean age 64.9 years; mean disease duration 4.8 years).
Olfactory testing was performed using the 40-item UPSIT.
We analyzed the relationship between UPSIT scores and measures of motor (disease duration, stage and severity) and non-motor (cognitive function, depression, anxiety and sleep) function.
In 60 PD patients, [(123)I]FP-CIT SPECT scans were available to assess the relationship between UPSIT scores and striatal dopamine transporter (DAT) binding.
Preliminary analyses revealed correlations of the olfactory deficit in PD with both motor and non-motor features, as well as with striatal DAT binding.
These data suggest that the olfactory deficit in PD is not stationary by the time the motor phase is entered, but continues to progress over time.
Hyposmia may therefore be useful as a marker of disease progression, at least in the early disease stages.
PMID: 21705020
Theory of Mind in Parkinson's disease.
Theory of Mind is an important concept within social cognition and refers to the ability to attribute mental states to oneself and others.
Other terms for this concept include mentalizing and mind reading.
Deficits in Theory of Mind may contribute to behavioral abnormalities, such as paranoia and delusions that are common in dementia.
There are several experimental tasks for measuring Theory of Mind.
A classical example is the false belief test.
Examples of other measures include tests of understanding metaphor, sarcasm, irony, deception, and faux pas, determining what a person is thinking or feeling from photographs of the eye region, and visual perspective taking.
There are several anatomical areas related to Theory of Mind.
These include regions within the frontal and temporal lobes, and temporoparietal junction.
There is a small but emerging literature on Theory of Mind in Parkinson's disease (PD).
The data suggest that Theory of Mind is impaired in PD and that the deficits precede the development of dementia.
Future studies are needed to better define the nature of the Theory of Mind deficits in PD, as well as the impact of these deficits on clinical disability in this disorder.
PMID: 21704798
Freezing of gait and activity limitations in people with Parkinson's disease.
To investigate the relationships between freezing of gait (FOG) and activity limitations in ambulant people with Parkinson's disease (PD), and to explore the contribution of FOG and gait hypokinesia to activity limitations after adjusting for the effects of disease severity.
Retrospective, cross-sectional design.
Participants were recruited from neurologists' clinics and the general public in metropolitan Melbourne, Australia.
Volunteers were screened for eligibility using the following inclusion criteria: diagnosis of idiopathic PD, modified Hoehn and Yahr stages 0 to IV, without dementia.
Participants (N=210) were tested (mean age ± SD, 67.9±9.6y; mean PD duration ± SD, 6.7±5.6y; median Hoehn and Yahr stage=2.5).
Not applicable.
FOG was measured using the FOG questionnaire.
Gait hypokinesia was quantified using both the 6-meter walk test and the Timed Up and Go test.
Activity limitation was measured using the modified Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale activities of daily living (ADL) section and the Schwab and England ADL scale.
Severity of gait freezing correlated significantly with the level of activity limitation (Spearman correlation coefficient, ρ=-.49 to .48; P<.001).
A hierarchic regression model showed that disease severity explained 37.5% of the variance in Schwab and England ADL score (P<.001).
Gait hypokinesia and FOG severity scores explained an additional 9.1% of the variance in activity limitation (R(2) change=.091; P<.001).
FOG severity and gait hypokinesia were associated with reduced levels of activity after adjusting for disease severity.
PMID: 21704797
Reproducibility and validity of patient-rated assessment of speech, swallowing, and saliva control in Parkinson's disease.
To report on the development and psychometric evaluation of the Radboud Oral Motor Inventory for Parkinson's Disease (ROMP), a newly developed patient-rated assessment of speech, swallowing, and saliva control in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD).
Reliability and validity study.
Tertiary-care Parkinson center for multidisciplinary assessment.
Consecutive community-dwelling patients with PD (n=129) or atypical parkinsonism (AP; n=49; mean ± SD age, 64±9.8y; mean ± SD disease duration, 7y; median Hoehn and Yahr [HY] stage, 2.5).
Not applicable.
To evaluate reproducibility, 60 patients completed the ROMP twice within a mean of 24±12 days.
To study validity, another cohort of 118 patients who had completed the ROMP was assessed by both a neurologist (HY stage, Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale III) and speech-language pathologist (severity of dysarthria, dysphagia, drooling) who were blinded to ROMP scores.
Confirmatory factor analysis identified the 3 a priori-designed ROMP domains of speech, swallowing, and saliva control.
Internal consistency was .95 for the total ROMP and .87 to .94 for the 3 domains or subscales.
Intraclass correlation coefficients for reproducibility were .94 and .83 to .92 for the subscales.
Construct validity was substantial to good with correlations ranging from .36 to .82.
The ROMP differentiated significantly (P<.001) between patients indicated for speech therapy (based on independent assessment) and those who were not and between mild, moderate, and severe PD according to HY stage.
The ROMP provides a reliable and valid instrument to evaluate patient-perceived problems with speech, swallowing, and saliva control in patients with PD or AP.
PMID: 21704673
Neuroprotective effect of bioflavonoid quercetin in 6-hydroxydopamine-induced oxidative stress biomarkers in the rat striatum.
An increasing large body of research on Parkinson's disease (PD) has focused on the understanding of the mechanisms behind the potential neuro protection offered by antioxidants and iron chelating agents.
In this study, the protective effect of the bioflavonoid quercetin on 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA)-induced model of PD was investigated.
PD was induced by a single intracisternal injection of 6-hydroxydopamine (300μg) to male Sprague-Dawley rats.
Quercetin treatment (30mg/kg body weight) over 14 consecutive days markedly increased the striatal dopamine and antioxidant enzyme levels compared with similar measurements in the group treated with 6-OHDA alone.
There was a significant decrease in protein carbonyl content in the striatum compared with that of rats that did not receive quercetin.
A significant increase in neuronal survivability was also found with quercetin treatment in rats administered 6-OHDA.
In conclusion, treatment with quercetin defended against the oxidative stress in the striatum and reduced the dopaminergic neuronal loss in the rat model of PD.
PMID: 21704337
Fighting the risk of developing Parkinson's disease; clinical counseling for first degree relatives of patients with Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease (PD) has a long pre-diagnosis phase that may span as long as 10-20 years.
The ability to identify at risk populations raises the possibility of early intervention to delay or prevent the onset of motor symptoms.
In Israel, there is a large group of Ashkenazi Jews at risk of developing PD due to high frequency of PD associated mutations in 2 genes (GBA and LRRK2).
To describe our unique experience with a clinical counseling service for 1st degree relatives of PD patients from the Ashkenazi origin who carry the G2019S mutation in the LRRK2 gene.
One hundred, self declared, healthy, first degree relatives of PD patients who carry the G2019S mutation in the LRRK2 gene were tested clinically and genetically in a cross sectional study.
Those who have requested information on their risk to develop PD were invited to a free of charge, clinical counseling session to provide information on their risk of developing PD and potential risk modifiers that can be applied.
Genetic status was not disclosed and the counselor was unaware of the subjects' G2019S mutation status.
46 subjects (mean age 48.2±10.7; 46% males) came for clinical counseling provided by a Movement Disorders specialist.
Siblings and off-springs of the same proband were seen together.
Counseling provided general information about the pre-diagnosis phase of PD, the concept of population at risk and habitual and behavioral recommendations that may delay PD motor symptoms onset.
A high percentage of individuals at risk for developing PD requested clinical counseling on modifiers of the risk to develop PD.
Counseling provided information as well as recommendations for behavioral modifications and drug treatment.
Screening population at risk increases the awareness as well as early diagnosis of PD.
Prospective information is needed in order to improve our knowledge base and assess the long term impact of such a counseling service.
PMID: 21704161
Properly scaled and targeted AAV2-NRTN (neurturin) to the substantia nigra is safe, effective and causes no weight loss: support for nigral targeting in Parkinson's disease.
Recent analyses of autopsied brains from subjects previously administered AAV2-neurturin (NRTN) gene transfer argues that optimizing the effects of neurotrophic factors in Parkinson's disease (PD) likely requires delivery to both the degenerating cell bodies (in substantia nigra) and their terminals (in striatum).
Prior to implementing this novel dosing paradigm in humans, we conducted eight nonclinical experiments with three general objectives: (1) evaluate the feasibility, safety and effectiveness of targeting the substantia nigra (SN) with AAV2-NRTN, (2) better understand and appraise recent warnings of serious weight loss that might occur with targeting the SN with neurotrophic factors, and (3) define an appropriate dose of AAV2-NRTN that should safely and effectively cover the SN in PD patients.
Toward these ends, we first determined SN volume for rats, monkeys and humans, and employed these values to calculate comparable dose equivalents for each species by scaling each dose, based on relative SN volume.
Using this information, we next injected AAV2-GFP to monkey SN to quantify AAV2-vector distribution and confirm reasonable SN coverage.
We then selected and administered a ~200-fold range of AAV2-NRTN doses (and a single AAV2-GDNF dose) to rat SN, producing a wide range of protein expression.
In contrast to recent warnings regarding nigra targeting, no dose produced any serious side effects or toxicity, though we replicated the modest reduction in weight gain reported by others with the highest AAV2-NRTN and the AAV2-GDNF dose.
A dose-related increase in NRTN expression was seen, with the lower doses limiting NRTN to the peri-SN and the highest dose producing mistargeted NRTN well outside the SN.
We then demonstrated that the reduction in weight gain following excessive-doses can be dissociated from NRTN in the targeted SN, and is linked to mistargeted NRTN in the diencephalon.
We also showed that prior destruction of the dopaminergic SN neurons via 6-OHDA had no impact on the weight loss phenomenon, further dissociating neurotrophic exposure to the SN as the culprit for weight changes.
Finally, low AAV2-NRTN doses provided significant neuroprotection against 6-OHDA toxicity, establishing a wide therapeutic index for nigral targeting.
These data support targeting the SN with AAV2-NRTN in PD patients, demonstrating that properly targeted and scaled AAV2-NRTN provides safe and effective NRTN expression.
They also provided the means to define an appropriate human-equivalent dose for proceeding into an ongoing clinical trial, using empirically-based scaling to account for marked differences in SN volume between species.
PMID: 21704125
Executive control in Parkinson's disease: effects of dopaminergic medication and deep brain stimulation on anti-cue keypress performance.
Using an anti-cue keypress task, we examined executive control in Parkinson's disease (PD) patients treated with deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the subthalamic nucleus (STN) and dopaminergic medication.
Across sessions, we varied stimulation (on, off) and dopaminergic medication (on, off).
Reaction time (RT) results of the PD patients and their age-matched controls showed a consistent pattern of RT costs and benefits generated by anti-cues with short and long preparation intervals, respectively.
This pattern was evident in all sessions, except when DBS stimulation and medication were off.
In this condition PD patients showed no RT benefits.
These findings are discussed in terms of an executive control process that suppresses the automatic but inappropriate response activation generated by anti-cues.
In PD this mechanism is severely compromised but it can be remediated by dopaminergic medication and DBS, suggesting an essential role of the basal ganglia in the selection and suppression of competing responses.
PMID: 21703827
BMSC and CoQ10 improve behavioural recovery and histological outcome in rat model of Parkinson's disease.
Objective: This study assessed the ability of a combination treatment of bone marrow stromal cell (BMSC) graft and oral coenzyme (CoQ10) in a rat model of Parkinson's disease (PD) as an appropriate substitute for current Parkinson treatments.
The combination treatment was compared to sole treatments of BMSC and CoQ10.
Materials and methods: In this experimental study, there were six groups of male Wistar rats: control, sham, lesion, CoQ10, graft BMSC and graft BMSC plus CoQ10.
Oral administration of CoQ10 began 1 week before the PD and continued during the entire treatment period.
To simulate PD, we injected 6 hydroxydopamine (6OHDA) in rats.
BMSC were labelled by 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (Brdu) before transplantation.
We assessed behaviour before PD, 2 weeks after PD and 8 weeks after cell transplantation.
At the end of the second month of treatment, immunohistochemistry, histology and molecular studies were performed.
Results: Behavioural assessment of the CoQ10 group and BMSC group indicated equal recovery in comparison with the lesion group (P<0.01), while the combined treatment of BMSC and CoQ10 showed considerably better recovery compared with the lesion group (P<0.001).
There were no signs of gliosis and graft rejection.
Immunohistochemistry analysis of Brdu indicated that cells were alive after 2 months of application in host tissue.
Cell counts showed significantly greater numbers of neural cells in the combination treatment of BMSC and CoQ10 compared to the other groups.
Tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) gene expression levels in the combined therapy group was significantly more than the other experimental groups (P<0.001).
Conclusion: The combined use of two neuroprotective treatments and cell replacement therapy can be effective in the treatment of PD, at least in experimental settings.
PMID: 21703262
Insulin resistance impairs nigrostriatal dopamine function.
Clinical studies have indicated a link between Parkinson's disease (PD) and Type 2 Diabetes.
Although preclinical studies have examined the effect of high-fat feeding on dopamine function in brain reward pathways, the effect of diet on neurotransmission in the nigrostriatal pathway, which is affected in PD and parkinsonism, is less clear.
We hypothesized that a high-fat diet, which models early-stage Type 2 Diabetes, would disrupt nigrostriatal dopamine function in young adult Fischer 344 rats.
Rats were fed a high fat diet (60% calories from fat) or a normal chow diet for 12 weeks.
High fat-fed animals were insulin resistant compared to chow-fed controls.
Potassium-evoked dopamine release and dopamine clearance were measured in the striatum using in vivo electrochemistry.
Dopamine release was attenuated and dopamine clearance was diminished in the high-fat diet group compared to chow-fed rats.
Magnetic resonance imaging indicated increased iron deposition in the substantia nigra of the high fat group.
This finding was supported by alterations in the expression of several proteins involved in iron metabolism in the substantia nigra in this group compared to chow-fed animals.
The diet-induced systemic and basal ganglia-specific changes may play a role in the observed impairment of nigrostriatal dopamine function.
PMID: 21701815
Sodium Benzoate, a Metabolite of Cinnamon and a Food Additive, Upregulates Neuroprotective Parkinson Disease Protein DJ-1 in Astrocytes and Neurons.
DJ-1 (PARK7) is a neuroprotective protein that protects cells from oxidative stress.
Accordingly, loss-of-function DJ-1 mutations have been linked with a familial form of early onset Parkinson disease.
Mechanisms by which DJ-1 level could be enriched in the CNS are poorly understood.
Recently we have discovered anti-inflammatory activity of sodium benzoate (NaB), a metabolite of cinnamon and a widely-used food additive.
Here we delineate that NaB is also capable of increasing the level of DJ-1 in primary mouse and human astrocytes and human neurons highlighting another novel neuroprotective effect of this compound.
Reversal of DJ-1-inducing effect of NaB by mevalonate, farnesyl phosphate, but not cholesterol and ubiquinone, suggests that depletion of intermediates, but not end products, of the mevalonate pathway is involved in the induction of DJ-1 by NaB.
Accordingly, either an inhibitor of p21(ras) farnesyl protein transferase (FPTI) or a dominant-negative mutant of p21(ras) alone was also able to increase the expression of DJ-1 in astrocytes suggesting an involvement of p21(ras) in DJ-1 expression.
However, an inhibitor of geranyl geranyl transferase (GGTI) and a dominant-negative mutant of p21(rac) had no effect on the expression of DJ-1, indicating the specificity of the effect.
Similarly lipopolysaccharide (LPS), an activator of small G proteins, also inhibited the expression of DJ-1, and NaB and FPTI, but not GGTI, abrogated LPS-mediated inhibition.
Together, these results suggest that NaB upregulates DJ-1 via modulation of mevalonate metabolites and that p21(ras), but not p21(rac), is involved in the regulation of DJ-1.
PMID: 21701785
Novel variant Pro143Ala in HTRA2 contributes to Parkinson's disease by inducing hyperphosphorylation of HTRA2 protein in mitochondria.
Mutations in the gene encoding the mitochondrial protein high temperature requirement A2 (HTRA2) are inconsistently associated with a risk of Parkinson's disease (PD).
We assessed the presence of HTRA2 mutations among patients with PD and performed functional assay of identified mutations or variants.
Among the total 1,373 subjects, the entire HTRA2 coding region was sequenced in 113 early-onset PD (EOPD), 20 familial PD patients and 150 control subjects.
An additional 390 sporadic late-onset PD patients and 700 controls were subsequently screened to validate possible mutations found in the first set.
We identified two novel heterozygous variants, c.427C > G (Pro143Ala) and c.906 +3 G > A, in 2 (1.5%) EOPD patients.
The missense variant, Pro143Ala, was also observed in one late-onset PD patient but was absent in total 850 control subjects (relative risk 2.3, 95% CI 1.5-2.8, P = 0.04).
Expressing Pro143Ala variant of HTRA2 in primary dopaminergic neurons causes neurite degeneration.
Following exposure to rotenone, the ultra-structural mitochondrial abnormality, the percentage of mitochondrial dysfunction and apoptosis in cells carrying the HTRA2 Pro143Ala variant was significantly higher than wild-type cells.
Mechanistically, protein level of phosphorylated HTRA2 was increased in cells carrying the Pro143Ala variant, suggesting Pro143Ala variant promotes HTRA2 phosphorylation with resultant mitochondrial dysfunction.
Our results support a biologically relevant role of HTRA2 in PD susceptibility in Taiwanese.
Further large-scale association studies are warranted to confirm the role of HTRA2 Pro143Ala variant in the risk of PD.
PMID: 21700495
Utility of the REM sleep behavior disorder screening questionnaire (RBDSQ) in Parkinson's disease patients.
We evaluated the usefulness of the REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) screening questionnaire (RBDSQ) among patients with Parkinson's disease (PD).
Forty-five patients with PD were evaluated (22 male and 23 female, 72.9±9.1 years old).
After patients completed the RBDSQ, we conducted interviews regarding RBD symptoms and performed polysomnographic examinations on the subjects.
We then compared RBDSQ scores among the following groups: PD with RBD (n=19), PD without RBD (n=26), and idiopathic RBD (n=31, 22 male and 9 female, 67.8±6.5 years old), and estimated the cut-off score for an RBD diagnosis.
RBDSQ scores in PD with RBD and idiopathic RBD groups were similar and higher than those in the PD without RBD group (PD with RBD: 7.2±1.9, idiopathic RBD: 7.9±2.8, PD without RBD: 2.9±1.6).
Cronbach's α for RBDSQ sub-scores was 0.73, suggesting a fair internal consistency.
A receiver-operator characteristics curve revealed that a total score of 6 points on the RBDSQ represented the best cut-off value for detecting RBD (sensitivity=0.842, specificity=0.962).
RBDSQ could be a useful tool for the screening of RBD in PD patients.
PMID: 21699982
Rho GTPase regulation of α-synuclein and VMAT2: implications for pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease.
Accumulation of α-synuclein (Asyn) in neuronal perikarya and dystrophic neurites is characteristic of idiopathic and familial Parkinson's disease.
In this study, we investigated the relationship between α-synuclein expression and neurite outgrowth-maturation using MN9D dopaminergic cells and demonstrated key features of Asyn regulation in hippocampal neurons.
Neurite elongation elicited by inhibition of Rho GTPase activity with C3 transferase or by db-cAMP treatment was associated with marked reduction of α-synuclein mRNA and protein expression.
Rho inhibition resulted in reduction of transcription factor SRF in the nuclear fraction and retention of MKL-1 - the SRF co-transactivator of SRE - in cytosol, indicating that these effects of Rho inhibition may be mediated though reduction of SRF-SRE transcription.
Inhibition of Rho GTPase activity led to decreased nuclear localization of GATA2, a key regulator of α-synuclein promoter activity.
Rho inhibition-induced neurite extension was associated with increased VMAT2 and SNARE proteins synaptophysin and synapsin I.
These results indicate that in the MN9D dopaminergic cell line, α-synuclein transcription and levels of synaptic vesicle associated proteins are inversely correlated with neurite growth.
We confirm that in mature hippocampal neurons inhibition of RhoA and knock down of SRF by siRNA also lead to decrease GATA2 and Asyn.
The results suggest that RhoA signaling may be potential therapeutic target for the treatment of synucleinopathies.
PMID: 21699711
Neuroregeneration in neurodegenerative disorders.
Neuroregeneration is a relatively recent concept that includes neurogenesis, neuroplasticity, and neurorestoration--implantation of viable cells as a therapeutical approach.
Neurogenesis and neuroplasticity are impaired in brains of patients suffering from Alzheimer's Disease or Parkinson's Disease and correlate with low endogenous protection, as a result of a diminished growth factors expression.
However, we hypothesize that the brain possesses, at least in early and medium stages of disease, a "neuroregenerative reserve", that could be exploited by growth factors or stem cells-neurorestoration therapies.
In this paper we review the current data regarding all three aspects of neuroregeneration in Alzheimer's Disease and Parkinson's Disease.
PMID: 21699627
Improvements in nocturnal symptoms with ropinirole prolonged release in patients with advanced Parkinson's disease.
The 24-week, double-blind Efficacy and Safety Evaluation in PD-Adjunct (EASE-PD Adjunct) study randomized patients with advanced Parkinson's disease (PD) suboptimally controlled with levodopa to once-daily placebo or adjunctive ropinirole prolonged release (2-24 mg/day).
We investigated the effect of ropinirole prolonged release on nocturnal symptoms in these patients.
Total and grouped item PD Sleep Scale (PDSS) scores were analyzed post hoc in patients with baseline PDSS total scores ≤ 100 (troublesome nocturnal symptoms) and >100.
Baseline PDSS total score was ≤ 100 in 93 of 198 (47%) and 89 of 189 (47%) patients receiving ropinirole prolonged release and placebo, respectively; this subgroup displayed evidence at baseline of greater daily awake 'off' time, reduced night-time sleep and worse quality of life, than the PDSS >100 subgroup.
Significant improvements with ropinirole prolonged release versus placebo in PDSS score from baseline to Week 24 last observation carried forward were observed for those with baseline PDSS ≤ 100 [adjusted mean treatment difference 9.0 (95% CI: 2.76, 15.33; P = 0.0051)], but not >100.
The PDSS ≤ 100 subgroup demonstrated treatment benefits for PDSS groupings of motor symptoms on waking and global quality of sleep.
Changes in daytime sleepiness were similar between treatment groups.
The PDSS >100 subgroup demonstrated significant treatment benefit for global quality of sleep.
The unadjusted odds ratio for a positive response with ropinirole prolonged release relative to placebo, for the PDSS ≤ 100 subgroup, was 2.90 (95% CI: 1.42, 5.95, P = 0.004).
Once-daily ropinirole prolonged release improves nocturnal symptoms in patients with advanced PD not optimally controlled with levodopa who suffer troublesome nocturnal disturbance.
PMID: 21699489
Therapeutic potential of cannabinoids in the treatment of neuroinflammation associated with Parkinson's disease.
The cannabinoid system is represented by two principal receptor subtypes, termed CB1 and CB2, along with several endogenous ligands.
In the central nervous system it is involved in several processes.
CB1 receptors are mainly expressed by neurons and their activation is primarily implicated in psychotropic and motor effects of cannabinoids.
CB2 receptors are expressed by glial cells and are thought to participate in regulation of neuroimmune reactions.
This review aims to highlight several reported properties of cannabinoids that could be used to inhibit the adverse neuroinflammatory processes contributing to Parkinson's disease and possibly other neurodegenerative disorders.
These include anti-oxidant properties of phytocannabinoids and synthetic cannabinoids as well as hypothermic and antipyretic effects.
However, cannabinoids may also trigger signaling cascades leading to impaired mitochondrial enzyme activity, reduced mitochondrial biogenesis, and increased oxidative stress, all of which could contribute to neurotoxicity.
Therefore, further pharmacological studies are needed to allow rational design of new cannabinoid-based drugs lacking detrimental in vivo effects.
PMID: 21699482
Intraoperative magnetic resonance imaging findings during deep brain stimulation surgery.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is an established neurosurgical technique used to treat a variety of neurological disorders, including Parkinson disease, essential tremor, dystonia, epilepsy, depression, and obsessive-compulsive disorder.
This study reports on the use of intraoperative MR imaging during DBS surgery to evaluate acute hemorrhage, intracranial air, brain shift, and accuracy of lead placement.
During a 46-month period, 143 patients underwent 152 DBS surgeries including 289 lead placements utilizing intraoperative 1.5-T MR imaging.
Imaging was supervised by an MR imaging physicist to maintain the specific absorption rate below the required level of 0.1 W/kg and always included T1 magnetization-prepared rapid gradient echo and T2* gradient echo sequences with selected use of T2 fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and T2 fast spin echo (FSE).
Retrospective review of the intraoperative MR imaging examinations was performed to quantify the amount of hemorrhage and the amount of air introduced during the DBS surgery.
Intraoperative MR imaging revealed 5 subdural hematomas, 3 subarachnoid hemorrhages, and 1 intraparenchymal hemorrhage in 9 of the 143 patients.
Only 1 patient experiencing a subarachnoid hemorrhage developed clinically apparent symptoms, which included transient severe headache and mild confusion.
Brain shift due to intracranial air was identified in 144 separate instances.
Intraoperative MR imaging can be safely performed and may assist in demonstrating acute changes involving intracranial hemorrhage and air during DBS surgery.
These findings are rarely clinically significant and typically resolve prior to follow-up imaging.
Selective use of T2 FLAIR and T2 FSE imaging can confirm the presence of hemorrhage or air and preclude the need for CT examinations.
PMID: 21698615
[Clinical application of gene therapy. Previous experience and the future].
PMID: 21698001
Temporal expression of mutant LRRK2 in adult rats impairs dopamine reuptake.
Parkinson's disease (PD) results from progressive degeneration of dopaminergic neurons.
Most PD cases are sporadic, but some have pathogenic mutation in the individual genes.
Mutation of the leucine-rich repeat kinase-2 (LRRK2) gene is associated with familial and sporadic PD, as exemplified by G2019S substitution.
While constitutive expression of mutant LRRK2 in transgenic mice fails to induce neuron death, transient expression of the disease gene by viral delivery causes a substantial loss of dopaminergic neurons in mice.
To further assess LRRK2 pathogenesis, we created inducible transgenic rats expressing human LRRK2 with G2019S substitution.
Temporal overexpression of LRRK2(G2019S) in adult rats impaired dopamine reuptake by dopamine transporter (DAT) and thus enhanced locomotor activity, the phenotypes that were not observed in transgenic rats constitutively expressing the gene throughout life time.
Reduced DAT binding activity is an early sign of dopaminergic dysfunction in asymptomatic subjects carrying pathogenic mutation in LRRK2.
Our transgenic rats recapitulated the initiation process of dopaminergic dysfunction caused by pathogenic mutation in LRRK2.
Inducible transgenic approach uncovered phenotypes that may be obscured by developmental compensation in constitutive transgenic rats.
Finding in inducible LRRK2 transgenic rats would guide developing effective strategy in transgenic studies: Inducible expression of transgene may induce greater phenotypes than constitutive gene expression, particularly in rodents with short life time.
PMID: 21697709
Association between self-assessed attention and objective neuropsychological tests in parkinson disease.
To examine the relationship between self-assessed attentional skills and objective neuropsychological measures of attention in Parkinson disease (PD) and controls.
The reliable self-assessment of one's own cognitive skills and deficits is an important but difficult task, especially in a chronic neurological condition like PD.
Theories point out that brain structures involved in a realistic self-appraisal might be affected in PD.
No study directly examined the association between self-assessed attentional skills and objective neuropsychological measures of attention in PD.
We applied a case control design with 54 participants in the PD group and 54 healthy controls.
PD patients and controls completed questionnaires on depression and self-assessed attention and were examined with computerized tests of attention.
PD patients differed from controls in subjective and objective assessment of attention.
Depression and self-assessed attention share a significant amount of variance, but are unrelated to objective measures of attention in both groups.
In PD patients, there are no associations between functional outcome and objective and subjective measures of attention.
Conscious reports in PD patients and controls are based on different processes rather than actual attentional performance.
These processes are not differentially affected in PD.
Nevertheless, patients' self-assessments are not an accurate indicator of their level of objective attentional functioning.
Without a definite validity criterion, it cannot be decided whether the objective or subjective assessment of attention is more valid.
Therefore, a multidimensional approach integrating different sources of information is most adequate in the assessment of attentional capacities and their meaning for everyday life in PD patients.
PMID: 21696777
Anorectal dysfunctions in Parkinson's disease.
Anorectal symptoms are frequently found in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD), mainly manifested as diffuse lower abdominal discomfort, constipation, and fecal incontinence.
Among these symptoms, constipation may precede by years the motor manifestations of PD.
Research has focused for decades on selection of a measurement method for detection of abnormalities and support of clinometric instruments for anorectal symptoms.
We review those manifestations and their contribution to evaluation of the anorectal symptoms in patients with PD.
PMID: 21696416
Unmyelinated axons are more vulnerable to degeneration than myelinated axons of the cardiac nerve in Parkinson's disease.
We recently demonstrated accumulation of α-synuclein aggregates of the cardiac sympathetic nerve in Parkinson's disease (PD) and a possible relationship between degeneration of the cardiac sympathetic nerve and α-synuclein aggregates.
The aim of this study is to determine whether there is a difference in the degenerative process between unmyelinated and myelinated axons of the cardiac nerve.
We immunohistochemically examined cardiac tissues from four pathologically verified PD patients, nine patients with incidental Lewy body disease (ILBD) and five control subjects, using antibodies against neurofilament, myelin basic protein (MBP) and α-synuclein.
First, we counted the number of neurofilament-immunoreactive axons not surrounded by MBP (unmyelinated axons) and those surrounded by MBP (myelinated axons).
Next, we counted the number of unmyelinated and myelinated axons with α-synuclein aggregates.
(i) The percentage of unmyelinated axons in PD (77.5 ± 9.14%) was significantly lower compared to that in control subjects (92.2 ± 2.40%).
(ii) The ratio of unmyelinated axons with α-synuclein aggregates to total axons with α-synuclein aggregates in ILBD ranged from 94.4 to 100 (98.2 ± 2.18%).
Among axons with α-synuclein aggregates, unmyelinated axons were the overwhelming majority, comprising 98.2%.
These findings suggest that in PD unmyelinated axons are more vulnerable to degeneration than myelinated axons of the cardiac nerve, because α-synuclein aggregates accumulate much more abundantly in unmyelinated axons.
PMID: 21696411
LRRK2 expression in idiopathic and G2019S positive Parkinson's disease subjects: a morphological and quantitative study.
Mutations in the gene encoding leucine-rich repeat kinase-2 (LRRK2) have been established as a common genetic cause of Parkinson's disease (PD).
The distribution of LRRK2 mRNA and protein in the human brain has previously been described, although it has not been reported in PD cases with the common LRRK2 G2019S mutation.
To further elucidate the role of LRRK2 in PD, we determined the localization of LRRK2 mRNA and protein in post-mortem brain tissue from control, idiopathic PD (IPD) and G2019S positive PD cases.
Widespread neuronal expression of LRRK2 mRNA and protein was recorded and no difference was observed in the morphological localization of LRRK2 mRNA or protein between control, IPD and G2019S positive PD cases.
Using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, we demonstrated that there is no regional variation in LRRK2 mRNA in normal human brain, but we have identified differential expression of LRRK2 mRNA with significant reductions recorded in limbic and neocortical regions of IPD cases compared with controls.
Semi-quantitative analysis of LRRK2 immunohistochemical staining demonstrated regional variation in staining intensity, with weak LRRK2 immunoreactivity consistently recorded in the striatum and substantia nigra.
No clear differences were identified in LRRK2 immunoreactivity between control, IPD and G2019S positive PD cases.
LRRK2 protein was identified in a small proportion of Lewy bodies.
Our data suggest that widespread dysregulation of LRRK2 mRNA expression may contribute to the pathogenesis of IPD.
PMID: 21696087
A systematic review of the worldwide prevalence and incidence of Parkinson's disease.
A number of epidemiologic studies of Parkinson 's disease (PD) have been conducted worldwide over the years.
Although every study reported the rise in prevalence and incidence rate of PD with the increasing age, the overall estimates were different across countries.
The variation in reported data may partly be contributed by case ascertainment, case finding method, data collection, and most importantly different population structures.
Systematically review prevalence and incidence of PD and find the causes of variation in the results.
A literature search was conducted on Medline and EMBASE for studies worldwide investigating the prevalence and incidence of PD and included all adults, English and publication between 1965 and January 2010.
The primary search of both databases yielded 5,330 results.
After screening topics and abstracts, 168 relevant abstracts were tagged and saved for more thorough perusal.
Ultimately, 40 papers were selected for review after applying the pre-specified inclusion criteria.
The worldwide prevalence of PD varies widely.
One reason for the variation in prevalence estimates could be due to the differences in survival across countries.
The use of epidemiological studies using medical records could be another reason for the variation in disease frequency.
PD is common in the elderly.
A number of descriptive epidemiologic studies have been conducted worldwide.
Comparing the incidence and prevalence of Parkinson's disease is difficult.
PMID: 21695419
Subthalamic nucleus versus pedunculopontine nucleus stimulation in Parkinson disease: synergy or antagonism?
Stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus (STN) improves the cardinal features of Parkinson disease (PD).
However, its efficacy on gait disorders is less satisfying in the long term.
In recent years, the pedunculopontine (PPN) nucleus has emerged as a possible promising deep brain stimulation target for gait disorders in PD.
In this review, we examine whether STN and PPN act synergistically or antagonistically.
Results suggest that the combination of STN and PPN stimulations leads to a significant further improvement in gait as compared with STN stimulation alone, but additive effects on the classical motor triad are questionable.
Thus, they highlight the specificity of STN stimulation over PPN's for the PD cardinal features and the specificity of PPN stimulation over STN for gait disorders.
In addition, low-frequency stimulation of the PPN may improve alertness.
The additive rather than potentiating effects of STN and PPN stimulations suggest that they may be mediated by distinct pathways.
Nevertheless, considering the inconsistencies in published results regarding the influence of PPN stimulation on gait disorders, work is still needed before one can know whether it will convert into a standard surgical treatment and to decipher its place beside STN stimulation.
PMID: 21694720
Autoregulation of Parkin activity through its ubiquitin-like domain.
Parkin is an E3-ubiquitin ligase belonging to the RBR (RING-InBetweenRING-RING family), and is involved in the neurodegenerative disorder Parkinson's disease.
Autosomal recessive juvenile Parkinsonism, which is one of the most common familial forms of the disease, is directly linked to mutations in the parkin gene.
However, the molecular mechanisms of Parkin dysfunction in the disease state remain to be established.
We now demonstrate that the ubiquitin-like domain of Parkin functions to inhibit its autoubiquitination.
Moreover pathogenic Parkin mutations disrupt this autoinhibition, resulting in a constitutively active molecule.
In addition, we show that the mechanism of autoregulation involves ubiquitin binding by a C-terminal region of Parkin.
Our observations provide important molecular insights into the underlying basis of Parkinson's disease, and in the regulation of RBR E3-ligase activity.
PMID: 21694600
Use of movement imagery in neurorehabilitation: researching effects of a complex intervention.
Since the beginning of the new millennium, the use of mental practice and movement imagery within several medical professions in rehabilitation and therapy has received an increased attention.
Before this introduction in healthcare, the use of movement imagery was mainly researched in sports science.
Mental practice is a complex intervention.
When a complex intervention is applied in a new target group or population, the intervention is most likely needed to be adjusted, developed, and evaluated.
Recently, a dissertation has been published in which the researchers describe their efforts to transfer the use of movement imagery in sports to rehabilitation.
This study reports two aspects from this research project: (a) What did the researcher do? (b) What do the results mean for future research? First, however, some background information is given, in which the use of movement imagery in athletes is discussed.
PMID: 21693708
Involvement of the Fc gamma receptor in a chronic N-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine mouse model of dopaminergic loss.
Although there is growing evidence for a role of the innate immune response in Parkinson's disease, the nature of any humoral response in dopaminergic degeneration is uncertain.
Here we report on a protracted N-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine model of dopaminergic death that potentially allows a more full adaptive humoral response to develop.
Rag2 mutant mice that lack the full adaptive response (deficient in both T and B cells) are resistant to dopaminergic death and behavioral deficiencies in this model.
These mice are resensitized after reconstitution with WT splenocytes.
To more directly provide evidence for humoral/IgG involvement, we show that deficiency of Fcγ receptors, which are critical for activation of macrophages/microglia by binding to IgGs, is also protective in this protracted model.
FcγR-deficient mice display improved behavior and impaired microglial activation.
Interestingly, however, Rag2 mutant but not FcγR-deficient mice are resistant to a more standard N-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine paradigm where death is more rapid.
Taken together, these data indicate that, provided sufficient time, the humoral arm of the adaptive immune system can play a critical functional role in modulating the microglial response to dopaminergic degeneration and suggest that this humoral component may participate in degeneration in Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21693556
Inferring causative variants in microRNA target sites.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate genes post transcription by pairing with messenger RNA (mRNA).
Variants such as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in miRNA regulatory regions might result in altered protein levels and disease.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) aim at identifying genomic regions that contain variants associated with disease, but lack tools for finding causative variants.
We present a computational tool that can help identifying SNPs associated with diseases, by focusing on SNPs affecting miRNA-regulation of genes.
The tool predicts the effects of SNPs in miRNA target sites and uses linkage disequilibrium to map these miRNA-related variants to SNPs of interest in GWAS.
We compared our predicted SNP effects in miRNA target sites with measured SNP effects from allelic imbalance sequencing.
Our predictions fit measured effects better than effects based on differences in free energy or differences of TargetScan context scores.
We also used our tool to analyse data from published breast cancer and Parkinson's disease GWAS and significant trait-associated SNPs from the NHGRI GWAS Catalog.
A database of predicted SNP effects is available at http://www.bigr.medisin.ntnu.no/mirsnpscore/.
The database is based on haplotype data from the CEU HapMap population and miRNAs from miRBase 16.0.
PMID: 21693148
Parkinson's disease-associated mutations in α-synuclein and UCH-L1 inhibit the unconventional secretion of UCH-L1.
Ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase L1 (UCH-L1) is an intracellular protein abundantly expressed in neurons, and a mutation in UCH-L1 has been identified in familial Parkinson's disease.
UCH-L1 has been detected in human cerebrospinal fluid, raising the possibility that UCH-L1 is secreted from neurons.
In the present study, we showed that a portion of UCH-L1 is secreted from cultured cells.
The secretion of D30K UCH-L1, which lacks ubiquitin binding activity, was decreased compared with that of wild-type UCH-L1, while the secretion of C90S UCH-L1, which lacks hydrolase activity, was not.
Treatment with Brefeldin A, an inhibitor of vesicle transport from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi, did not block the secretion of UCH-L1, indicating that UCH-L1 is secreted by an unconventional pathway.
The UCH-L1 sequence from Leu-32 to Leu-39 is similar to the unconventional secretory signal sequence of engrailed 2, and substitution of the leucines within this region (L32S/L32A/L34S/L34A/L39S/L39A) reduced the secretion of UCH-L1.
We found that the Parkinson's disease-associated mutation I93M in UCH-L1 decreased the secretion of I93M UCH-L1.
In addition, Parkinson's disease-linked α-synuclein mutants reduced the secretion of endogenous UCH-L1.
Our results indicate that the hydrolase activity is not necessary for the unconventional secretion of UCH-L1, and suggest that the ubiquitin binding activity and the sequence between Leu-32 and Leu-39 are involved in the secretion.
Moreover, the secretion of UCH-L1 could be involved in the pathology of Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21693054
Audio-biofeedback training for posture and balance in patients with Parkinson's disease.
Patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) suffer from dysrhythmic and disturbed gait, impaired balance, and decreased postural responses.
These alterations lead to falls, especially as the disease progresses.
Based on the observation that postural control improved in patients with vestibular dysfunction after audio-biofeedback training, we tested the feasibility and effects of this training modality in patients with PD.
Seven patients with PD were included in a pilot study comprised of a six weeks intervention program.
The training was individualized to each patient's needs and was delivered using an audio-biofeedback (ABF) system with headphones.
The training was focused on improving posture, sit-to-stand abilities, and dynamic balance in various positions.
Non-parametric statistics were used to evaluate training effects.
The ABF system was well accepted by all participants with no adverse events reported.
Patients declared high satisfaction with the training.
A significant improvement of balance, as assessed by the Berg Balance Scale, was observed (improvement of 3% p = 0.032), and a trend in the Timed up and go test (improvement of 11%; p = 0.07) was also seen.
In addition, the training appeared to have a positive influence on psychosocial aspects of the disease as assessed by the Parkinson's disease quality of life questionnaire (PDQ-39) and the level of depression as assessed by the Geriatric Depression Scale.
This is, to our knowledge, the first report demonstrating that audio-biofeedback training for patients with PD is feasible and is associated with improvements of balance and several psychosocial aspects.
PMID: 21692754
A Swedish version of the 16-item Parkinson fatigue scale (PFS-16).
Hagell P, Rosblom T, Pålhagen S.
A Swedish version of the 16-item Parkinson fatigue scale (PFS-16).
Acta Neurol Scand: DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2011.01560.x.
© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.
Background -  The PFS-16 is a 16-item fatigue scale for Parkinson's disease (PD) developed in the UK.
However, documented translations and psychometric evaluations are sparse.
Aim -  To translate the PFS-16 into Swedish and conduct initial testing of its psychometric properties.
Methods -  Following translation, the PFS-16 was administered twice (2 weeks apart) to 30 people with PD (18 men; mean age/PD duration, 60/6.4 years).
The PFS-16 uses five response categories (1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree), and the total score is the mean over item scores (1-5; 5 = more fatigue).
An alternative, dichotomised scoring method has also been suggested (total score, 0-16; 16 = more fatigue).
Scaling assumptions, floor/ceiling effects, reliability, and correlations with other variables including the generic fatigue scale Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy - Fatigue scale (FACIT-F) were tested.
Results -  Scaling assumptions were generally supported for the original scoring [range of mean (SD) item scores, 2.1-3.3 (1-1.4); corrected item-total correlations, ≥0.40], but not for dichotomised scoring [range of mean (SD) item scores, 0.1-0.6 (0.3-0.5); corrected item-total correlations, ≥0.16].
Reliabilities were ≥0.88.
Floor effects were absent (original scoring) and >23% (dichotomised scoring); there were no ceiling effects.
Correlations with other variables followed expectations (e.g.
-0.88 with FACIT-F scores).
Conclusions -  These observations support the psychometric properties of the Swedish PFS-16, but cautions against dichotomised scoring.
PMID: 21692648
Imbalanced estrogen metabolism in the brain: possible relevance to the etiology of Parkinson's disease.
Damage to DNA by dopamine quinone and/or catechol estrogen quinones may play a significant role in the initiation of Parkinson's disease (PD).
Depurinating estrogen-DNA adducts are shed from cells and excreted in urine.
The aim of this study was to discover whether higher levels of estrogen-DNA adducts are associated with PD.
Forty estrogen metabolites, conjugates, and DNA adducts were analyzed in urine samples from 20 PD cases and 40 matched controls by using ultra performance liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry.
The levels of adducts in cases versus controls (P < 0.005) suggest that unbalanced estrogen metabolism could play a causal role in the initiation of PD.
PMID: 21692295
[Effects of penetration therapy with scalp electroacupuncture on gene expressions of nerve growth factors in substantia nigra of rats with Parkinson's disease].
To explore the protective mechanism of penetration therapy with scalp electroacupuncture on Parkinson's disease (PD).
Thirty-six Wistar rats were randomly divided into a normal group, a sham operation group, a model group and a penetration therapy group, 9 rats in each group.
The sham operation group was operated by micro-injection with normal saline in the left corpus striatum.
The model group and penetration therapy group were generated by micro-injection with 6-hydroxydopamine in the left corpus striatum to prepare rotation model of PD.
The penetration therapy group was treated by penetration therapy with scalp electroacupuncture through "Baihui" (GV 20) to "Taiyang" (EX-HN 5), once each day, 6 days for one course, altogether 2 courses, and there was no treatment in the other two groups.
(1) Immunohistochemical method was used to test the morphology and count of positive cells of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH).
(2) In situ hybridization histochemistry was applied to detect the mRNA expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF).
(1) The areal density (AD), numerical density (ND) and integrating optic density (IOD) of the positive neurons of TH in substantia nigra in the penetration therapy group were 0.065 +/- 0.011, 0.014 +/- 0.003 and 0.470 +/- 0.099, respectively, which were higher than 0.039 +/- 0.008, 0.008 +/- 0.002 and 0.266 +/- 0.065 in the model group (all P < 0.05).
(2) The AD, ND and IOD of the mRNA expression of BDNF in substantia nigra in the penetration therapy group were 0.100 +/- 0.012, 0.014 +/- 0.003 and 1.158 +/- 0.130, respectively, which were higher than 0.047 +/- 0.012, 0.007 +/- 0.001 and 0.602 +/- 0.108 in the model group (all P < 0.05).
The penetration therapy with scalp electroacupuncture has a better protective effect on dopaminergic neurons in substantia nigra of rats with PD.
The protective mechanism is related to the provocation of neural nourishment so as to improve the morphous of dopaminergic neurons and increase the number of dopaminergic neurons.
PMID: 21691332
Parkinson disease: sniffing out dementia.
PMID: 21691241
Feasibility and impact of a function focused care intervention for Parkinson's disease in the community.
Parkinson's disease (PD) results in a progressive loss of function such that family caregivers provide a large percentage of the personal care to PD patients living in the home setting.
The aim of this study was to test the feasibility and impact of function-focused care for PD (FFC-PD) developed to optimize function and physical activity among people with PD who live in the community.
This pilot study was a single-group, 2 pretest, 3 posttest repeated-measures design to investigate the impact of the FFC-PD intervention over a 12-month period.
Measurements included the Self-Efficacy and Outcome Expectations for Exercise and Functional Activities, Yale Physical Activity Scale, Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale, Barthel Index, Schwab & England, Timed Chair Rise, Parkinson's Disease Questionnaire-39, and Geriatric Depression Scale.
The impact of FFC-PD on a person with PD showed a statistically significant increase in outcome expectations for exercise, F(3, 60) = 3.09, p = .034; hours a week exercising, F(1, 24) = 4.95, p = .004; mean weekly energy expenditure, F(2,43) = 4.32, p = .017; hours spent in overall activities, F(3, 60) = 6.06, p = .001; decreased disability based on the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale, F(2, 40) = 9.48, p < .001; improved Parkinson's Disease Questionnaire-39 score, F(3, 60) = 3.81, p = .014; and a trend toward significance on Barthel Index, F(1.6, 31) = 3.47, p = .055.
Function-focused care for PD has a significant effect on increasing and on strengthening outcome expectations related to exercise, time spent in exercise, and physical activity and in improving functional performance in people with PD.
Further research is needed to explore the use of objective measurements of functional performance and activity and to test FFC-PD in a randomized controlled trial.
PMID: 21690031
[Dopamine dysregulation syndrome in Parkinson's disease and restless legs syndrome].
Dopamine replacement therapy in Parkinson's disease (PD) improves the motor symptoms.
However, it has recently been shown that a small sub-group of patients suffers from motor and behavioral disturbances associated with the use of dopamine agonists (DAs).
The behavioral disorders are incentive- or reward-based repetitive symptoms regrouped under the term « dopamine dysregulation syndrome » (DDS).
They include pathological gambling, hypersexuality, compulsive shopping, compulsive eating, punding, and compulsive medication use.
Whether these behaviors are related to the dopaminergic medications interacting with an underlying individual vulnerability or whether the primary pathological features of Parkinson's disease play a role is not entirely understood.
This review is devoted to the phenomenology of the DDS and factors influencing its susceptibility.
We further review the literature studies that investigated the decision-making profile using the Iowa Gambling Task in Parkinson's disease, and the recent literature devoted to these abnormal behaviors in the restless legs syndrome (RLS).
Given the potential substantial impact of the DDS on personal, familial, social, and financial well-being, patients with PD or RLS should be informed that DAs use may lead to the development of impulsive and compulsive disorders, and clinicians should include the investigation of these disorders as part of routine clinical care.
The refinement of clinical strategies to predict, identify and manage DDS will help the future care of motor and non-motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21689963
Neurotrophic factors for the treatment of Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common neurodegenerative disorder caused by the progressive degeneration of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic pathway.
The resulting loss of dopamine neurotransmission is responsible for the symptoms of the disease.
Available treatments are initially successful in treating PD symptoms; however, their long-term use is associated with complications and they cannot stop the neurodegeneration.
Current research aims at developing new therapies to halt/reverse the neurodegenerative process, rather than treating symptoms.
Neurotrophic factors are proteins critical for maintenance and protection of neurones in the developing and adult brain.
Several neurotrophic factors have been investigated for their protective effects on dopaminergic neurones.
Here we review some of the most promising factors and provide an update on their status in clinical trials.
PMID: 21689962
The prevalence of symptomatic orthostatic hypotension in patients with Parkinson's disease and atypical parkinsonism.
Non-motor symptoms in Parkinson disease (PD) have been increasingly recognized as a major cause of declining health-related quality of life.
We aimed to determine the prevalence of symptomatic orthostatic hypotension (OH) in patients with PD and atypical parkinsonism, and to evaluate the risk factors for OH in this population.
We reviewed the records of 1318 patients diagnosed with PD or atypical parkinsonism at the Parkinson's Disease Center and Movement Disorders Clinic, Baylor College of Medicine.
The frequency of symptomatic OH was 81% (21/26) in patients with multiple system atrophy (MSA), 18% (198/1125) of PD patients, and 19% (31/167) of patients with non-MSA atypical parkinsonism.
Among PD patients, those with symptoms of OH were significantly older (p = 0.001), had more advanced Hoehn & Yahr stage (p = 0.007), a longer duration of PD symptoms (p = 0.031), and a greater range between their highest and lowest sitting systolic and diastolic BPs (p = 0.0001) over time.
In the atypical parkinsonism group, excluding MSA, patients with symptoms of OH were taking more anti-hypertensive medications than those without symptoms of OH (p = 0.043).
On the other hand, MSA patients with symptoms of OH were less likely to be taking anti-hypertensive medications than those without symptoms (p = 0.035).
In conclusion, symptomatic OH is a common cause of disability in patients with PD, atypical parkinsonian disorders, and especially in patients with MSA.
PMID: 21689832
Peripheral Lewy body pathology in Parkinson's disease and incidental Lewy body disease: four cases.
The accumulation of Lewy pathology (LP) within autonomic nervous system tissues has received increased attention recently as a possible induction site for Lewy neurodegeneration and a possible source of biopsy material for biomarkers of early Parkinson's disease (PD).
Here, we describe LP accumulation within various tissues involving peripheral autonomic nervous system neurons in three PD cases and one case of incidental Lewy body disease.
Findings highlight the value of examining pathology within functional neuroanatomical systems and particularly the importance of Lewy neurites (LNs) in the pathophysiology of PD.
PMID: 21689829
Apathy and depression scales in Parkinson's disease: are they good enough?
The choice of a scale has important implications for the results of clinical research, including epidemiological and treatment studies.
In addition to the requirements for any clinical scale, evaluation of rating scales for depression and apathy in Parkinson's disease (PD) faces additional challenges, reflecting the overlap of syndromes, controversies on the concept particularly of apathy, fluctuations related to medication, and difficulties in assessment.
However, a number of rating scales are available which have been assessed for use in patients with PD, and the evidence for the use of these scales is discussed.
A number of scales fulfil the basic requirements but further studies on their properties are required.
Scales for screening need to have different properties than scales for rating severity.
Overall, there is no perfect scale, but the choice of scale needs to take into account clinimetric properties, validity in the sample examined, content and purpose.
PMID: 21689676
Progesterone prevents depression-like behavior in a model of Parkinson's disease induced by 6-hydroxydopamine in male rats.
Hemiparkinsonism induced by 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) injected in left corpus striatum is a recognized model of motor deficits in rats.
Some reports concerning motor deficits indicate a favorable response to steroid administration in hemiparkinsonian animals.
However, there is no much information regarding progesterone administration in relation to cognitive and affective dysfunctions.
Here we could confirm earlier reports regarding a mild deficit of memory and a noticeable depressive-like behavior 4 weeks after injecting 6-OHDA.
We also present some evidence that progesterone could be - when administered 7 days after the injection of 6-OHDA - a possible neuroprotector concerning both motor deficits as well as cognitive - memory- and depression-like behaviors.
The affective deficit was reverted by administering the tricyclic antidepressant imipramine.
Since Parkinson's disease is a conspicuous cause of psycho-organic decline in human beings, it would be important to be able of dealing early with non-motor indicators in order to use prospective neuroprotectors to prevent the progression of the disease.
PMID: 21689433
Pros and cons of a prion-like pathogenesis in Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a slowly progressive neurodegenerative disorder which affects widespread areas of the brainstem, basal ganglia and cerebral cortex.
A number of proteins are known to accumulate in parkinsonian brains including ubiquitin and α-synuclein.
Prion diseases are sporadic, genetic or infectious disorders with various clinical and histopathological features caused by prion proteins as infectious proteinaceous particles transmitting a misfolded protein configuration through brain tissue.
The most important form is Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease which is associated with a self-propagating pathological precursor form of the prion protein that is physiologically widely distributed in the central nervous system.
It has recently been found that α-synuclein may behave similarly to the prion precursor and propagate between cells.
The post-mortem proof of α-synuclein containing Lewy bodies in embryonic dopamine cells transplants in PD patient suggests that the misfolded protein might be transmitted from the diseased host to donor neurons reminiscent of prion behavior.
The involvement of the basal ganglia and brainstem in the degenerative process are other congruencies between Parkinson's and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
However, a number of issues advise caution before categorizing Parkinson's disease as a prion disorder, because clinical appearance, brain imaging, cerebrospinal fluid and neuropathological findings exhibit fundamental differences between both disease entities.
Most of all, infectiousness, a crucial hallmark of prion diseases, has never been observed in PD so far.
Moreover, the cellular propagation of the prion protein has not been clearly defined and it is, therefore, difficult to assess the molecular similarities between the two disease entities.
At the current state of knowledge, the molecular pathways of transmissible pathogenic proteins are not yet fully understood.
Their exact involvement in the pathophysiology of prion disorders and neurodegenerative diseases has to be further investigated in order to elucidate a possible overlap between both disease categories that are currently regarded as distinct entities.
PMID: 21687764
Traditional chinese medicine improves activities of daily living in Parkinson's disease.
We evaluated the effects of a traditional Chinese medicine (TCM), named Zeng-xiao An-shen Zhi-chan 2 (ZAZ2), on patients with Parkinson's disease (PD).
Among 115 patients with idiopathic PD enrolled (mean age, 64.7 ± 10.2 years old), 110 patients (M = 65, F = 45; mean age, 64.9 ± 10.7 years old) completed the study.
Patients took either ZAZ2 (n = 59) or placebo granule (n = 56) in a blind manner for 13 weeks while maintaining other anti-Parkinson medications unchanged.
All participants wore a motion logger, and we analyzed the power-law temporal autocorrelation of the motion logger records taken on 3 occasions (before, one week, and 13 weeks after the drug administration).
Drug efficacy was evaluated with the conventional Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS), as well as the power-law exponent α, which corresponds to the level of physical activity of the patients.
ZAZ2 but not placebo granule improved the awake-sleep rhythm, the UPDRS Part II, Part II + III, and Part IV scores, and the α values.
The results indicate that ZAZ2 improved activities of daily living (ADL) of parkinsonism and, thus, is a potentially suitable drug for long-term use.
PMID: 21687757
Influence of different cut-off values on the diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease.
Comparable to Alzheimer's disease, mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease (PD-MCI) is associated with an increased risk for dementia.
However different definitions of PD-MCI may have varying predictive accuracy for dementia.
In a cohort of 101 nondemented Parkinson patients who underwent neuropsychological testing, the frequency of PD-MCI subjects and PD-MCI subtypes (i.e., amnestic/nonamnestic) was determined by use of varying healthy population-based cut-off values.
We also investigated the association between defined PD-MCI groups and ADL scales.
Varying cut-off values for the definition of PD-MCI were found to affect frequency of PD-MCI subjects (9.9%-92.1%) and, maybe more important, lead to a "shift" of proportion of detected PD-MCI subtypes especially within the amnestic single-domain subtype.
Models using a strict cut-off value were significantly associated with lower ADL scores.
Thus, the use of defined cut-off values for the definition of PD-MCI is highly relevant for comparison purposes.
Strict cut-off values may have a higher predictive value for dementia.
PMID: 21686180
Novel Strategies for Drug Discovery Based on Intrinsically Disordered Proteins (IDPs).
Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) are proteins that usually do not adopt well-defined native structures when isolated in solution under physiological conditions.
Numerous IDPs have close relationships with human diseases such as tumor, Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease, diabetes, and so on.
These disease-associated IDPs commonly play principal roles in the disease-associated protein-protein interaction networks.
Most of them in the disease datasets have more interactants and hence the size of the disease-associated IDPs interaction network is simultaneously increased.
For example, the tumor suppressor protein p53 is an intrinsically disordered protein and also a hub protein in the p53 interaction network; α-synuclein, an intrinsically disordered protein involved in Parkinson diseases, is also a hub of the protein network.
The disease-associated IDPs may provide potential targets for drugs modulating protein-protein interaction networks.
Therefore, novel strategies for drug discovery based on IDPs are in the ascendant.
It is dependent on the features of IDPs to develop the novel strategies.
It is found out that IDPs have unique structural features such as high flexibility and random coil-like conformations which enable them to participate in both the "one to many" and "many to one" interaction.
Accordingly, in order to promote novel strategies for drug discovery, it is essential that more and more features of IDPs are revealed by experimental and computing methods.
PMID: 21685825
GW0742, a high-affinity PPAR-δ agonist, mediates protection in an organotypic model of spinal cord damage.
Experimental study of spinal cord injury (SCI) using an organotypic slice culture.
To clarify the protective mechanism of PPAR-δ agonist GW0742 in the injured spinal cord using an in vitro model.
In vivo data suggest that ligands of the δ isoform have activity in a number of disease models that are partly driven by the inflammatory response.
Moreover, reports from in vivo studies using models of ischemia reperfusion and Parkinson disease also have shown neuroprotection conferred by PPAR-δ.
The biological role and function of PPAR-δ remains relatively unclear.
Spinal cord from 6-week-old mice was cut into transverse slices of 400-μm thickness to generate the organotypic slice cultures.
The slices were injured using a weight dropped onto the center of the slice.
PPAR-δ agonist was applied at 10 μM at 1 hour before injury.
Our study shows that GW0742 incubation (10 μM) at 1 hour before transverse lesion significantly reduced (1) p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), (2) c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK/SAP kinase), (3) NF-κB activation, (4) loss of neurotrophic factors (BDNF, GDNF), (5) COX-2 expression, and (6) cell death.
GW0742 reduces the cellular and molecular changes occurring in SCI by targeting different downstream pathways modulating PPAR-δ receptors.
PMID: 21685805
Surgical Outcome of Lumbar Fusion Surgery in Patients With Parkinson Disease.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective study.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the overall surgical outcome of lumbar fusion surgery in patients with Parkinson disease (PD).
SUMMARY OF BACK GROUND DATA: Poor bone quality and muscular dysfunction are important clinical manifestations connected with musculoskeletal diseases in PD patients.
These secondary changes caused by PD often result in spinal pathology, indicating spine operations for some patients with scoliosis, kyphosis, osteoporotic fracture, or degenerative spondylosis.
However, little is known about the surgical outcome or prognosis of spine surgery in PD patients.
METHODS: Lumbar fusion surgery was performed on 20 patients who had PD and degenerative spinal diseases.
At the time of lumbar fusion surgery, the mean duration of PD, age, sex, the preoperative visual analog pain scale (VAS, 0 to 100 mm) for low back pain, Hoehn and Yahr staging, and other comorbidities were evaluated.
Patients' postoperative clinical outcome was measured using the criteria of Kim and Kim and VAS for back pain.
Radiographic assessment was made using plain films and a dynamogram.
RESULTS: At the time of the spine surgery, Hoehn and Yahr staging of PD was from 1 to 2 in all patients.
Only 1 patient had a satisfactory outcome; a good result according to Kim and Kim's criteria.
The average postoperative VAS (mm) was 55.2, whereas the mean preoperative VAS (mm) was 53.9.
Radiological assessment showed fusion status in 15 patients and probably no solid fusion mass in 5 patients.
CONCLUSIONS: A poor surgical outcome would be inevitable because of the worsening of symptoms owing to the natural history of PD.
Therefore, our current study suggested surgical indication should be exercised cautiously in the patients with PD and spinal stenosis.
PMID: 21685323
Ethyl pyruvate rescues nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons by regulating glial activation in a mouse model of Parkinson's disease.
This study examined whether ethyl pyruvate (EP) promotes the survival of nigrostriatal dopaminergic (DA) neurons in the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) mouse model of Parkinson's disease.
MPTP induced degeneration of nigrostriatal DA neurons and glial activation as visualized by tyrosine hydroxylase, macrophage Ag complex-1, and/or glial fibrillary acidic protein immunoreactivity.
Western blotting and immunohistochemistry showed activation of microglial NADPH oxidase and astroglial myeloperoxidase (MPO) and subsequent reactive oxygen species/reactive nitrogen species production and oxidative DNA damage in the MPTP-treated substantia nigra.
Treatment with EP prevented degeneration of nigrostriatal DA neurons, increased striatal dopamine levels, and improved motor function.
This neuroprotection afforded by EP was associated with the suppression of astroglial MPO expression, NADPH oxidase-, and/or inducible NO synthase-derived reactive oxygen species/reactive nitrogen species production by activated microglia.
Interestingly, EP was found to protect DA neurons from 1-methyl-4-phenyl-pyridinium neurotoxicity in cocultures of mesencephalic neurons and microglia but not in neuron-enriched mesencephalic cultures devoid of microglia.
The present findings show that EP may inhibit glial-mediated oxidative stress, suggesting that EP may have therapeutic value in the treatment of aspects of Parkinson's disease related to glia-derived oxidative damage.
PMID: 21684679
Burden of care among caregivers of patients with Parkinson disease: a cross-sectional study.
Parkinson disease (PD) affects the lives of both the individuals and their family members.
This study aims at investigating for clinical as well as socio-demographic factors associated with the perception of burden among the caregivers of individuals with PD in Malaysia.
This is a descriptive, cross-sectional study on PD patients and their caregivers who attended the neurology clinics of 2 tertiary hospitals in Kuala Lumpur.
Socio-demographic and clinical data of the patients were obtained, including caregivers' perception of burden using the Caregiver's Burden Scale (CBS).
The patients' mean age was 62.12±9.69 years, almost half of them were in stage 2 of their illness, had developed PD at the age of 50-69 and had duration of illness of less than 5 years.
The caregivers were mostly females and a third of them were wives.
Factors which were significantly associated with increased caregiver burden were patients' advancing age, later stage of illness and those having longer duration of caring.
Caregivers' perceived burden was related to their race gender, social status, kinship with patient or duration of care-giving.
Burden of care is significantly more in PD patients of advanced age and stage of illness.
PMID: 21684552
Neuroanatomical correlates of depression and apathy in Parkinson's disease: magnetic resonance imaging studies.
Depression and apathy are among the most common neuropsychiatric disturbances in Parkinson's disease (PD), and among the most important factors associated with a poor quality of life.
However, their neural bases remain unclear.
The results of the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies on depression in PD differ dramatically.
Some of them proposed a role of morphologic changes in the mediodorsal thalamus.
In contrast to previous voxel-based morphometry (VBM) data, our study did not confirm a decrease in gray matter (GM) density in any brain region of depressed PD patients.
Instead, a more severe white matter (WM) loss in the right frontal lobe was found, including the anterior cingulate bundle and the inferior orbitofrontal (OF) region.
We suggested that the negative correlation between the severity of depression and WM density in the right OF region reinforces the hypothesis of depression in PD as a "disconnection syndrome".
Only one MRI study using VBM found that high apathy scores correlated with low GM density values in the right (posterior) cingulate gyrus and the bilateral inferior frontal gyrus, in line with the findings in Alzheimer's disease and elderly adults with major depression.
PMID: 21684335
Familial Parkinson disease mutations influence α-synuclein assembly.
Lewy bodies composed of aggregates of α-synuclein (αS) in the brain are the main histopathological features of Lewy body diseases (LBD) such as Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies.
Mutations such as E46K, A30P and A53T in the αS gene cause autosomal dominant LBD in a number of kindreds.
Although these mutations accelerate fibril formation, their precise effects at early stages of the αS aggregation process remain unknown.
To answer this question, we examined the aggregation including monomer conformational dynamics and oligomerization of the E46K, A30P, A53T and A30P/A53T mutations and wild type (WT) using thioflavin S assay, circular dichroism spectroscopy, photo-induced cross-linking of unmodified proteins, electron microscopy, and atomic force microscopy.
Relative to WT αS, E46K αS accelerated the kinetics of the secondary structure change and oligomerization, whereas A30P αS decelerated them.
These effects were reflected in changes in average oligomer size.
The mutant oligomers of E46K αS functioned as fibril seeds significantly more efficiently than those of WT αS, whereas the mutant oligomers of A30P αS were less efficient.
Our results that mutations of familial LBD had opposite effects at early stages of αS assembly may provide new insight into the molecular mechanisms of LBD.
PMID: 21684266
Role of α6 nicotinic receptors in CNS dopaminergic function: relevance to addiction and neurological disorders.
Although a relative newcomer to the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) family, substantial evidence suggests that α6 containing nAChRs play a key role in CNS function.
This subtype is unique in its relatively restricted localization to the visual system and catecholaminergic pathways.
These latter include the mesolimbic and nigrostriatal dopaminergic systems, which may account for the involvement of α6 containing nAChRs in the rewarding properties of nicotine and in movement.
Here, we review the literature on the role of α6 containing nAChRs with a focus on the striatum and nucleus accumbens.
This includes molecular, electrophysiological and behavioral studies in control and lesioned animal models, as well as in different genetic models.
Converging evidence suggest that the major α6 containing nAChRs subtypes in the nigrostriatal and mesolimbic dopamine system are the α6β2β3 and α6α4β2β3 nAChR populations.
They appear to have a dominant role in regulating dopamine release, with consequent effects on nAChR-modulated dopaminergic functions such as reinforcement and motor behavior.
Altogether these data suggest that drugs directed to α6 containing nAChRs may be of benefit for the treatment of addiction and for neurological disorders with locomotor deficits such as Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21683964
Impulsivity and Parkinson's disease: more than just disinhibition.
In the last few years it has become clear that impulsivity is a complex behaviour composed of different domains and dependent on different neural networks.
The proposed pathogenetic mechanisms for the emergence of impulsivity disorders in Parkinson's Disease (PD) can be broadly separated into three potentially interacting processes: the contribution of premorbid susceptibility to impulsivity, the contribution of the disease itself to the behaviour and the potential contribution of therapeutic agents.
Growing evidence suggests that dopamine and the subthalamic nucleus are playing a certain role in the pathophysiology of different aspects of impulsivity.
In this review, we summarise the main concepts defining various components of impulsivity both in healthy subjects and patients affected by PD.
PMID: 21683963
Alpha- and beta-synuclein expression in Parkinson disease with and without dementia.
Parkinson disease (PD) is the most important movement disorder and about 50% of patients develop dementia over the time.
PD belongs to the group of Lewy body disorders.
Alpha-synuclein (AS) is the main component of Lewy bodies and its aggregation is a key event in the pathogenesis of PD.
Beta-synuclein (BS) inhibits AS aggregation in vitro and in vivo and has been shown to interact directly with AS regulating its functionality and preventing its oligomerization.
Recently, we have described a molecular subgroup of DLB characterized by the drastic BS reduction in cortical areas.
In this study we have analyzed the expression of two BS transcripts and the main AS transcript SNCA140, in frozen samples of three brain areas, temporal cortex, caudate nucleus and pons, from patients with PD and PDD in comparison with controls.
Relative mRNA expression was determined by real-time PCR with SybrGreen, neuron-specific-enolase as housekeeping gene and the deltadeltaCt method.
The most important difference in BS and AS mRNA expression between PD and PDD was found in the caudate nucleus, where BS mRNA was overexpressed in PD and AS mRNA diminished in PDD.
Our findings provide new insights into the pathogenesis of dementia in PD, indicating that differential BS and AS expression in the caudate nucleus may represent one of the molecular mechanisms involved in these complex diseases.
PMID: 21683801
Ubiquitin-dependent mitochondrial protein degradation.
Progressive mitochondrial failure is tightly associated with the onset of many age-related human pathologies.
This tight connection results from the double-edged sword of mitochondrial respiration, which is responsible for generating both ATP and ROS, as well as from risks that are inherent to mitochondrial biogenesis.
To prevent and treat these diseases, a precise understanding of the mechanisms that maintain functional mitochondria is necessary.
Mitochondrial protein quality control is one of the mechanisms that protect mitochondrial integrity, and increasing evidence implicates the cytosolic ubiquitin/proteasome system (UPS) as part of this surveillance network.
In this review, we will discuss our current understanding of UPS-dependent mitochondrial protein degradation, its roles in diseases progression, and insights into future studies.
PMID: 21683700
Stimulation of the subthalamic region at 20 Hz slows the development of grip force in Parkinson's disease.
Excessive synchronization of basal ganglia neuronal activity at ~20 Hz is characteristic of patients with untreated Parkinson's disease (PD).
Correlative evidence suggests that this activity may contribute to bradykinesia.
Attempts to demonstrate causality through stimulation imposed synchronization at 20 Hz in the region of the subthalamic nucleus (STN) have had limited success.
Finger-tapping is slowed by about 8% and only in those PD patients that have a relatively normal baseline performance in this task.
Here we investigate whether greater performance decrements might be seen in a reaction time grip task.
We studied 32 sides in 16 patients with PD after overnight withdrawal of medication.
Patients were asked to grip as hard and as fast as possible without STN stimulation and during bilateral stimulation at 5 Hz, 10 Hz, 20 Hz, 50 Hz and 130 Hz.
Stimulation at 20 Hz slowed the development of force by 14.7±8.3% (P=0.044) across all patients.
Slowing increased by 22±7% (P=0.005) in those patients with the best performance in the task without stimulation.
The effect was frequency specific.
These data provide direct interventional evidence of a mechanistic link between excessive neuronal synchronization in the beta range and motor impairment in PD.
PMID: 21683375
Impulsive and compulsive behaviors in Parkinson's disease: a one-year follow-up study.
Impulsive and compulsive behaviors (ICBs) have been reported to occur frequently in Parkinson's disease (PD) and include impulse control disorders (ICDs), punding and dopamine dysregulation syndrome (SSD).
We report on the outcomes of 25 PD patients who developed ICBs.
Information was collected on changes in parkinsonian and psychiatric medication follow-up (median=12.1 months).
At time 1, only 18 patients (72%) were taking dopamine agonists (DA).
At time 2, fifteen patients (83.33%) either discontinued or decreased their DA treatment.
Of these patients, thirteen (86.67%) reported experiencing full or partial remission of their ICBs symptoms.
When analyzing separately the 11 patients with punding, these symptoms remained unchanged in 9 patients (81.82%) independently of changes in dopaminergic drugs.
In conclusion, the current study suggests that there are clear similarities, but also important differences, between punding and ICDs over time.
Pathological gambling, binge or compulsive eating, pathological hypersexuality and compulsive shopping in PD were robustly associated with the use of DA but the relationship between dopaminergic medications and punding is less clear.
It is important to determine if other treatment strategies may be effective for punding in PD.
PMID: 21683120
Genetic analysis of lysosomal alpha-galactosidase A gene in sporadic Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease.
Majority of PD cases are sporadic, resulting from interaction of genetic and environmental factors.
Accumulating evidence indicates that autophagy, which delivers alpha-synuclein to lysosomes for degradation, is involved in the PD pathogenesis.
Some lysosomal hydrolases, such as glucocerebrosidase gene and ATP13A2, a lysosomal ATPase gene, have been implicated in PD.
We have previously screened the activities of a group of lysosomal hydrolases in sporadic PD patients and found that alpha-galactosidase A (GLA) activities are significantly decreased.
In this study, we analyzed GLA gene in sporadic PD patients by sequencing its promoter and exon regions.
One single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the promoter region, rs3027580 (NG_007119.1:g.4292G>C), and two SNPs in the GLA 5'-untranslated region, rs2071225 (NM_000169.2:c.-10C>T) and rs3027585 (NM_000169.2:c.-12G>A), were identified with similar frequencies in sporadic PD patients and healthy controls.
A novel variant (NG_007119.1:g.4488C>G) within the promoter region, at the -573 site upstream of the translation start codon (ATG), was found in one male PD patient, but not in female PD patients or healthy controls.
Our data suggest that the sequence variant may affect GLA gene expression by altering transcription factor binding sites, contributing to the pathogenesis of sporadic PD.
PMID: 21682904
Successful twin pregnancy in a patient with parkin-associated autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism.
Pregnancy in patients with Parkinson disease is a rare occurrence.
To the best of our knowledge, the effect of pregnancy as well as treatment in genetically confirmed autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism (ARJP) has never been reported.
Here, we report the first case of pregnancy in a patient with ARJP associated with a parkin gene mutation, ARJP/PARK2.
A 27-year-old woman with ARJP/PARK2 was diagnosed as having a spontaneous dichorionic/diamniotic twin pregnancy.
Exacerbation of motor disability was noted between ovulation and menstruation before pregnancy as well as during late pregnancy, suggesting that her parkinsonism might have been influenced by fluctuations in the levels of endogenous sex hormones.
During the organogenesis period, she was only treated with levodopa/carbidopa, although she continued to receive inpatient hospital care for assistance in the activities of daily living.
After the organogenesis period, she was administered sufficient amounts of antiparkinsonian drugs.
She delivered healthy male twins, and psychomotor development of both the babies was normal at the age of 2 years.
Pregnancy may worsen the symptoms of ARJP/PARK2, although appropriate treatments with antiparkinsonian drugs and adequate assistance in the activities of daily living might enable successful pregnancy and birth of healthy children.
PMID: 21682352
The use of decision-analytic models in Parkinson's disease: a systematic review and critical appraisal.
The aims of this review were to review decision-analytic models used to evaluate interventions in idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD), and to consider the future directions for development of methods to model the progression of PD over time.
A systematic search of the healthcare literature up to June 2010 identified model-based economic evaluations in PD.
The modelling methods used in the identified studies were appraised using good practice guidelines for decision-analytic modelling.
The review identified 18 model-based evaluations of interventions in PD.
All models evaluated treatments targeted towards the motor symptoms of PD or the motor complications of PD treatment.
There were no models identified that evaluated interventions targeted towards the non-motor symptoms of PD, such as neuropsychiatric problems or autonomic dysfunction.
Consequently, models characterized disease progression in PD using clinical measures of motor functioning.
Most studies (n = 13) evaluated medications, three evaluated diagnostic technologies and two examined surgical procedures.
Overall, the models reported structural components and data inputs appropriately and clearly, although limited evidence was provided to support choices made on the structures used in the models or the data synthesis reported.
Models did not adequately consider structural uncertainty or internal/external consistency.
Modelling methods used to date do not capture the full impact of PD.
The emphasis in the current literature is on the motor symptoms of PD, characterizing the clinical nature of disease progression, largely neglecting the important impacts of non-motor symptoms.
Modelling methods reported for the motor symptoms of PD may not be suitable for future interventions targeted towards modifying disease progression in PD across the entire spectrum of PD.
More comprehensive models of disease progression, including both motor and non-motor symptoms will be needed where it is important to capture the effects of interventions more broadly.
PMID: 21681795
Therapies for dopaminergic-induced dyskinesias in Parkinson disease.
Existing and emerging strategies for managing L-dopa-induced dyskinesias (LIDs) in patients with Parkinson disease have involved either delaying the introduction of L-dopa therapy, treatment with an antidyskinetic agent, using a therapy or delivery system that can provide continuous dopaminergic stimulation, or using novel agents that target receptors implicated in the mechanisms underlying LIDs.
Treatment with dopamine agonists such as pramipexole or ropinirole allows levodopa to be delayed, but once levodopa is added to the drug regimen the usual course of onset of dyskinesias is observed.
Amantadine, an N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonist, is so far the only approved compound with evidence of providing a sustained antidyskinetic benefit in the absence of unacceptable side effects.
These findings support the hypothesis of glutamate overactivity in the development of dyskinesias.
More continuous delivery of dopaminergic medication, such as through intraintestinal or subcutaneous routes, is promising but invasive and associated with injection site reactions.
As a result of molecular research and elucidation of the role of a variety of neurotransmitters in the mechanism of LIDs, new compounds have been identified, including those that modulate the direct and indirect striatal output pathways; some of these new agents are in the early stages of development or undergoing proof-of-concept evaluation as antidyskinetic agents.
PMID: 21679972
Progress in defining the premotor phase of Parkinson's disease.
Several studies have suggested that a variety of non-motor symptoms (NMS) frequently antedate the development of the classical motor symptoms in Parkinson's disease (PD).
Some of these premotor symptoms are well known, like REM sleep behaviour disorder, smell loss and constipation and can precede the motor symptoms by years or even decades.
The appearance of these symptoms seems to correlate with the neuropathological changes occurring during Braaks stages I to III.
Also studies of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic pathways with neuroimaging show that substantia nigra degeneration occurs before motor symptoms onset.
Studies on the premotor phase of PD are important for our understanding of when and where does PD start and how it evolves in these initial stages.
Several ongoing studies combine clinical, genetic and neuroimaging investigations to study the premotor phase in subjects at high risk for developing such as hyposmic individuals (PARS study) or nonmanifesting carriers of LRRK2 mutations (ASAP Study).
The diagnosis of premotor PD remains still elusive but the information becoming available on premotor PD should guide the search for predictive biomarkers and the identification of risk or protective factors for PD.
PMID: 21679126
LRRK2 Parkinson's disease: from animal models to cellular mechanisms.
Mutations in the gene encoding leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) play a major role in the development of Parkinson's disease.
The most frequently defined mutations of LRRK2 are located in the central catalytic region of the LRRK2 protein, suggesting that dysregulations of its enzymatic activities contribute to PD pathogenesis.
Herein, we review recent progress in research concerning how LRRK2 mutations affect cellular pathways and lead to neuronal degeneration.
We also summarize recent evidence revealing the endogenous function of LRRK2 protein within cells.
These concepts can be used to further understand disease pathophysiology and serve as a platform to develop therapeutic strategies for the treatment of Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21679108
Neuroproteomics and Parkinson's disease: don't forget human samples.
PMID: 21677446
The Risk of Parkinson Disease Associated with Urate in a Community-Based Cohort of Older Adults.
Background/Aims: Studies suggest an inverse association between urate concentration and the risk of Parkinson disease (PD).
We investigated this in the Cardiovascular Health Study in an elderly community-based cohort of adults.
Methods: The association of baseline urate (μmol/l) and incident PD over 14 years was assessed with locally weighted scatterplot smoothing (LOESS) regression from which categories of low (<300 μmol/l), middle (300-500 μmol/l), and high (>500 μmol/l) urate ranges were derived.
Multivariate logistic regression models assessed the risk of PD for each urate range.
Linear and quadratic terms were tested when modeling the association between urate and the risk of PD.
Results: Women had significantly lower urate concentrations than did men [316.8 μmol/l (SD 88.0) vs.
367.4 μmol/l (SD 87.7), p < 0.0001] and in women no associations between urate and PD risk were observed.
In men, LOESS curves suggested a U-shaped or threshold effect between urate and PD risk.
With the middle range as reference, the risk of developing PD was significantly increased for urate <300 μmol/l (OR 1.69, 95% CI 1.03-2.78) but not for urate >500 μmol/l (OR 1.55, 95% CI 0.72-3.32) in men.
A negative linear term was significant for urate <500 μmol/l, and across the entire range a convex quadratic term was significant.
Conclusions: Results suggest a more complex relationship than previously reported between urate levels and the risk of PD in men.
Low urate concentrations were associated with a higher PD risk and high urate concentrations were not associated with a further decrease in PD risk.
PMID: 21677249
Temporary interruption of deep brain stimulation for Parkinson's disease during outpatient electroconvulsive therapy for major depression: a novel treatment strategy.
The safety of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) in patients with deep brain stimulation (DBS) has not been established.
Cases reported had no adverse events, but DBS was withheld throughout the weeks of the ECT course.
The authors report the first case of temporary interruption of DBS only during the minutes of each outpatient ECT.
PMID: 21677241
Transcutaneous electrical stimulation (TENS) for psychogenic movement disorders.
Psychogenic movement disorders (PMDs) often result in disability and diminished quality of life, yet medical therapies are presently limited and largely ineffective.
On the basis of previous reports that transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) is helpful for certain patients with organic movement disorders, the authors studied the effects of TENS in 19 patients with PMDs, utilizing the Psychogenic Movement Disorder Rating Scale (PMDRS) as well as patient-rated assessments of PMD magnitude, persistence, and disability.
The PMDRS Severity score significantly improved after a mean follow-up of 6.9 months, and short duration of PMD was found to be the only identifiable predictor of a favorable outcome.
Although the tingling sensation produced by TENS makes it poorly suited for a controlled clinical trial, the device has a favorable side-effect profile and is an acceptable palliative treatment for a subset of PMD patients.
PMID: 21677223
DBS, Parkinson's disease, and suicide.
PMID: 21676990
Cognitive-behavioral therapy for depression in Parkinson's disease: a randomized, controlled trial.
Despite the negative effects of depression in Parkinson's disease, there is currently no evidence-based standard of care.
The purpose of this study was to examine the efficacy of individually administered cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), relative to clinical monitoring (with no new treatment), for depression in this medical population.
Eighty depressed (based on DSM-IV criteria) patients with Parkinson's disease participated in a randomized, controlled trial of CBT relative to clinical monitoring (1:1 ratio) in an academic medical center from April 2007 to July 2010.
All patients continued to maintain stable medication regimens under the care of their personal physicians.
The 17-item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D) total score was the primary outcome.
CBT was modified to meet the unique needs of the Parkinson's disease population and provided for 10 weeks.
Assessments were completed by blind raters at baseline and 5 (midpoint), 10 (end of treatment), and 14 weeks (follow-up evaluation) postrandomization.
The CBT group reported greater reductions in depression (change in HAM-D score) than the clinical monitoring group.
At week 10, the mean HAM-D score change was 7.35 for CBT relative to 0.05 for clinical monitoring.
CBT was also superior to clinical monitoring on several secondary outcomes (i.e., Beck Depression Inventory scores, anxiety, quality of life, coping, Parkinson's disease symptom ratings).
There were more treatment responders in the CBT group than the clinical monitoring group (56% versus 8%, respectively).
CBT may be a viable approach for the treatment of depression in Parkinson's disease.
Further research is needed to replicate and extend these findings.
PMID: 21676605
Vascular damage mediates neuronal and non-neuronal pathology following short and long-term rotenone administration in Sprague-Dawley rats.
Even though rotenone has been used extensively in recent years to produce a model of Parkinson disease in rats, its systemic effects either on neurons apart from dopaminergic structures or non-neuronal tissues have not been elucidated well.
In our present study, 30 adult Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into three even groups.
A short-term rotenone-treated group received 10mg/kg b.w.
rotenone daily for 7 days.
The long-term rotenone-treated group received 3mg/kg b.w.
rotenone daily for 30 days.
The control group received vehicle only and were kept 5 rats each in parallel to both short- and long-term rotenone treated groups.
It was found that short-term rotenone treatment produced marked vascular damages associated with ischemic neuronal degeneration particularly in the thalamus, cerebellum and nucleus dentatus.
In long-term rotenone-treated group, vascular changes were less severe and neuronal degeneration was associated with mild microglial proliferation and astrocytosis.
Non-neuronal pathology as the result of short-term rotenone exposure consisted of degeneration and necrosis of seminiferous tubular epithelia with formation of spermatide multinucleate giant cells.
On the other hand, long-term rotenone treatment did not affect testicles and only caused sinusoidal dilatation in the liver, myocardial degeneration in the heart and interstitial hemorrhages in the kidneys and lungs.
In conclusions, damage to blood vasculature by rotenone appeared mediating neuronal and non-neuronal pathology in Sprague-Dawley rats.
This effect might provide new insights for ethiopathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases and contributes to the understanding of hemorrhagic stroke.
PMID: 21676337
Role of LRRK2 kinase dysfunction in Parkinson disease.
Parkinson disease is a common and usually sporadic neurodegenerative disorder.
However, a subset of cases are inherited and, of these, mutations in the gene encoding leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most frequent genetic cause of disease.
Here, we will discuss recent progress in understanding how LRRK2 mutations lead to disease and how this might have therapeutic implications.
The effect of mutations on LRRK2 enzyme function provides clues as to which functions of the protein are important to disease.
Recent work has focused on the kinase and GTP-binding domains of LRRK2, and it is assumed that these will be therapeutically important, although there is a substantial amount of work to be done to address this hypothesis.
PMID: 21676288
Cerebral microvascular endothelium and the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases.
Diseases of the central nervous system (CNS) pose a significant health challenge, but despite their diversity, they share many common features and mechanisms.
For example, endothelial dysfunction has been implicated as a crucial event in the development of several CNS disorders, such as Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple sclerosis, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1-associated neurocognitive disorder and traumatic brain injury.
Breakdown of the blood-brain barrier (BBB) as a result of disruption of tight junctions and transporters, leads to increased leukocyte transmigration and is an early event in the pathology of these disorders.
The brain endothelium is highly reactive because it serves as both a source of, and a target for, inflammatory proteins and reactive oxygen species.
BBB breakdown thus leads to neuroinflammation and oxidative stress, which are implicated in the pathogenesis of CNS disease.
Furthermore, the physiology and pathophysiology of endothelial cells are closely linked to the functioning of their mitochondria, and mitochondrial dysfunction is another important mediator of disease pathology in the brain.
The high concentration of mitochondria in cerebrovascular endothelial cells might account for the sensitivity of the BBB to oxidant stressors.
Here, we discuss how greater understanding of the role of BBB function could lead to new therapeutic approaches for diseases of the CNS that target the dynamic properties of brain endothelial cells.
PMID: 21674693
Motor imagery evokes increased somatosensory activity in parkinson's disease patients with tremor.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is surprisingly heterogeneous: some patients have a prominent resting tremor, while others never develop this symptom.
Here we investigate whether the functional organization of the voluntary motor system differs between PD patients with and without resting tremor, and whether these differences relate to the cerebral circuit producing tremor.
We compared 18 PD patients with marked tremor, 20 PD patients without tremor, and 19 healthy controls.
Subjects performed a controlled motor imagery task during fMRI scanning.
We quantified imagery-related cerebral activity by contrasting imagery of biomechanically difficult and easy movements.
Tremor-related activity was identified by relating cerebral activity to fluctuations in tremor amplitude, using electromyography during scanning.
PD patients with tremor had better behavioral performance than PD patients without tremor.
Furthermore, tremulous PD patients showed increased imagery-related activity in somatosensory area 3a, as compared with both healthy controls and to nontremor PD patients.
This effect was independent from tremor-related activity, which was localized to the motor cortex, cerebellum, and thalamic ventral intermediate nucleus (VIM).
The VIM, with known projections to area 3a, was unique in showing both tremor- and imagery-related responses.
We conclude that parkinsonian tremor influences motor imagery by modulating central somatosensory processing through the VIM.
This mechanism may explain clinical differences between PD patients with and without tremor.
Hum Brain Mapp, 2011.
© 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
PMID: 21674642
Mitochondria, calcium, and endoplasmic reticulum stress in Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease characterized by a loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNPC) and the presence of intracytoplasmatic inclusions known as Lewy bodies, largely composed of alpha-synuclein (α-syn).
PD is a multifactorial disease and its etiology remains largely elusive.
Although more than 90% of the cases are sporadic, mutations in several nuclear encoded genes have been linked to the development of autosomal recessive and dominant familial parkinsonian syndromes (Bogaerts et al.
(2008) Genes Brain Behav 7, 129-151), enhancing our understanding of biochemical and cellular mechanisms contributing to the disease.
Many cellular mechanisms are thought to be involved in the dopaminergic neuronal death in PD, including oxidative stress, intracellular Ca(2+) homeostasis impairment, and mitochondrial dysfunctions.
Furthermore, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress together with abnormal protein degradation by the ubiquitin proteasome system is considered to contribute to the PD pathogenesis.
This review covers all the aspects related to the molecular mechanisms underlying the interplay between mitochondria, ER, and proteasome system in PD-associated neurodegeneration.
PMID: 21674624
Balance and falls in Parkinson's disease: a meta-analysis of the effect of exercise and motor training.
This systematic review with meta-analysis aimed to determine the effects of exercise and motor training on the performance of balance-related activities and falls in people with Parkinson's disease.
Sixteen randomized and quasi-randomized controlled trials that assessed the efficacy of exercise and/or motor training against no intervention or placebo intervention were included.
The primary outcome measures were balance-related activity performance (15 trials) and falls (2 trials).
The pooled estimate of the effect of exercise and motor training indicated significantly improved balance-related activity performance (Hedges' g, 0.33; 95% confidence interval, 0.11-0.55; P=.003), but there was no evidence of an effect on the proportion of fallers (risk ratio, 1.02; 95% confidence interval, 0.66-1.58, P=.94).
Balance-related activity performance improved to a greater extent in the trials of programs involving highly challenging balance training, but the difference in effect sizes was not statistically significant (P=.166).
Exercise and motor training can improve the performance of balance-related activities in people with Parkinson's disease.
However, further research is required to determine if falls can be prevented in this population.
PMID: 21674622
A cost analysis of intraoperative microelectrode recording during subthalamic stimulation for Parkinson's disease.
Deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus is the standard of care for treating medically intractable Parkinson's disease.
Although the adjunct of microelectrode recording improves the targeting accuracy of subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation in comparison with image guidance alone, there has been no investigation of the financial cost of intraoperative microelectrode recording.
This study was performed to address this issue.
A comprehensive literature search of large subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation series (minimum, 75 patients) was performed, revealing a mean operating room time of 223.83 minutes for unilateral and 279.79 minutes for simultaneous bilateral implantation.
The baseline operating room time was derived from the published operating room time for subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation without microelectrode recording.
The total cost (operating room, anesthesia, neurosurgery) was then calculated based on hospitals geographically representative of the entire United States.
The average cost for subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation implantation with microelectrode recording per patient is $26,764.79 for unilateral, $33,481.43 for simultaneous bilateral, and $53,529.58 for staged bilateral.
For unilateral implantation, the cost of microelectrode recording is $19,461.75, increasing the total cost by 267%.
For simultaneous bilateral implantation, microelectrode recording costs $20,535.98, increasing the total cost by 159%.
For staged bilateral implantation, microelectrode recording costs $38,923.49, increasing the total cost by 267%.
Microelectrode recording more than doubles the cost of subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation for Parkinson's disease and more than triples the cost for unilateral and staged bilateral procedures.
The cost burden of microelectrode recording to subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation requires the clinical efficacy of microelectrode recording to be proven in a prospective evidence-based manner in order to curtail the potential for excessive financial burden to the health care system.
PMID: 21674238
Identification of novel α-synuclein isoforms in human brain tissue by using an online nanoLC-ESI-FTICR-MS method.
Parkinson's disease (PD) and Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) are neurodegenerative diseases that are characterized by intra-neuronal inclusions of Lewy bodies in distinct brain regions.
These inclusions consist mainly of aggregated α-synuclein (α-syn) protein.
The present study used immunoprecipitation combined with nanoflow liquid chromatography (LC) coupled to high resolution electrospray ionization Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-FTICR-MS/MS) to determine known and novel isoforms of α-syn in brain tissue homogenates.
N-terminally acetylated full-length α-syn (Ac-α-syn₁₋₁₄₀) and two N-terminally acetylated C-terminally truncated forms of α-syn (Ac-α-syn₁₋₁₃₉ and Ac-α-syn₁₋₁₀₃) were found.
The different forms of α-syn were further studied by Western blotting in brain tissue homogenates from the temporal cortex Brodmann area 36 (BA36) and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex BA9 derived from controls, patients with DLB and PD with dementia (PDD).
Quantification of α-syn in each brain tissue fraction was performed using a novel enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
PMID: 21672953
Molecular epidemiology of strangles outbreaks in the UK during 2010.
The sequence of the Streptococcus equi subspecies equi (S equi) M-like protein (SeM) gene was determined for 105 isolates of S equi from strangles outbreaks in the UK during 2010 and compared with previous data from 2007 to 2008.
Twenty-three distinct alleles were identified, including 11 novel alleles.
One allele giving rise to a putative truncated M protein was identified from the guttural pouch of an asymptomatic carrier.
Allele 9 was the most prevalent, comprising 57.7 per cent of isolates, followed by allele 6 (10.3 per cent).
Significant changes in allele prevalence were found between 2007, 2008 and 2010, with an increasing prevalence in SeM-9-related alleles and a corresponding decreasing prevalence in SeM-6-related alleles observed over the period (P<0.001).
Geographical proximity of outbreaks caused by some uncommon alleles was apparent between 2007, 2008 and 2010.
PMID: 21672695
Gastrointestinal symptoms in Parkinson disease: clinical aspects and management.
Although it is now generally recognized that the clinical spectrum of Parkinson disease (PD) is broader than its defining motor aspects, its various non-motor symptoms are often not routinely assessed in the clinical setting.
As most of these symptoms are amenable to treatment, improved recognition would lead to more comprehensive management of the disease, and ultimately improve the quality of life for PD patients.
In an attempt to increase the general awareness of physicians caring for these patients, this article focuses on the clinical manifestations and treatment of the gastrointestinal symptoms most commonly experienced by PD patients, as well as on the gastrointestinal side effects of antiparkinsonian treatments.
PMID: 21672674
Analysis of EMG and acceleration signals for quantifying the effects of deep brain stimulation in Parkinson's disease.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is effective in reducing motor symptoms in Parkinson's disease (PD).
However, objective methods for quantifying its efficacy are lacking.
We present a principal component (PC)-based tracking method for quantifying the effects of DBS in PD by using electromyography (EMG) and acceleration measurements.
Ten parameters capturing PD characteristic signal features were initially extracted from isometric EMG and acceleration recordings.
Using a PC approach, the original parameters were transformed into a smaller number of PCs.
Finally, the effects of DBS were quantified by examining the PCs in a low-dimensional feature space.
The EMG and acceleration data from 13 PD patients with DBS ON and OFF, and 13 healthy age-matched controls were used for analysis.
Clinical evaluation of patients showed that their motor symptoms were effectively reduced with DBS.
The analysis results showed that the signal characteristics of 12 patients were more similar to those of the healthy controls with DBS ON than with DBS OFF.
These observations indicate that the PC-based tracking method can be used to objectively quantify the effects of DBS on the neuromuscular function of PD patients.
Further studies are suggested to estimate the clinical sensitivity of the method to different types of PD.
PMID: 21672576
The effect of Ndrg2 expression on astroglial activation.
N-myc downstream-regulated gene 2 (Ndrg2) is a differentiation- and stress-associated molecule predominantly expressed in astrocytes in the central nervous system (CNS).
To study the expression and possible role of Ndrg2 in quiescent and activated astrocytes, mice were administrated with 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropypridine (MPTP), a Parkinson disease (PD)-related neurotoxin which causes both neurodegeneration and glial activation.
Immunohistological analysis revealed that Ndrg2 was highly expressed in both types of astrocytes, but less so in astrocytes during the early process of activation.
Ndrg2 was also expressed in astrocyte-like cells, but not in neurons, in human brains from PD and Cortico-basal degeneration (CBD) patients.
In cultured astrocytes, gene silencing of Ndrg2 significantly enhanced the numbers of 5-bromo-2'-deoxy-uridine (BrdU)-incorporated and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA)-positive cells, and reduced the length of cell processes and the amount of F-actin.
In contrast, adenovirus-mediated overexpression of Ndrg2 significantly reduced the numbers of BrdU-incorporated and PCNA-positive cells, and enhanced the amount of F-actin.
Fractionation and immunocytochemical analysis further revealed that Ndrg2 was located in different cellular fractions including the cytosol and cell surface membranes.
These results suggest that Ndrg2 may regulate astroglial activation through the suppression of cell proliferation and stabilization of cell morphology.
PMID: 21672570
Changes in iron-regulatory gene expression occur in human cell culture models of Parkinson's disease.
Neuronal iron accumulation is thought to be relevant to the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease (PD), although the mechanism remains elusive.
We hypothesized that neuronal iron uptake may be stimulated by functional mitochondrial iron deficiency.
To determine firstly whether the mitochondrial toxin, 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium iodide (MPP(+)), results in upregulation of iron-import proteins and transporters of iron into the mitochondria, and secondly whether similar changes in expression are induced by toxins with different mechanisms of action.
We used quantitative PCR and Western blotting to investigate expression of the iron importers, divalent metal transporter, transferrin receptor 1 and 2 (TfR1 and TfR2) and mitoferrin-2 and the iron exporter ferroportin in differentiated SH-SY5Y cells exposed to three different toxins relevant to PD, MPP(+), paraquat (a free radical generator) and lactacystin (an inhibitor of the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS)).
MPP(+) resulted in increased mRNA and protein levels of genes involved in cellular iron import and transport into the mitochondria.
Similar changes occurred following exposure to paraquat, another inducer of oxidative stress.
Lactacystin also resulted in increased TfR1 mRNA levels, although the other changes were not found.
Our results support the hypothesis of a functional mitochondrial iron deficit driving neuronal iron uptake but also suggest that differences exist in neuronal iron handling induced by different toxins.
PMID: 21672073
Pale neurites, premature α-synuclein aggregates with centripetal extension from axon collaterals.
Progressive aggregation of α-synuclein (αS) from pale bodies (PBs) and extension from Lewy neurites (LNs) are candidate mechanisms for Lewy body (LB) formation.
To identify how aggregation of αS is related to its extension along neurites, 60-µm-thick brainstem sections of Parkinson disease (PD) patients were prepared for three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction of αS-positive neurites with neurofilament (NF) and thiazin red (TR), a fluorochrome with an affinity to solid aggregates.
This demonstrated 3D layering of αS surrounded by NF with the aggregates probed by TR in the center, corresponding to the eosinophilic core of mature LBs.
This eosinophilic/TR-positive profile, characteristically absent in PBs, premature counterpart of LBs, was similarly absent in some LNs.
We would like to refer these premature LNs as "pale neurites" (PNs).
Their premature nature was evidenced by 3D fluoroprofiling with quantum dots (QDs) and subsequent electron microscopic identification (3D-oriented immunoelectron microscopy) as loosely packed αS (QDs)-positive filaments.
Quantification of LNs, frequently extended around branching axons, demonstrated that LNs are initiated at axon collaterals to extend centripetally into proximal segments.
This branching-oriented extension of αS is related to its selective predisposition to systems with highly divergent axons, preferentially affected in PD, which may explain barely somatotopic manifestations of PD.
PMID: 21671840
Determining the efficacy of rasagiline in reducing bradykinesia among Parkinson's disease patients: a review.
Bradykinesia has a significant impact on the lives of Parkinson's disease (PD) patients.
Consequently, treating this symptom is of particular concern for patients and clinicians.
A number of studies have documented the efficacy of rasagiline in reducing the severity of PD symptoms.
To summarize studies that specifically examined the impact of rasagiline on bradykinesia symptoms in PD patients across disease severity.
The EMBASE database was searched for relevant articles published between 2000 and November 2010.
Three studies were identified that explicitly examined the effect of rasagiline on the bradykinesia subscale of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) motor examination.
In each, 1 mg/day rasagiline significantly reduced bradykinesia scores in patients.
As a monotherapy or an adjunctive therapy, rasagiline is an effective drug for reducing the severity of bradykinesia in PD patients.
PMID: 21671510
A novel protein degradation system in young-onset Parkinson's disease: mitophagy is a therapeutic target as a quality control for damaged mitochondria.
PMID: 21671509
Parkin inactivation via PARIS (ZNF746) may lead to neurodegeneration in Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21671508
The risk of valvular regurgitation in patients with Parkinson's disease treated with dopamine receptor agonists.
Several observational studies suggest an association between treatment with ergoline-derived dopamine agonists and valvular regurgitation.
In this article, we present an overview of the literature and conduct a meta-analysis.
Observational studies addressing the frequency of moderate or severe valvular regurgitation among ergoline-treated patients with Parkinson's disease were considered for a meta-analysis.
Pooled risk estimates and the risk of increased pulmonary artery pressure were calculated.
The pooling of data from well-designed observational studies documented that both pergolide (RR = 3.05 [1.71-5.44]) and cabergoline (RR = 6.38 [3.17-12.81]) represent a substantially increased risk of developing moderate to severe valvular regurgitation.
In addition, pergolide, but not cabergoline, was associated with an increase in pulmonary artery pressure.
The present meta-analysis confirmed a statistically significant association between pergolide and cabergoline treatment and the risk of moderate to severe valvular regurgitation.
An association between bromocriptine and valvular regurgitation cannot be entirely ruled out.
PMID: 21670764
Parkinson disease: protein-based stem cells generate healthy dopamine neurons.
PMID: 21670077
Urinary dysfunction in early and untreated Parkinson's disease.
Urinary dysfunction is common in Parkinson's disease (PD); however, little is known about urinary dysfunction in early and untreated PD patients.
Fifty consecutive untreated PD patients (mean age, 66.7; mean disease duration, 23.6 months; and mean Hoehn & Yahr scale, 1.9) were recruited; those with other conditions that might have influenced urinary function were excluded.
Patients were evaluated using a urinary questionnaire and urodynamic studies.
Sixty-four per cent complained of urinary symptoms (storage, 64.0%; voiding, 28.0%).
Urodynamic studies showed abnormal findings in the storage phase in 84%, with detrusor overactivity (DO) and increased bladder sensation without DO in 58.0% and 12.0% of patients, respectively.
In the voiding phase, detrusor underactivity, impaired urethral relaxation such as detrusor sphincter dyssynergia, and bladder outlet obstruction were present in 50.0%, 8.0% and 16% of patients, respectively.
In patients with both storage and voiding phase abnormalities, DO+detrusor underactivity was the most common finding.
Few patients experienced urge incontinence and/or quality-of-life impairment owing to urinary dysfunction; none had low-compliance bladder or abnormal anal-sphincter motor unit potential.
These urinary symptoms and urodynamic findings were not correlated with gender, disease severity or motor symptom type.
Urinary dysfunction, manifested primarily as storage disorders with subclinical voiding disorders and normal anal-sphincter electromyography, occurs in early and untreated PD patients.
In cases with severe voiding disorder and/or abnormal anal-sphincter electromyography, other diagnoses should be considered.
PMID: 21669496
Reprogramming neurons by microRNAs into iPSCs to treat Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21669041
Docosahexaenoic Acid Promotes Dopaminergic Differentiation in Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells and Inhibits Teratoma Formation in Rats with Parkinson-like Pathology.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the degeneration of dopaminergic (DA) neurons in the midbrain.
Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells have shown potential for differentiation and may become a resource of functional neurons for the treatment of PD.
However, teratoma formation is a major concern for transplantation-based therapies.
This study examined whether functional neurons could be efficiently generated from iPS cells using a five-step induction procedure combined with docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) treatment.
We demonstrated that DHA, a ligand for the RXR/Nurr1 heterodimer, significantly activated expression of the Nurr1 gene and the Nurr1-related pathway in iPS cells.
DHA treatment facilitated iPS differentiation into tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)-positive neurons in vitro and in vivo and functionally increased dopamine release in transplanted grafts in PD-like animals.
Furthermore, DHA dramatically up-regulated the endogenous expression levels of neuroprotective genes (Bcl-2, Bcl-xl, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, and glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor) and protected against 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-induced apoptosis in iPS-derived neuronal precursor cells.
DHA-treated iPS cells significantly improved the behavior of 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA)-treated PD-like rats compared to control or eicosapentaenoic acid-treated group.
Importantly, the in vivo experiment suggests that DHA induces the differentiation of functional dopaminergic precursors and improves the abnormal behavior of 6-OHDA-treated PD-like rats by 4 months after transplantation.
Furthermore, we found that DHA treatment in iPS cell-grafted rats significantly down-regulated the mRNA expression of embryonic stem cell-specific genes (Oct-4 and c-Myc) in the graft and effectively blocked teratoma formation.
Importantly, 3 Tesla-magnetic resonance imaging and ex vivo green fluorescence protein imaging revealed that no teratomas were present in transplanted grafts of DHA-treated iPS-derived DA neurons 4 months after implantation.
Therefore, our data suggest that DHA plays a crucial role in iPS differentiation into functional DA neurons and that this approach could provide a novel therapeutic approach for PD treatment.
PMID: 21668692
Parkinson's disease or Parkinson symptoms following seasonal influenza.
Influenza may cause neurological sequelae and has been associated with encephalitis lethargica, an entity displaying Parkinson's disease (PD) signs and symptoms that followed the 1918 influenza pandemic.
We studied the association between diagnosed influenza and idiopathic PD or Parkinson symptoms (PS) not followed by a firm PD diagnosis.
We used the UK-based General Practice Research Database to perform a case-control analysis.
We identified cases who developed an incident diagnosis of PD or PS between 1994 and March 2007, and we matched four controls on age, gender, general practice, calendar time, and history in the database to each case.
We calculated odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI) using conditional logistic regression to assess the relative risk of developing PD or PS in association with previous influenza diagnoses.
We identified 3976 PD cases and 18 336 PS cases.
The risk of developing PD was not associated with previous influenza infections.
However, PS was associated with recent influenza (last infection 0-29 days: OR 3·03, 95% CI 1·94-4·74; 30-364 days: OR 1·36, 95% CI 1·14-1·63), number of influenza episodes (1 attack: OR 1·20, 95% CI 1·12-1·28; 2 attacks: OR 1·52, 95% CI 1·28-1·81; ≥3 attacks: OR 2·00, 95% CI 1·45-2·75), and severity of preceding influenza infections (≥1 severe attack: OR 1·45, 95% CI 1·25-1·68).
Influenza is associated with PD-like symptoms such as tremor, particularly in the month after an infection, but not with an increased risk of developing idiopathic PD.
PMID: 21668554
An 88-year old woman with long-lasting parkinsonism.
PMID: 21668447
Methamphetamine neurotoxicity decreases phasic, but not tonic, dopaminergic signaling in the rat striatum.
Neurotoxic doses of methamphetamine (METH) are known to cause depletions in striatal dopamine (DA) tissue content.
However, the effects of METH-induced insults on dopaminergic neurotransmission are not fully understood.
Here, we employed fast-scan cyclic voltammetry at a carbon-fiber microelectrode in the anesthetized rat striatum to assess the effects of a neurotoxic regimen of METH on phasic and tonic modes of dopaminergic signaling and underlying mechanisms of DA release and uptake.
Extracellular DA was electrically evoked by stimulation of the medial forebrain bundle mimicking tonic and phasic firing patterns for dopaminergic cells and was monitored simultaneously in both the dorsomedial and dorsolateral striatum.
Kinetic analysis of evoked recordings determined parameters describing DA release and uptake.
Striatal DA tissue content was quantified by high performance liquid chromatography with electrochemical detection.
METH-pretreatment (four doses of 7.5 or 10.0 mg/kg s.c.) induced DA depletions of ∼ 40% on average, which are reported in both striatal subregions.
METH pre-treatment significantly decreased the amplitude of signals evoked by phasic, but not tonic, stimulation.
Parameters for DA release and uptake were also similarly reduced by ∼ 40%, consistent with effects on evoked phasic-like responses and DA tissue content.
Taken together, these results suggest that METH-pretreatment selectively diminishes phasic, but not tonic, dopaminergic signaling in the dorsal striatum.
PMID: 21667279
MPP(+)-induced toxicity in the presence of dopamine is mediated by COX-2 through oxidative stress.
Accumulating evidence suggests that endogenous dopamine may act as a neurotoxin and thereby participate in the pathophysiology of Parkinson's disease (PD).
Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) has been implicated in the pathogenesis of PD due to its ability to generate reactive oxygen species (ROS).
Inhibition of COX-2 leads to neuroprotection by preventing the formation of dopamine-quinone.
In this study, we examined whether dopamine mediates 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP(+))-induced toxicity in primary ventral mesencephalic (VM) neurons, an in vitro model of PD, and if so, whether the protective effects of COX-2 inhibitors on dopamine mediated MPP(+)-induced VM neurotoxicity and VM dopaminergic cell apoptosis result from the reduction of ROS.
Reserpine, a dopamine-depleting agent, significantly reduced VM neurotoxicity induced by MPP(+), whereas dopamine had an additive effect on MPP(+)-induced VM neurotoxicity and VM dopaminergic cell apoptosis.
However, inhibition of COX-2 by a selective COX-2 inhibitor (DFU) or ibuprofen significantly attenuated MPP(+)-induced VM cell toxicity and VM dopaminergic cell apoptosis, which was accompanied by a decrease in ROS production in VM dopaminergic neurons.
These results suggest that dopamine itself mediates MPP(+)-induced VM neurotoxicity and VM dopaminergic cell apoptosis in the presence of COX-2.
PMID: 21667065
Broadening the phenotype of TARDBP mutations: the TARDBP Ala382Thr mutation and Parkinson's disease in Sardinia.
Mutations in the TARDBP gene are a cause of autosomal dominant amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), but they have not been found so far in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD).
A founder TARDBP mutation (p.Ala382Thr) was recently identified as the cause of ~30% of ALS cases in Sardinia, a Mediterranean genetic isolate.
We studied 327 consecutive Sardinian patients with clinically diagnosed PD (88 familial, 239 sporadic) and 578 Sardinian controls.
One family with FTLD and parkinsonism was also included.
The p.Ala382Thr heterozygous mutation was detected in eight unrelated PD patients (2.5%).
The three patients from the FTLD/parkinsonism family also carried this mutation.
Within the control group, there were three heterozygous mutation carriers.
During follow-up, one of these individuals developed motoneuron disease and another, a rapidly progressive dementia; the third remains healthy at the age of 79 but two close relatives developed motoneuron disease and dementia.
The eight PD patients carrying the p.Ala382Thr mutation had all sporadic disease presentation.
Their average onset age was 70.0 years (SD 9.4, range 51-79), which is later but not significantly different from that of the patients who did not carry this mutation.
In conclusion, we expand the clinical spectrum associated with TARDBP mutations to FTLD with parkinsonism without motoneuron disease and to clinically definite PD.
The TDP-43 protein might be directly involved in a broader neurodegenerative spectrum, including not only motoneuron disease and FTLD but also PD.
PMID: 21666500
The cell cycle regulator phosphorylated retinoblastoma protein is associated with tau pathology in several tauopathies.
Retinoblastoma protein (pRb) is a ubiquitous 928-amino acid cell cycle regulatory molecule with diverse biologic activities.
One critical function of pRb is the control of the G1-to-S phase checkpoint of the cell cycle.
In the hypophosphorylated state, pRb suppresses the activity of E2F transcription factors thereby inhibiting transcription of cell cycle-promoting genes.
On phosphorylation, primarily by cyclin-dependent kinases, phosphorylated pRb dissociates from E2F and permits cell cycle progression.
We previously found phosphorylated pRb to be intimately associated with hyperphosphorylated tau-containing neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer disease (AD), the pathogenesis of which is believed to involve dysregulation of the cell cycle and marked neuronal death.
Here, we used immunohistochemistry to investigate the presence of phosphorylated pRb in other distinct neurodegenerative diseases that share the common characteristic of hyperphosphorylated tau pathology and neuronal loss with AD.We found colocalized labeling of tau pathology and phosphorylated pRb in Pick disease and progressive supranuclear palsy (3 cases each), neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation type 1 (2 cases), and Parkinson-amyotrophic lateral sclerosis of Guam, subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, frontotemporal dementia and Parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17, and dementia pugilistica (1 case each).
These observations further implicate aberrant neuronal cell cycle progression in neurodegenerative diseases, particularly tauopathies, and suggest a novel target for therapeutic intervention.
PMID: 21666262
Parkinson's disease progression at 30 years: a study of subthalamic deep brain-stimulated patients.
Clinical findings in Parkinson's disease suggest that most patients progressively develop disabling non-levodopa-responsive symptoms during the course of the disease.
Nevertheless, several heterogeneous factors, such as clinical phenotype, age at onset and genetic aspects may influence the long-term clinical picture.
In order to investigate the main features of long-term Parkinson's disease progression, we studied a cohort of 19 subjects treated with subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation after >20 years of disease, reporting clinical and neuropsychological data up to a mean of 30 years from disease onset.
This group of patients was characterized by an early onset of disease, with a mean age of 38.63 years at Parkinson's disease onset, which was significantly lower than in the other long-term subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation follow-up cohorts reported in the literature.
All subjects were regularly evaluated by a complete Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale, a battery of neuropsychological tests and a clinical interview, intended to assess the rate of non-levodopa-responsive symptom progression.
Clinical data were available for all patients at presurgical baseline and at 1, 3 and 5 years from the subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation surgical procedure, while follow-up data after >7 years were additionally reported in a subgroup of 14 patients.
The clinical and neuropsychological performance progressively worsened during the course of follow-up; 64% of patients gradually developed falls, 86% dysphagia, 57% urinary incontinence and 43% dementia.
A progressive worsening of motor symptoms was observed both in 'medication-ON' condition and in 'stimulation-ON' condition, with a parallel reduction in the synergistic effect of 'medication-ON/stimulation-ON' condition.
Neuropsychological data also showed a gradual decline in the performances of all main cognitive domains, with an initial involvement of executive functions, followed by the impairment of language, reasoning and memory.
Thirty years after the disease onset, most patients presented non-levodopa-responsive symptoms, although the effect of both subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation and dopaminergic therapies still showed significant efficacy on the main disease cardinal features.
Nevertheless, compared with other subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation follow-up studies, which included patients with a shorter disease duration at the time of surgery, a higher prevalence of axial and non-levodopa-responsive symptoms was observed in the long-term evaluations, confirming that several complex aspects underlie the development of non-motor symptoms and other features of Parkinson's disease progression, even in patients with an early disease onset and a prior long-lasting response to dopaminergic therapies.
PMID: 21664737
Culture, gender and health care stigma: Practitioners' response to facial masking experienced by people with Parkinson's disease.
Facial masking in Parkinson's disease is the reduction of automatic and controlled expressive movement of facial musculature, creating an appearance of apathy, social disengagement or compromised cognitive status.
Research in western cultures demonstrates that practitioners form negatively biased impressions associated with patient masking.
Socio-cultural norms about facial expressivity vary according to culture and gender, yet little research has studied the effect of these factors on practitioners' responses toward patients who vary in facial expressivity.
This study evaluated the effect of masking, culture and gender on practitioners' impressions of patient psychological attributes.
Practitioners (N = 284) in the United States and Taiwan judged 12 Caucasian American and 12 Asian Taiwanese women and men patients in video clips from interviews.
Half of each patient group had a moderate degree of facial masking and the other half had near-normal expressivity.
Practitioners in both countries judged patients with higher masking to be more depressed and less sociable, less socially supportive, and less cognitively competent than patients with lower masking.
Practitioners were more biased by masking when judging the sociability of the American patients, and American practitioners' judgments of patient sociability were more negatively biased in response to masking than were those of Taiwanese practitioners.
Practitioners were more biased by masking when judging the cognitive competence and social supportiveness of the Taiwanese patients, and Taiwanese practitioners' judgments of patient cognitive competence were more negatively biased in response to masking than were those of American practitioners.
The negative response to higher masking was stronger in practitioner judgments of women than men patients, particularly American patients.
The findings suggest local cultural values as well as ethnic and gender stereotypes operate on practitioners' use of facial expressivity in clinical impression formation.
PMID: 21664587
Diagnosis and referral delay in women with Parkinson's disease.
Gender differences in Parkinson's disease may be attributable to biological and environmental factors as well as health care-seeking behaviors and diagnosis bias.
The goal of this pilot study was to determine whether there are gender discrepancies in diagnosis and time to present to a movement disorder specialist, and to assess whether clinical and referral factors account for these differences.
We report data on diagnosis, health care-seeking patterns, and clinical features in men and women with early Parkinson's disease treated at a tertiary care center.
A total of 109 patients with Parkinson's disease (53 women and 56 men; median age at onset, 60.3 years) were included in this study.
Although men and women did not differ in time from symptom onset to first physician visit, duration from symptom onset to movement disorder specialist visit was longer in women than in men.
The expected duration from onset to movement disorder specialist visit for women was 61% greater than for men in the unadjusted model (P = 0.002).
There were gender differences in time to present to a movement disorder specialist in these patients with early Parkinson's disease, and further study in larger samples is warranted.
PMID: 21663383
Study of methylation levels of parkin gene promoter in Parkinson's disease patients.
Mutations in the parkin gene have been significantly linked to autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism (ARJP).
In addition to its association with ARJP, loss of heterozygosity of parkin has been found in several types of malignant tumors, including ovarian, breast, and hepatocellular tumors.
Abnormal methylation of parkin promoter was observed in patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia and chronic myelogenous leukemia in lymphoid blast crisis.
We hypothesized that hypermethylation of the parkin promoter might reduce the expression of parkin, which would contribute to the pathogenesis of parkinson's disease (PD) in idiopathic patients and parkin heterozygotes.
In this study, we analyzed samples from 17 PD patients with heterozygous parkin mutations, 17 PD patients without parkin mutations, and 10 normal controls.
We determined the levels of methylation of the parkin gene promoter in each group using bisulfite genomic sequencing of a region containing 33 CpG sites in the CpG island of the parkin promoter.
The methylation levels indicated hypomethylation, and there were no significant differences in the incidence of CpG site methylation among three groups (P > 0.05).
These results suggest that the methylation mechanism is unlikely to play a role in the pathogenesis and development of PD.
PMID: 21663381
Clinical vignettes in Parkinson's disease: a collection of unusual medication-induced hallucinations, delusions, and compulsive behaviours.
Hallucinations, delusions, and compulsive behaviors are frequent iatrogenic complications of the treatment of motor dysfunction in Parkinson's disease (PD).
Although these have been studied, and the phenomenology described, there are few detailed descriptions of the various psychiatric problems our treated PD patients live with that allow physicians who do not have a great deal of experience with PD patients to appreciate the extent of their altered lives.
This report is a compilation of vignettes describing these behavioral problems that the treating neurologist or psychiatrist attributed to the medications used for treating PD.
PMID: 21661277
[2011: not just PRAXIS, also dopa turns 100 years old.].
PMID: 21661056
Do nonmotor symptoms in Parkinson's disease differ from normal aging?
Nonmotor symptoms in Parkinson's disease are frequent and affect health-related quality of life of patients.
The severity and domains of nonmotor symptoms involved in Parkinson's disease and normal aging have not been compared before.
We performed a prospective case-control study to assess the frequency and severity of nonmotor symptoms in patients with Parkinson's disease (n = 174) and age-matched normal controls (n = 128) using the Non-Motor Symptoms Scale.
Nonmotor symptoms in Parkinson's disease were ubiquitous, more frequent, and more severe than in normal aging, particularly in women.
Cardiovascular, mood/cognition, and perceptual problems/hallucinations domains were rarely involved in age-matched controls.
Age had no effect and sex some influence on nonmotor symptoms in Parkinson's disease.
In contrast, in controls, nonmotor symptoms increased with age, and sex had no effect.
Nonmotor symptoms in Parkinson's disease differ from those in aging in frequency, severity, sex predilection, and domain involvement.
PMID: 21661054
Pathological gambling in Parkinson's disease--a review of the literature.
The prevalence of pathological gambling is 3.4% to 6% in treated Parkinson's disease, which is higher than the background population rate.
In this review we discuss current evidence to indicate that dopamine agonists are much more likely to trigger this behavior than either L-dopa or selective monoamine oxidase B inhibitor monotherapy.
New insights from recent behavioral and functional imaging studies and possible treatment approaches are also covered.
A PubMed literature search using the terms "gambling" and "Parkinson's disease," "impulse control disorder," "impulsive compulsive behaviour," "dopamine agonist," of individual dopamine agonists, and of ongoing drug trials, using http://www.clinicaltrials.gov, was carried out for the period up to January 2011.
PMID: 21661047
Genomewide linkage study of modifiers of LRRK2-related Parkinson's disease.
Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 gene, located at 12q12, are the most common known genetic causes of Parkinson's disease.
Studies of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 mutation carriers have shown incomplete and age-dependent penetrance, and previous studies have suggested that inherited susceptibility factors may modify the penetrance of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 mutations.
Genomewide linkage to age of onset of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2-related Parkinson's disease was evaluated in a sample of 113 leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 mutation carriers from 64 families using single-nucleotide polymorphism data from the Illumina HumanCNV370 genotyping array.
Association between onset age and single-nucleotide polymorphisms under suggestive linkage peaks was also evaluated.
The top logarithmic odds score for onset age (logarithmic odds score = 2.43) was in the chromosome 1q32.1 region.
Moderate linkage to onset was also identified at 16q12.1 (logarithmic odds score = 1.58).
Examination of single-nucleotide polymorphism association to Parkinson's disease onset under the linkage peaks revealed no statistically significant single-nucleotide polymorphism associations.
The 2 novel genomic regions identified may harbor modifiers of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2-related Parkinson's disease onset age or penetrance, and further study of these regions may provide important insight into leucine-rich repeat kinase 2-related Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 21660634
Pseudobulbar affect: an under-recognized and under-treated neurological disorder.
Pseudobulbar affect (PBA) is a neurologic syndrome of emotional affect disinhibition, characterized by uncontrollable, exaggerated, and often inappropriate emotional outbursts, which may cause severe distress, embarrassment, and social dysfunction.
However, the US prevalence of PBA remains unknown.
An online survey was conducted primarily to estimate the US prevalence of PBA in patients with the six most commonly associated conditions: Alzheimer's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, stroke, and traumatic brain injury.
Invitations to participate were randomly sent online to adults (aged ≥ 18 years) registered in the Harris Poll Online Panel who were patients or belonged to a household with a patient diagnosed with one of the six conditions (identified through previous screening by Harris Interactive).
Participants were screened for PBA using the Pathological Laughing and Crying Scale (PLACS) and the Center for Neurologic Study-Lability Scale (CNS-LS).
PBA estimates were made using a cut-off score of ≥ 13 on the PLACS and two different cut-off thresholds on the CNS-LS, a lower one of ≥ 13 and a more rigorous one of ≥ 21.
Existing US prevalence data for the six underlying conditions were used to estimate US prevalence of PBA.
Of 38,000 individuals invited to participate, 8876 responded (23%) and 2318 (26%) completed the questionnaire.
Mean prevalence of PBA across all six conditions was 10.1%, 9.4%, and 37.5% with the PLACS ≥ 13, CNS-LS ≥ 21, and CNS-LS ≥ 13 thresholds, respectively.
Using disease population estimates from government agencies and professional organizations, the estimated US population with PBA ranged from 1.8 to 7.1 million.
Among patients who discussed their laughing and/or crying episodes with a physician, 41% were diagnosed, and about half received a medication for their episodes.
The overall prevalence of PBA was estimated to be about 10% across these commonly associated underlying neurological conditions and appears to be under-recognized.
PMID: 21660610
[Static posturography in selected Parkinson syndromes: quantitative analysis of postural control].
Idiopathic Parkinson's disease (IPD) is associated with postural disturbances and falls.
The assessment of postural instability by the pull test may lead to inconclusive results.
Static posturography measurements may give more reliable information regarding the differential diagnosis of Parkinson syndromes.
We compared results of the pull test and static posturography (sway area in eyes-open/eyes-closed conditions) in healthy controls (C) and patients with akinetic-rigid IPD (n=18), atypical Parkinson syndromes (APS; n=18) and secondary Parkinson syndromes (SPS; n=17).
Static posturography and the pull test results did not differ significantly between controls and patients with akinetic-rigid IPD.
APS patients had significantly greater postural sway areas when tested with eyes open compared to controls (APS: 16.89 vs C: 6.89 mm, p≤0.001) and IPD patients (APS: 16.89 vs IPD: 9.55 mm, p=0.005).
The correlation in the APS group between the pull test and sway area in the eyes-open condition was significant (r=0.526, p=0.025).
With eyes closed, postural instability in APS patients was not significantly increased (+2%, p=.847).
SPS patients were more unstable under the eyes-closed condition compared to controls (sway area SPS: 26.29 vs C: 8.79 mm, p≤0.001), IPD patients (sway area SPS: 26.29 vs IPD: 11.06 mm, p≤0.001) and APS patients (sway area SPS: 26.29 vs APS: 17.28 mm, p=0.027), without a significant correlation to the pull test.
The sway area in the SPS patients increased significantly by 67% (p=0.001) under the eyes-closed condition.
Static posturography may be a helpful tool for the differentiation of Parkinson syndromes.
PMID: 21658954
Parkinson's disease in general practice: assessing knowledge, confidence and the potential role of education.
In the context of an ageing population, Australian general practitioners (GPs) will be asked increasingly to manage challenging neurodegenerative conditions such as Parkinson's disease (PD).
This study sought to evaluate whether Australian GPs have been provided with sufficient training to effectively diagnose and manage PD, and to determine the extent to which a brief training seminar could improve knowledge and increase confidence.
A baseline assessment was completed by 168 GPs in New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory, and was re-administered following an educational seminar to 105 GPs.
Australian GPs demonstrated significant knowledge gaps on the baseline assessment, scoring only 50% (standard deviation [SD] 15.5%).
Post-seminar results showed significant improvement (p<0.001) to 71.5% (SD 15%).
Although following the seminar the vast majority reported increased confidence, there were some differential benefits between metropolitan and regional practitioners.
These findings emphasise the need for continuing education in relation to PD in primary health care.
PMID: 21658728
Neuropsychological correlates of olfactory dysfunction in Parkinson's disease.
Olfactory impairment is a common early non-motor manifestation in Parkinson's disease that has garnered interest as a clinical biomarker for early "pre-motor" diagnosis and prediction of associated clinical phenotypes.
Whether olfactory impairment correlates well with motor symptoms is not yet clear, and recent interest has focused on the relationship between hyposmia and other non-motor symptoms.
In this paper, we will review emerging evidence for a relationship between hyposmia and neuropsychiatric manifestations, discussing the potential pathophysiology together with challenges and opportunities for future research.
PMID: 21658431
Decreased expression of Bmal2 in patients with Parkinson's disease.
Bmal1 is one of the central regulators of the clock machinery.
Recently, we examined the expression profile of Bmal1 in total leukocytes for a 12h duration during the evening, overnight, and the morning, in subjects with Parkinson's disease (PD) and healthy controls.
The results indicate that the expression of Bmal1 is significantly lower in PD patients versus control subjects.
However, it is still unclear whether other key regulators of the clock machinery, especially Bmal2, the paralog of Bmal1, are also expressed differently in PD.
To address this issue, the expression profiles of Bmal2, Clock, and Dec1 were examined in the same samples using real-time RT-PCR assay.
The results show a difference in the expression pattern of Bmal2, but not Clock and Dec1.
The expression of Bmal2 is significantly lower in PD at 21:00 h (p=0.005) and 00:00 h (p=0.025).
These results together with our previous findings suggest that the molecular clock in total leukocytes is disturbed in PD patients.
PMID: 21658387
LRRK2 directly phosphorylates Akt1 as a possible physiological substrate: impairment of the kinase activity by Parkinson's disease-associated mutations.
LRRK2 is the causal molecule for autosomal-dominant familial Parkinson's disease, although its true function, including its physiological substrates, remains unknown.
Here, using in vitro kinase assay with recombinant proteins, we demonstrated for the first time that LRRK2 directly phosphorylates Akt1, a central molecule involved in signal transduction for cell survival and prevention of apoptosis.
Ser473, one of two amino acids essential for Akt1 activation, was the target site for LRRK2.
A knockdown experiment using intact cells also demonstrated LRRK2-mediated phosphorylation of Akt1 (Ser473), suggesting that Akt1 is a convincing candidate for the physiological substrate of LRRK2.
The disease-associated mutations, R1441C, G2019S, and I2020T, exhibited reduced interaction with, and phosphorylation of, Akt1, suggesting one possible mechanism for the neurodegeneration caused by LRRK2 mutations.
PMID: 21658161
Sequential imaging analysis using MIBG scintigraphy revealed progressive degeneration of cardiac sympathetic nerve in Parkinson's disease.
Metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) cardiac scintigraphy was used to differentiate Parkinson's disease (PD) with Lewy body pathology from other degenerative parkinsonisms.
MIBG cardiac scintigraphy demonstrates the extent of degeneration of myocardial post-ganglionic sympathetic nerves in patients with PD.
Because of its specificity for Lewy body (LB) pathology, MIBG scan might also be useful biomarker for the neurodegeneration attributed to PD.
To estimate the utility of the imaging technique as a biomarker, we conducted sequential imaging analysis and power analysis.
Sixty-three patients who met the UK PD Society Brain Bank criteria were enrolled in this study.
(123) I-MIBG myocardial scintigraphy was performed on all subjects, and the heart to mediastinum (H/M) ratio was calculated.
A second imaging session was carried out after a mean interval of 268 days.
Sequential imaging revealed a 2.9% decline of the H/M ratio from the baseline to the follow-up image, which reached statistical significance, but the power analysis showed that a relatively large number of patients would be required to demonstrate the neuroprotective effects of any therapy.
Sequential imaging using (123) I-MIBG myocardial scintigraphy revealed progressive degeneration of the cardiac sympathetic nerve in 63 patients with PD.
Although careful elimination of other disease conditions that damage the cardiac sympathetic nerve system is necessary, (123) I-MIBG myocardial scintigraphy may be a useful addition to clinical trials that intend to prove neuroprotection among patients with PD.
PMID: 21656921
Finite dimensional structure of the GPI discharge in patients with Parkinson's disease.
Stochastic systems are infinitely dimensional and deterministic systems are low dimensional, while real systems lie somewhere between these two limit cases.
If the calculation of a low (finite) dimension is in fact possible, one could conclude that the system under study is not purely random.
In the present work we calculate the maximal Lyapunov exponent from interspike intervals time series recorded from the internal segment of the Globus Pallidusfrom patients with Parkinson's disease.
We show the convergence of the maximal Lyapunov exponent at a dimension equal to 7 or 8, which is therefore our estimation of the embedding dimension for the system.
For dimensions below 7 the observed behavior is what would be expected from a stochastic system or a complex system projecting onto lower dimensional spaces.
The maximal Lyapunov exponent did not show any differences between tremor and akineto-rigid forms of the disease.
However, it did decay with the value of motor Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale -OFF scores.
Patients with a more severe disease (higher UPDRS-OFF score) showed a lower value of the maximal Lyapunov exponent.
Taken together, both indexes (the maximal Lyapunov exponent and the embedding dimension) remark the importance of taking into consideration the system's non-linear properties for a better understanding of the information transmission in the basal ganglia.
PMID: 21656851
Clinical features, with video documentation, of the original familial lewy body parkinsonism caused by α-synuclein triplication (Iowa kindred).
PMID: 21656414
Disease-associated differences in religious cognition in patients with Parkinson's disease.
We sought to establish whether patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) exhibit change in religiosity as a function of disease progression and asymmetry, medication regimens, mood dysfunction, sex, and age.
We assessed both controlled (conscious reflection) and automatic (semantic priming) modes of religiosity.
In the main study, self-reported religiosity, cognitive, and clinical measures were assessed in 71 patients with midstage PD and 75 age-matched controls with non-neurological chronic health conditions.
To understand a potential mechanism associated with change in religiosity in PD patients, we supplemented the findings with pilot investigations.
The pilot included 21 PD patients and utilized a different self-report measure than that of the main study and assessed automatic activation of religious concepts both on and off levodopa.
The main study results demonstrated that PD patients consistently scored lower in five of six dimensions of religiosity.
Multivariate linear regression demonstrated that self-reported religiosity was related to disease stage, asymmetry, and male gender.
Results are discussed in the context of other neurologic correlates of religiosity.
The pilot study on religious concept activation suggested that the mechanism is organic and hemisphere dependent.
On/off drug testing confirmed these findings to be independent of medication effects.
Gain/decay semantic modeling suggested that right and left forebrain pathways selectively mediated the time constant of gain and decay, respectively, for religious concepts.
PD patients exhibit significant differences in both controlled and automatic access to religious concepts with mid/late-stage, male, left-onset patients most impaired in access to religious cognition.
The findings indicate that aspects of religious/spiritual cognition appear related to specific cerebral structures.
PMID: 21656215
Modulation of the soleus H reflex by electrical subcortical stimuli in humans.
Over the past two decades, the H reflex has been used as a neural tool to assess the effect on the motoneuronal pool of conditioning volleys in supraspinal descending tracts elicited by transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) or auditory stimuli.
However, mechanisms mediating such modulation are unclear.
These hypothesized neural pathways are likely to be affected by single electrical stimulus applied through the electrodes implanted in the subthalamic nucleus for deep brain stimulation (sSTNDBS).
To improve our knowledge on such mechanisms, we examined in 11 Parkinson's disease patients the effects of conditioning sSTNDBS applied contralateral and ipsilateral to the H reflex recording on the amplitude of the soleus H reflex, at interstimulus intervals (ISIs) between 0 and 110 ms.
There was a significant main effect of the ISI (P<0.001) and of the sSTNDBS stimulation side (P=0.019) on the percentage change in the soleus H-reflex amplitude.
Contralateral sSTNDBS modulation of the soleus H reflex resembles that of TMS in healthy subjects with two facilitation phases (at 5-20 ms and at 60 ms), while after ipsilateral sSTNDBS, there is only a single facilitation phase peaking up at 5 ms later than the first facilitation period observed with contralateral stimulation.
These findings contribute to the discussion of the mechanisms underlying the excitability of the spinal alpha motoneuron pool and the modulation of the H reflex by supraspinal stimuli.
PMID: 21655272
Oct4-induced reprogramming is required for adult brain neural stem cell differentiation into midbrain dopaminergic neurons.
Neural stem cells (NSCs) lose their competency to generate region-specific neuronal populations at an early stage during embryonic brain development.
Here we investigated whether epigenetic modifications can reverse the regional restriction of mouse adult brain subventricular zone (SVZ) NSCs.
Using a variety of chemicals that interfere with DNA methylation and histone acetylation, we showed that such epigenetic modifications increased neuronal differentiation but did not enable specific regional patterning, such as midbrain dopaminergic (DA) neuron generation.
Only after Oct-4 overexpression did adult NSCs acquire a pluripotent state that allowed differentiation into midbrain DA neurons.
DA neurons derived from Oct4-reprogrammed NSCs improved behavioural motor deficits in a rat model of Parkinson's disease (PD) upon intrastriatal transplantation.
Here we report for the first time the successful differentiation of SVZ adult NSCs into functional region-specific midbrain DA neurons, by means of Oct-4 induced pluripotency.
PMID: 21655265
Immunolocalization of influenza A virus and markers of inflammation in the human Parkinson's disease brain.
Although much is known regarding the molecular mechanisms leading to neuronal cell loss in Parkinson's disease (PD), the initiating event has not been identified.
Prevailing theories including a chemical insult or infectious agent have been postulated as possible triggers, leading to neuroinflammation.
We present immunohistochemical data indicating the presence of influenza A virus within the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) from postmortem PD brain sections.
Influenza A virus labeling was identified within neuromelanin granules as well as on tissue macrophages in the SNpc.
Further supporting a role for neuroinflammation in PD was the identification of T-lymphocytes that colocalized with an antibody to caspase-cleaved Beclin-1 within the SNpc.
The presence of influenza A virus together with macrophages and T-lymphocytes may contribute to the neuroinflammation associated with this disease.
PMID: 21655131
Quantitative analysis of tremors in welders.
Workers chronically exposed to manganese in welding fumes may develop an extra-pyramidal syndrome with postural and action tremors.
To determine the utility of tremor analysis in distinguishing tremors among workers exposed to welding fumes, patients with Idiopathic Parkinson's Disease (IPD) and Essential Tremor (ET).
Retrospective study of recorded tremor in subjects from academic Movement Disorders Clinics and Welders.
Quantitative tremor analysis was performed and associated with clinical status.
Postural tremor intensity was increased in Welders and ET and was associated with visibly greater amplitude of tremor with arms extended.
Mean center frequencies (Cf) of welders and patients with ET were significantly higher than the mean Cf of PD subjects.
Although both the welders and the ET group exhibited a higher Cf with arms extended, welders could be distinguished from the ET subjects by a significantly lower Cf of the rest tremor than that measured in ET subjects.
In the context of an appropriate exposure history and neurological examination, tremor analysis may be useful in the diagnosis of manganese-related extra-pyramidal manifestations.
PMID: 21653695
Alpha-synuclein interacts with Glucocerebrosidase providing a molecular link between Parkinson and Gaucher diseases.
The presynaptic protein α-synuclein (α-syn), particularly in its amyloid form, is widely recognized for its involvement in Parkinson disease (PD).
Recent genetic studies reveal that mutations in the gene GBA are the most widespread genetic risk factor for parkinsonism identified to date.
GBA encodes for glucocerebrosidase (GCase), the enzyme deficient in the lysosomal storage disorder, Gaucher disease (GD).
In this work, we investigated the possibility of a physical linkage between α-syn and GCase, examining both wild type and the GD-related N370S mutant enzyme.
Using fluorescence and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, we determined that α-syn and GCase interact selectively under lysosomal solution conditions (pH 5.5) and mapped the interaction site to the α-syn C-terminal residues, 118-137.
This α-syn-GCase complex does not form at pH 7.4 and is stabilized by electrostatics, with dissociation constants ranging from 1.2 to 22 μm in the presence of 25 to 100 mm NaCl.
Intriguingly, the N370S mutant form of GCase has a reduced affinity for α-syn, as does the inhibitor conduritol-β-epoxide-bound enzyme.
Immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence studies verified this interaction in human tissue and neuronal cell culture, respectively.
Although our data do not preclude protein-protein interactions in other cellular milieux, we suggest that the α-syn-GCase association is favored in the lysosome, and that this noncovalent interaction provides the groundwork to explore molecular mechanisms linking PD with mutant GBA alleles.
PMID: 21653540
Leucoaraiosis, nigrostriatal denervation and motor symptoms in Parkinson's disease.
Leucoaraiosis is associated with motor symptoms in otherwise normal older adults.
Comorbid leucoaraiosis is predicted to contribute also to motor features in Parkinson's disease but previous studies of white matter changes in Parkinson's disease show variable results.
No prior studies have compared directly the effects of both leucoaraiosis and the degree of nigrostriatal dopaminergic denervation on motor features.
We investigated the effect of leucoaraiosis severity on motor impairment independent of the degree of nigrostriatal dopaminergic denervation in Parkinson's disease.
Seventy-three subjects with Parkinson's disease (Hoehn and Yahr stages 1-3) underwent brain magnetic resonance and [(11)C]dihydrotetrabenazine vesicular monoamine transporter type 2 positron emission tomography imaging.
Automated assessment of supratentorial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery magnetic resonance hyperintense white matter voxels was performed using cerebellar white matter as the intensity reference.
White matter signal hyperintensity burden was log-transformed and normalized for brain volume.
Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale total and subscore ratings were assessed to determine motor impairment.
Subjects receiving dopaminergic medications were examined in the clinically defined 'OFF' state.
Multivariate regression analysis with measures of white matter signal hyperintensity burden and nigrostriatal denervation as independent variables demonstrated a significant overall model for total motor Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale scores (F  = 11.4, P < 0.0001) with significant regression effects for both white matter signal hyperintensity burden (t  = 2.0, β = 0.22, P = 0.045) and striatal monoaminergic binding (t = -3.5, β = -0.38, P = 0.0008).
Axial motor impairment demonstrated a robust association with white matter signal hyperintensity burden (t  = 4.0, β = 0.43, P  =0.0001) compared with striatal monoaminergic binding (t = -2.1, β = 0.22, P = 0.043).
White matter signal hyperintensity burden regression effects for bradykinesia had borderline significance.
No significant white matter signal hyperintensity burden effects were found for rigidity or tremor subscores.
White matter signal hyperintensity burden was significantly higher in the subgroup with postural instability and gait difficulties compared with the tremor-predominant subgroup despite no significant differences in age or duration of disease.
These findings indicate that increased white matter signal hyperintensity burden is associated with worse motor performance independent of the degree of nigrostriatal dopaminergic denervation in Parkinson's disease.
Comorbid white matter disease is a greater determinant of axial motor impairment than nigrostriatal dopaminergic denervation.
PMID: 21652707
Comparative analysis of different peptidyl-prolyl isomerases reveals FK506-binding protein 12 as the most potent enhancer of alpha-synuclein aggregation.
FK506-binding proteins (FKBPs) are members of the immunophilins, enzymes that assist protein folding with their peptidyl-prolyl isomerase (PPIase) activity.
Some non-immunosuppressive inhibitors of these enzymes have neuroregenerative and neuroprotective properties with an unknown mechanism of action.
We have previously shown that FKBPs accelerate the aggregation of α-synuclein (α-SYN) in vitro and in a neuronal cell culture model for synucleinopathy.
In this study we investigated whether acceleration of α-SYN aggregation is specific for the FKBP or even the PPIase family.
Therefore, we studied the effect of several physiologically relevant PPIases, namely FKBP12, FKBP38, FKBP52, FKBP65, Pin1, and cyclophilin A, on α-SYN aggregation in vitro and in neuronal cell culture.
Among all PPIases tested in vitro, FKBP12 accelerated α-SYN aggregation the most.
Furthermore, only FKBP12 accelerated α-SYN fibril formation at subnanomolar concentrations, pointing toward an enzymatic effect.
Although stable overexpression of various FKBPs enhanced the aggregation of α-SYN and cell death in cell culture, they were less potent than FKBP12.
When FKBP38, FKBP52, and FKBP65 were overexpressed in a stable FKBP12 knockdown cell line, they could not fully restore the number of α-SYN inclusion-positive cells.
Both in vitro and cell culture data provide strong evidence that FKBP12 is the most important PPIase modulating α-SYN aggregation and validate the protein as an interesting drug target for Parkinson disease.
PMID: 21651967
Lactoferrin conjugated PEG-PLGA nanoparticles for brain delivery: preparation, characterization and efficacy in Parkinson's disease.
A novel biodegradable brain drug delivery system, the lactoferrin (Lf) conjugated polyethylene glycol-polylactide-polyglycolide (PEG-PLGA) nanoparticle (Lf-NP) was constructed in this paper with its in vitro and in vivo delivery properties evaluated by a fluorescent probe coumarin-6.
Lf was thiolated and conjugated to the distal maleimide function surrounding on the pegylated nanoparticle to form Lf-NP.
TEM observation and ELISA analysis confirmed the existence of active Lf on the surface of Lf-NP.
The results of qualitative and quantitative uptake studies of coumarin-6 incorporated Lf-NP showed a more pronounced accumulation of Lf-NP in bEnd.3 cells than that of unconjugated nanoparticle (NP).
Further uptake inhibition study indicated that the increased uptake of Lf-NP was via an additional clathrin mediated endocytosis processes.
Following intravenous administration, a near 3 fold of coumarin-6 was found in the mice brain carried by Lf-NP compared to that carried by NP.
Intravenous injection of urocortin loaded Lf-NP effectively attenuated the striatum lesion caused by 6-hydroxydopamine in rats as indicated by the behavioral test, the immunohistochemistry test and striatal transmitter content detection results.
The cell viability test and CD68 immunohistochemistry demonstrated the acceptable toxicity of the system.
All these results demonstrated that Lf-NP was a promising brain drug delivery system with reasonable toxicity.
PMID: 21651510
Exome sequencing in Parkinson's disease.
Exome sequencing is rapidly becoming a fundamental tool for genetics and functional genomics laboratories.
This methodology has enabled the discovery of novel pathogenic mutations causing mendelian diseases that had, until now, remained elusive.
In this review, we discuss not only how we envisage exome sequencing being applied to a complex disease, such as Parkinson's disease, but also what are the known caveats of this approach.
PMID: 21651332
Stimulation, protection and regeneration of dopaminergic neurons by 9-methyl-β-carboline: a new anti-Parkinson drug?
β-carbolines are potential endogenous and exogenous neurotoxins that may contribute to the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease (PD).
9-methyl-β-carboline exhibits multimodal effects that could be beneficial in the treatment of PD.
It shows stimulatory effects to dopaminergic neurons by increasing the expression of tyrosine hydroxylase and its transcription factors in pre-existing dopa decarboxylase immunoreactive neurons.
Furthermore, 9-methyl-β-carboline has emerged as a substance with the rare property of a protective and regenerative/restorative potential for dopaminergic neurons by inducing gene expression of several neurotrophic factors and decreasing apoptotic cell signals.
It reduces protein levels of α-synuclein and inhibits monoamine oxidase A and B.
Finally, 9-methyl-β-carboline acts on multiple targets in the inflammatory cascade by inhibiting the proliferation of microglia, by decreasing chemotactic cytokines and by creating an anti-inflammatory environment in the CNS.
This article summarizes our current knowledge of 9-methyl-carboline and discusses its potential role as a new drug for the treatment of PD.
PMID: 21651331
Cell-based therapies for Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disease worldwide, classically characterized by a triad of motor features: bradykinesia, rigidity and resting tremor.
Neurodegeneration in PD critically involves the dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta, which results in a severe reduction in dopamine levels in the dorsal striatum.
However, the disease also exhibits extensive non-nigral pathology and as many non-motor as motor features.
Nevertheless, owing to the relatively circumscribed nature of the nigrostriatal lesion in PD, dopaminergic cell transplantation has emerged as a potentially reparative therapy for the disease.
Sources for such cells are varied and include the developing ventral mesencephalon, several autologous somatic cell types, embryonic stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells.
In this article, we review the origins of dopaminergic transplantation for PD and the emergent hunt for a suitable long-term source of transplantable dopaminergic neurons.
PMID: 21651330
Intensive voice treatment in Parkinson's disease: Lee Silverman Voice Treatment.
Advances in neuroscience have led to an expanded and improved understanding of neurobiological changes associated with rehabilitation and exercise in Parkinson's disease (PD).
This knowledge has led to a direct clinical impact of increased referral for early and continuous exercise programs for individuals with PD (physical, occupational, speech therapy and general exercise programs) and an increased research focus on the impact of such approaches in humans with PD.
The purpose of this article is to examine the role of speech therapy in the landscape of exercise-based interventions for individuals with PD.
We will specifically focus on the intensive voice treatment protocol, Lee Silverman Voice Treatment, as an example therapy.
This article will briefly review the literature on the characteristics and features of speech and voice disorders in individuals with PD, and will discuss the impact of pharmacological and surgical treatment techniques on these disorders.
This will be followed by a focus on behavioral speech treatment, specifically Lee Silverman Voice Treatment, including development of the treatment approach, documenting efficacy, discovery of unexpected outcomes and insights into the mechanism of speech disorders in PD gained from treatment-related changes.
This research will be placed in the context of other previous and current speech treatment approaches in development for individuals with PD, and will highlight future directions for research.
PMID: 21651329
Pathological gambling in Parkinson's disease: disease related or drug related?
Pathological gambling and other impulse-control disorders occur in susceptible Parkinson's disease patients during dopaminergic therapy, particularly in association with dopamine agonists.
Additional factors such as age at onset play an important role, and predisposing personality traits have been identified both in treated patients, as well as in patients even before therapy is initiated.
The contributions of specific allelic polymorphisms of the dopamine receptor and transporter genes were also tested as predictors of adverse effects of dopaminergic therapy but results are not conclusive.
Recent imaging studies have shed light on the mechanism underlying pathological gambling.
Resting-state brain perfusion of Parkinson's disease gamblers showed higher activity in 'limbic' areas associated with addictive processes.
More importantly, severity of this behavior is associated with the impaired functioning of brain regions that are involved in 'top-down' cognitive monitoring and inhibition of inappropriate behaviors.
This evidence is consistent with a significant contribution of disease-related factors.
PMID: 21649894
Pleiotrophin over-expression provides trophic support to dopaminergic neurons in parkinsonian rats.
Pleiotrophin is known to promote the survival and differentiation of dopaminergic neurons in vitro and is up-regulated in the substantia nigra of Parkinson's disease patients.
To establish whether pleiotrophin has a trophic effect on nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons in vivo, we injected a recombinant adenovirus expressing pleiotrophin in the substantia nigra of 6-hydroxydopamine lesioned rats.
The viral vector induced pleiotrophin over-expression by astrocytes in the substantia nigra pars compacta, without modifying endogenous neuronal expression.
The percentage of tyrosine hydroxylase-immunoreactive cells as well as the area of their projections in the lesioned striatum was higher in pleiotrophin-treated animals than in controls.
These results indicate that pleiotrophin over-expression partially rescues tyrosine hydroxylase-immunoreactive cell bodies and terminals of dopaminergic neurons undergoing 6-hydroxydopamine-induced degeneration.
PMID: 21647015
Parkinson's: symptoms, treatments and research.
Parkinson's is a incurable progressive neurological condition caused by a degeneration of dopamine-producing cells.
The most common symptoms of the condition include slowness of movement, tremor and muscle stiffness; other symptoms include sleep difficulties, depression and anxiety.
Parkinson's is usually controlled by medication but other treatments and therapies, such as occupational therapy, physiotherapy and speech and language therapy, can also be effective in controlling and managing symptoms.
The timing of this medication is key to the successful management of Parkinson's.
Delays to initiating medication or missed doses can have serious consequences, and it can take some time for symptoms to stabilize.
Research into treatments for Parkinson's and, ultimately, finding a cure for the condition, is ongoing.
Parkinson's UK researchers are working on projects to identify the causes of cell death and tests to detect the condition at its earliest possible stage.
Current treatments can help to ease the symptoms but none can repair the damage in the brain or slow the progress of the condition; now, Parkinson's UK researchers are working to develop new treatments that can.
PMID: 21646627
Meta-analysis of the relationship between Parkinson disease and melanoma.
To assess the epidemiologic evidence on melanoma in relation to Parkinson disease (PD) via systematic review and meta-analysis.
Epidemiologic studies on melanoma and PD were searched using PubMed, Web of Science, Scoups, and Embase (1965 through June 2010).
Eligible studies were those that reported risk estimates of melanoma among patients with PD or vice versa.
Pooled odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated using random-effects models.
We identified 12 eligible publications on melanoma and PD: 8 had fewer than 10 cases with both PD and melanoma, and 7 provided gender-specific results.
The pooled OR was 2.11 (95% CI 1.26-3.54) overall, 2.04 (1.55-2.69) for men, and 1.52 (0.85-2.75) for women.
Analyses by temporal relationship found that melanoma occurrence was significantly higher after the diagnosis of PD (OR 3.61, 95% CI 1.49-8.77), but not before PD diagnosis (OR 1.07, 95% CI 0.62-1.84).
Further analyses revealed that the lack of significance in the latter analysis was due to one study, which when excluded resulted in a significant association (OR 1.44, 95% CI 1.06-1.96).
We also analyzed nonmelanoma skin cancers in relation to PD and found no significant relationship (OR 1.11, 95% CI 0.94-1.30).
Collective epidemiologic evidence supports an association of PD with melanoma.
Further research is needed to examine the nature and mechanisms of this relationship.
PMID: 21646421
Classifications of vocalic segments from articulatory kinematics: healthy controls and speakers with dysarthria.
In this study, the authors classified vocalic segments produced by control speakers (C) and speakers with dysarthria due to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) or Parkinson's disease (PD); classification was based on movement measures.
The researchers asked the following questions: (a) Can vowels be classified on the basis of selected measures of articulatory motions? and (b) Can classification models that are constructed from control productions classify vowels produced by speakers with dysarthria that is related to ALS and PD?.
Nineteen C, 7 PD, and 8 ALS speakers participated in this study.
The severity of dysarthria varied across individuals and between the 2 disorder groups.
The stimuli were 6 vowels produced in 10 words embedded into sentences read at a comfortable reading rate.
Movement data were collected using the x-ray microbeam.
Movement measures included distances traveled, durations, and average speeds of vowel-related movement strokes.
Vowels and words were classified by linear discriminant analysis with measures of articulatory motion as input variables.
The study showed that vocalic segments could be classified using articulatory movement characteristics with up to 80% accuracy.
The classification accuracy of the movement-based models depended largely on the number of articulators involved and, to a lesser extent, on the movement measure (e.g., distance, duration, speed).
Classification of PD vowels was similar to that of the C group, suggesting a simple scaling of gestures as an explanation of the movement deficit in this disease.
Classification performance for ALS vowels appeared to be different from that of C and PD productions.
Classification of vowels was possible on the basis of their articulatory motions.
ALS vowels appeared categorically different from those of C and PD speakers.
PMID: 21646329
Unilateral subdural motor cortex stimulation improves essential tremor but not Parkinson's disease.
Epidural motor cortex stimulation has been reported to be effective in treating some movement disorders.
Nevertheless, clinical results have been variable and no double-blinded evaluations have been reported.
The aim of this study was to investigate efficacy and safety of unilateral subdural motor cortex stimulation in patients with essential tremor and Parkinson's disease.
Six patients with essential tremor and five parkinsonian patients were selected.
Craniotomy was performed under local anaesthesia with conscious sedation.
A four contact electrode (Resume II model 3587, Medtronic, Inc) was positioned on the motor cortex, after identification of the area with direct monopolar cortical stimulation.
Soon after surgery, a variety of different settings of stimulation were assessed using standard rating scales to select the optimal stimulation parameters.
The effects of chronic stimulation were evaluated in both groups of patients after 3 months (double-blinded fashion) and 1 year (open fashion).
In essential tremor, contralateral hand tremor scores significantly improved (P = 0.04) with stimulation during the double-blinded study, whereas in Parkinson's disease, there were no changes in the OFF medication/on stimulation motor scores compared with off stimulation.
At 1 year, tremor was improved by stimulation in two out of three patients with essential tremor available at follow-up, whereas no improvement was observed in the five parkinsonian patients.
One parkinsonian patient had a cortical venous infarct.
Three other patients had self-limiting seizures with aggressive trials of stimulation in the period of dosage selection.
These findings suggest that unilateral subdural motor cortex stimulation may be useful for contralateral hand tremor in selected patients with essential tremor but was not effective in improving parkinsonian signs in our series.
PMID: 21646303
Deep brain stimulation: current and future clinical applications.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) has developed during the past 20 years as a remarkable treatment option for several different disorders.
Advances in technology and surgical techniques have essentially replaced ablative procedures for most of these conditions.
Stimulation of the ventralis intermedius nucleus of the thalamus has clearly been shown to markedly improve tremor control in patients with essential tremor and tremor related to Parkinson disease.
Symptoms of bradykinesia, tremor, gait disturbance, and rigidity can be significantly improved in patients with Parkinson disease.
Because of these improvements, a decrease in medication can be instrumental in reducing the disabling features of dyskinesias in such patients.
Primary dystonia has been shown to respond well to DBS of the globus pallidus internus.
The success of these procedures has led to application of these techniques to multiple other debilitating conditions such as neuropsychiatric disorders, intractable pain, epilepsy, camptocormia, headache, restless legs syndrome, and Alzheimer disease.
The literature analysis was performed using a MEDLINE search from 1980 through 2010 with the term deep brain stimulation, and several double-blind and larger case series were chosen for inclusion in this review.
The exact mechanism of DBS is not fully understood.
This review summarizes many of the current and potential future clinical applications of this technology.
